* 0401780
* Fractal Nanoarchitectures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* George Newkome, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2007
* USD 370,000.00

The fields of macromolecular, dendrimer, polymer, supramolecular chemistry,
and&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology, are expanding rapidly as they intersect and
integrate. The research proposed&lt;br/&gt;herein, describes new material
construction and analysis. Benefits to the public will arise
through&lt;br/&gt;the reporting of basic scientific results, applied technology,
student training, and outreach&lt;br/&gt;programs in this cutting edge
field.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed activity explores novel and
innovative routes to new&lt;br/&gt;application-oriented materials predicated on
logical extensions of foundations in prior results of&lt;br/&gt;the principal
investigator. Terpyridine-based dendritic networks, fractal nanoarchitectural
selfassembly,&lt;br/&gt;and shape-persistent nanoscale constructs introduce new
avenues and concepts for&lt;br/&gt;macromolecular construction and utility.
Fractal nanomolecular design and syntheses further&lt;br/&gt;integrates the
spatial arts and mathematics by incorporating self-similar motifs at
different&lt;br/&gt;molecular scales. Melding of supramolecular macromolecular
chemistry with that of classical&lt;br/&gt;organic and inorganic regimes will
lead to new thought processes," available methodologies, and&lt;br/&gt;building
blocks for material and device engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, we herein
propose to expand our investigations of branched architectures
via&lt;br/&gt;dendritic construction based on (1) "dendrimer-to-dendron"
connectivity, since we have&lt;br/&gt;developed terpyridine-metal-terpyridine
assembly of preconstructed dendrimers and dendritic&lt;br/&gt;components
resulting in novel network-based architectures. Additionally, we intend to (2)
extend&lt;br/&gt;our studies on fractal architectures for the construction of
nanoscopic, precisely positioned,&lt;br/&gt;multiple metal arrays; and (3)
investigate the potential and effects of incorporation of
shapepersistent,&lt;br/&gt;terpyridine-based ligands in the construction of
polymetallic, hyperbranched&lt;br/&gt;architectures.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Aspects:
Advancement of discovery and understanding of the proposed work&lt;br/&gt;will
promote the integration of student training and enrichment, at all education
levels, including&lt;br/&gt;K-12, undergraduate, graduate, post-doctoral and
visiting scientists (national and international),&lt;br/&gt;by providing
appropriately staged conceptual and technical scientific challenges. This
will&lt;br/&gt;facilitate student competence while instilling and nurturing
specific elements of critical thinking,&lt;br/&gt;requisite for all disciplines.
Participation of underrepresented groups and minorities is
encouraged&lt;br/&gt;through direct support (from additional funding sources)
and community outreach projects&lt;br/&gt;(primarily through the College of
Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering) and include innercity&lt;br/&gt;school
presentations and K-12 teacher involvement that broadly promote scientific
and&lt;br/&gt;technical understanding. Additionally, scientific information
about polymeric materials, and&lt;br/&gt;dendrimers in particular, is
promulgated through the principal investigator's
website&lt;br/&gt;(www.dendrimers.com ) which currently averages 6,000 - 7,000
visits per month.&lt;br/&gt;The Akron-Cleveland metroplex has approximately 3
million residents (a 500 mile&lt;br/&gt;radius encompasses 42 % of the US
population and 40 % of the Canadian population). This&lt;br/&gt;provides a
broadly diverse workforce (with unique polymer-related opportunities for
regional&lt;br/&gt;interactions) with close to 2000 polymer companies within 100
miles. The proposed activities&lt;br/&gt;will enhance the N.E. Ohio workforce
through research, training, presentations, and education,&lt;br/&gt;thus
augmenting the mission of the University of Akron and the U.S. scientific agenda
in the&lt;br/&gt;community and region.&lt;br/&gt;Commercialization of
discoveries and technologies arising from the proposed work will&lt;br/&gt;be
facilitated by the University of Akron Research Foundation and Office of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;Transfer, in association with the Akron Commercialization
Center and the newly-formed&lt;br/&gt;Materials Experiment Station, (all under
the auspices of the University of Akron) that is&lt;br/&gt;committed to
aggressive marketing of University research.