* 0401906
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Flight and Motion Perception in Nocturnal Bees
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Jamie Theobald, Theobald                Jamie          C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2006
* USD 144,274.00

0401906 Theobald

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Jamie C.
Theobald to work with Dr. Eric J. Warrant at Lund University in Sweden and at
the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute on Barro Colorado Island in Panama.

This project examines the neural mechanisms through which animals maintain
reliable vision in darkness. Megalopta genalis are fully nocturnal neotropical
bees which visually navigate through forests 20 times dimmer than starlight.
Night activity is rare among bees because they possess apposition compound eyes,
a design unsuited to low light, and leaving little room to improve vision
optically. Their retinas absorb signals compromised by the quantum phenomenon of
photon noise. This research tests the hypothesis that Megalopta rely on neural
summation to see well in the dark. Behavioral and neurobiological experiments
reveal the signal processing between sensory input and muscular output, and
produce mathematical models to describe it analytically. Behavior is
characterized by filming bee flight around a nest to correlate light level with
flight agility. Neural processing is examined by displaying visual scenes while
electrically recording from retinal cells, and brain cells that detect self-
motion during flight. The expectation is that Megalopta uses neural summation to
fly and navigate in darkness which manifests in low optimum spatial and temporal
frequencies in motion-detecting neurons, and flight that sacrifices sharp
maneuvers in the dark.