* 0401582
* Attitudes and Stereotypes as Socially Situated Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Eliot Smith, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 04/30/2006
* USD 199,780.00

This program of research builds on the concept of "situated cognition", which
includes the ideas that cognition evolved to direct adaptive behavior, and that
motivation and emotion are properly considered a part of cognition. Integration
of this novel viewpoint with the sophisticated theoretical and empirical
knowledge of mainstream social psychology leads to two projects addressing
different substantive areas. The projects use multiple methods, including
computer simulations of connectionist networks, and empirical laboratory-based
studies with human participants. One project works toward increasing
understanding of the mental representation of attitudes and stereotypes. One set
of studies uses computer simulations to investigate how the functional
properties of attitudes (their role in the guidance of action) relate to their
representational properties such as evaluative priming, a link that has not
previously been drawn. Empirical studies with human participants will test the
hypothesis (flowing from the situated cognition approach) that attitude
representations link attitude objects to the self. Additional studies will test
the hypothesis that representations of social groups emphasize not the groups'
intrinsic qualities (such as personality traits), but rather their relationship
to the perceiver's own in-groups. A second project is aimed at understanding
interrelationships of individual mental representations and communication
processes. The situated cognition perspective holds that cognition occurs not
just in an isolated individual mind, but through social interaction and
communication. These studies specifically address the role of language in
implicitly communicating aspects of mental representations from one person to
another. The broader goals of this research program are to contribute to the
integration of the situated cognition perspective with mainstream social
psychology, and, to enhance scientific understanding of such socially important
phenomena as attitudes, stereotypes, interpersonal communication, and social
influence.&lt;br/&gt;