* 0401897
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Comparative Genomics of Breeding System Evolution in Caenorhabditis
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Asher Cutter, Cutter                  Asher          D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2006
* USD 162,300.00

0401897 Cutter

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Asher D.
Cutter to work with Dr. Deborah Charlesworth at University of Edinburgh in the
United Kingdom.

Reproduction constitutes the principle determinant of organismal fitness and,
therefore, a central theme in biology is devoted to understanding variation in
the mode of reproduction and its effects within and among species. Different
modes of reproduction are expected to perturb population genetic patterns in
evolutionarily important ways and genome-scale data from two or more related
species that differ in key characteristics makes feasible evolutionarily
motivated comparative studies. This research is developing a comparative genomic
context for studying breeding system evolution in Caenorhabditis by (1)
generating gene sequences on a large scale for outbred members of this genus and
(2) assaying population genetic variation within and among species of
Caenorhabditis from natural samples. A survey of expressed sequence tags (EST)
from the outbred C. remanei and C. japonica (outgroup) is being conducted for
comparison with each other and with genes from the inbred, fully sequenced
genomes of C. elegans and C. briggsae. With these data, molecular evolution
analyses test for differences in patterns of codon usage and constraints on gene
function. Furthermore, surveys nucleotide polymorphism for autosomal, sex-
linked, and mitochondrial genes for species of Caenorhabditis from natural
populations in Europe generate a much-needed population genetic perspective for
this group of model organisms that helps clarify the influence of variation in
breeding system.