* 0401350
* Acoustic Waves in Thin Piezoelectric Plates:  Theory and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Dennis Polla, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 258,000.00



The aim of this project is to carry out detailed theoretical and experimental
investigation of acoustic waves propagating in thin piezoelectric plates. By
thin we mean plates whose thickness h is much less than the acoustic wavelength
. The main tasks that will be undertaken during the course of this project
include: (1) Theoretical analysis of plate wave propagation in a number of
useful materials such as quartz, lithium niobate, lithium tantalate, potassium
niobate, langasite, langatate, etc. The aim of this analysis is to identify
materials and crystal cut/propagation directions that can provide large values
of electromechanical coupling coefficient K 2 together with zero or low values
of TCD (temperature coefficient of time delay) and PFA (power flow angle).
Results obtained from theoretical calculations will be experimentally verified.
(2) Theoretical and experimental investigation of the influence of a thin film
of arbitrary conductivity deposited on the surface of a plate wave device. (3)
Measurement of mechanical and electrical properties of liquids using plate waves
and development of a system for identifying liquids based on their electrical
properties. (4) Development of techniques to fabricate devices on plates as thin
as a few micrometers (um) and integration of the resulting acoustic device with
silicon substrate, and (5) Investigation of plate wave propagation in the
presence of a biasing electric field and use of this work to realize devices
with electronically tunable characteristics. Intellectual Merit: The research
proposed in this project will produce major advances in the field of acoustic
wave sensors. Devices based on acoustic waves in piezoelectric solids are
currently receiving much attention for use as chemical and biological sensors. A
number of different types of acoustic waves have been investigated for sensor
applications. At present, best performance is obtained by using surface acoustic
waves (SAWs) for sensing in the gas or vapor phase, and shear horizontal surface
acoustic waves (SH-SAW) for sensing in the liquid phase. Sensors based on thin
plate waves can provide following important advantages over SAW and SH-SAW
sensors. (i) A number of chemical and biological sensors are based on detecting
the change in mass on the sensor surface. For the same operating wavelength, the
mass loading sensitivity of a thin plate device can be greater than that of a
SAW or SH-SAW device by more than a factor of 10. (ii) Acoustic waves in thin
plates can provide values of coupling coefficient K 2 that are 5 to 10 times
greater than K 2 of SAWs and SH-SAWs. This will produce corresponding increase
in the sensitivity of chemical and biological sensors which operate by detecting
changes in electrical properties of the bio(chemical) coating. (iii) The energy
of a plate wave is present on both surfaces of the plate. Thus one can enclose
one side of the senor to protect it from environmental attack while allowing
wave interaction at the other surface. (iv) The thin plate device can be
integrated with silicon substrate which can contain the electronic circuitry
associated with the sensor. This will greatly reduce size and cost of the
overall sensor package while simultaneously improving its reliability. Broader
Impacts: Various educational activities will form an important and integral part
of this project. These include: (1) Hands-on-mini course for junior and senior
year high school students, (2) Seminar and laboratory course for freshman
students in our engineering college, (3) Opportunity for undergraduate students
to participate in research through the REU program, (4) Establishing
partnerships with high school teachers through the RET program, and (5) Graduate
student mentoring. In selecting student and teacher participants, special
efforts will be made to seek qualified candidates from groups underrepresented
in science and engineering. As a result of previous NSF grants, the PI has
mentored eight REU students, out of which two were female students and two were
male students belonging to groups currently underrepresented in science and
engineering. Successful completion of the work proposed in this project will
lead to the development of fully integrated, low cost, high performance sensors.
Sensors play an important role in all facets of our lives such as environmental
monitoring, pollution control, counter terrorism measures, biomedical devices,
etc. The research proposed in this project has many beneficial effects for
society and will contribute towards improving the quality of our lives, health,
and environment.