* 0401494
* Strain Distribution Within Geosynthetic Reinforced Soil Slopes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Jorge Zornberg, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2006
* USD 125,548.00

Soil reinforcement using geosynthetics is a very attractive alternative for
highway embankment and retaining wall projects because of the economic benefits
it offers in relation to cenventional retaining structures. Desigh of reinforced
soil slopes is typically performed using software-based techniques (limit
equilibrium), which require significant assumptions regarding the distribution
of strains within the reinforcement elements. However, to date, the assumed
strain distributions have not been fully validated against monitored results.
One consequence of this is a perceived overconservatism in
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research initiative
is to generate and integrate (via centrifuge modeling, digital image analysis,
and finite element analysis) data that will provide a definite answer regarding
the strain distribution to be adopted in reinforced soil slope design.
Specificaly, this project will integrate results from the following five phases:
(i) a centrifuge modeling investigation undertaken to generate experimental data
on the performance fo geosynthetic reinforced soil slopes under working stress
conditions; (ii) a digital image processing and analysis effort performed to
collect and evaluate strain information from inflight-captured images of
videotaped centrifuge models; (iii) a numerical (finite element) study performed
to compile parametric evaluations of reinforced soil slope behavior, after
having calibrated numerical procedures against data collected in the previous
experimental phase; (iv) an evaluation effort to incorporate findings on
reinforcement strain distribution into current reinforced soil guidelines; and
(v) an educational component to integrate digital video clips of centrifuge
geotechnical models into multimedia presentations to be used for undergraduate
and graduate geotechnical instructions as well as for recruitment of
underrepresented minority high school students into engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the specific goal of refining
design guidelines for geosynthetic reinforced soil slopes by gaining better
understanding of the pattern of strain distributions, the proposed research is
the cornerstone of larger, ongoing agendas under active development on
reinforced soil research by the PI and on geotechnical modeling at the PI's
institution. In fact, the proposed investigation will initiate implementation of
innovative procedures invilving digital image analysis in geotechnical
centrifuge testing at the University of Colorado, will contribute to ongoing
efforts of cross-validation between physical and numerical modeling of
geotechnical systems, and will foster integration of research into engineering
education.