* 0401125
* Control-Theoretic Methods for the Analysis and Design of High-Speed Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Rayadurgam Srikant, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2008
* USD 210,000.00

Control-Theoretic Methods for the Analysis and Design of&lt;br/&gt;High-Speed
Networks&lt;br/&gt;Carolyn Beck and R. Srikant&lt;br/&gt;Over the last few
years, a significant amount of research activity in networking has been devoted
to the&lt;br/&gt;study of congestion control in the Internet. New algorithms
have been suggested for congestion controllers&lt;br/&gt;at the sources and
active queue management at the routers. While the success of the mathematical
modelling&lt;br/&gt;approach to congestion control has been quite remarkable,
many important problems remain open. In this&lt;br/&gt;proposal, we have
targeted a few of these problems which have a control-theoretic flavor and
therefore, we&lt;br/&gt;believe, would benefit from analysis using linear or
nonlinear system-theoretic methods.&lt;br/&gt;The practical impact of the
proposed research would be the development of algorithms which will
result&lt;br/&gt;in a loss-free, delay-free Internet, thus enabling the users of
the Internet to enjoy levels of quality of ser-vice&lt;br/&gt;that are not seen
today. Further, our work will lay the groundwork for future Internet algorithms
when&lt;br/&gt;the access speeds are expected to grow by several orders of
magnitude as compared to today's networks.&lt;br/&gt;Scalable algorithms for
high-speed networks are already under development; however, these schemes pri-
marily&lt;br/&gt;address the fact that today's TCP is not scalably stable. On
the other hand, our work will not only&lt;br/&gt;address scalable stability, it
also aims to improve the quality of service seen by Internet users by
essentially&lt;br/&gt;eliminating queueing delays and large buffer build-ups
which lead to packet losses.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit Our recent work has
established scalable local stability of a class of congestion man-
agement&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for the Internet with a fixed number of sources,
and robustness of these algorithms in the&lt;br/&gt;special case of a link
accessed by many sources. While we have only scratched the surface of this rich
class&lt;br/&gt;of problems, the appealing features, such as distributed
implementation, robustness, full network utilization,&lt;br/&gt;etc., observed
in the preliminary work indeed ask for a more comprehensive study of the
underlying issues&lt;br/&gt;in a broader context. Specifically, we would like to
know whether we can establish the global stability of&lt;br/&gt;these algorithms
for general topology networks, quantify their robustness to worst-case
disturbance as well&lt;br/&gt;as stochastic disturbances, and study their
stability properties when there are source arrivals and departures.&lt;br/&gt;In
the process, we plan to appeal to the rich literature on model reduction for
large-scale control systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact One of the PIs teaches a
graduate course on Modeling and Control of High-Speed Networks&lt;br/&gt;(ECE
459). The results from this project will be incorporated into that course. We
have prior experience&lt;br/&gt;with employing undergraduates to work on
research projects in the area of network design and control.&lt;br/&gt;If this
project is funded, we will continue to do the same. The algorithms developed as
a result of this&lt;br/&gt;project will be implemented in Internet lab, housed
in the Coordinated Science lab and directed by one of&lt;br/&gt;the PIs. Over
the past four years, we have advised six graduate students and two post-doctoral
research&lt;br/&gt;associates from under-represented groups in engineering. We
will continue our efforts to recruit students&lt;br/&gt;from under-represented
groups for graduate studies. One of the PIs teaches undergraduate courses in
the&lt;br/&gt;Department of General Engineering. Traditionally, this department
has a high percentage of women in the&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate population
compared to other engineering departments. By incorporating some of the
results&lt;br/&gt;of this project in the undergraduate courses in General
Engineering, we hope to stimulate interest in this&lt;br/&gt;area among students
from this group.&lt;br/&gt;P-1