* 0401310
* Investigating Distributed RF/Microwave Wireless Relays
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Babak Daneshrad, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Leda Lunardi
* 04/30/2007
* USD 214,998.00

0401310&lt;br/&gt;Hua&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a novel
concept of wireless communications, which is based on cooperative nature of
multiple wireless mobile nodes within the framework of mobile ad hoc networks.
But unlike the previously explored approaches that are mostly medium access
control (MAC) protocols, this project aims at improving the capacity of the most
fundamental physical link via multiple distributed wireless relays. These relays
that are clustered and located anywhere between a source and a destination do
not perform the conventional store-and-forward operations, but rather they are
programmed to perform space-time modulation on their received baseband signals
that are corrupted by both fading and noise. These relays do not need to
exchange symbols with each other, and no feedback of channel state information
is necessary. Hence, the burden on the MAC layer is reduced, and the ability to
adapt to fast time-varying environment is improved. Such an array of relays
performs like an array of wireless antennas, and reduces the negative effect of
small scale fading on the signals received at the destination. With the space
diversity achieved by the relays, the effective channel between the source and
the destination becomes virtually free of small scale fading, which resembles
wireline communications. The relays to be developed in this project are a
function rather than a rigid device, and this function can be embedded in all
mobile nodes, and more importantly can be embedded under the MAC based
cooperative schemes. This project goes beyond the traditional mode of research,
and the PIs of complementary strength have laid out a vertically integrated
research plan to rapidly further develop the concept of distributed wireless
relays, which is already proven to be promising based on a preliminary study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless
communication technology will continue to evolve to meet the needs of future
generations of mankind. One of the desired features of wireless communications
is a fully mobile wireless network where neither base-station nor pre-existing
infrastructure is required. Such a communication network is desired by people
working and moving in remote areas and by the general public in the events of
catastrophe. Distributed wireless relays may also be a useful solution to
enhance the capacity of the cellular mobile systems, and the quality of future
wireless communications may become seamless from that of wireline
communications. A preliminary study by the PI shows that with distributed
wireless relays, the total power consumption can be reduced by more than 10 dB
from the baseline of the traditional single relay system. When fully proven and
implemented, this power saving may imply that all batteries used in mobile nodes
in a dense mobile network could last more than ten times longer. This project is
not only likely to lead to technological breakthrough, but also will help the
training of graduate students and undergraduate students (especially minority
students) from two campuses of the University of California, who may become the
first entrepreneurs to benefit the society by using distributed wireless relays
in wireless communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;