* 0401772
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Iron Isotopes and the Neoproterozoic Snowball Earth
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Galen Halverson, Halverson               Galen          P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2006
* USD 96,791.00

0401772 Halverson

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-one-month research fellowship by Dr. Galen P.
Halverson to work with Drs. Franck Poitrasson and Anne Nedelec at the University
Paul-Sabatier in Toulouse, France.

The main objectives of this project are to evaluate the fidelity of the iron-
isotopic signal preserved in ancient sediments and to test the prediction of
Beard et al. (2003b) that large fluctuations in the iron isotopic composition of
seawater coincided with global (snowball) glaciations in the late Precambrian
(~750 to 600 million years ago).

The field of iron isotope geochemistry is young, and much work remains to be
done to elucidate the magnitude and causes of natural variations in iron isotope
composition in both biological and non-biological systems. However, recent
improvements in analytical precision and results demonstrating relatively large
fluctuations in iron isotope ratios in minerals precipitated from seawater mean
that iron isotope analysis is certain to find many applications in sedimentary
geochemistry. Rocks deposited during and immediately after the late Precambrian
glaciations are an ideal place to look for large deviations in the iron isotopic
composition of the ocean. According to the "snowball" Earth hypothesis of
Hoffman et al. (1998), the entire ocean froze over during these glaciations, and
iron derived exclusively from hydrothermal fluxes - which has a unique iron
isotopic signal - accumulated in solution. This signal should be preserved in
iron-bearing minerals deposited during the glaciations. Importantly, iron-rich
carbonates were deposited synchronously and worldwide at the end of the
glaciations, enabling a straightforward test of the viability of the iron
isotopic signature in ancient sedimentary rocks as a proxy for marine chemistry.
Additional benefits of this investigation will include a major contribution to
the iron isotopic database on naturally occurring specimens, implications for
the magnitude of natural variations in iron isotope compositions between
different iron phases, and the development of analytical techniques applicable
to a wide variety of other problems.

This project takes advantage of a newly established, state-of-the art laboratory
built with the specific intention of analyzing iron isotopes. The project
complements ongoing field work and geochemical analysis at Harvard University
and MIT aimed at unraveling the chemical evolution of the glacial and post-
glacial oceans.