* 0401611
* Collaborative Research:  Influences of Halogen Chemistry on Processing of North American Pollutant Outflow
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Lynn Russell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/2007
* USD 334,952.00

The recognition of the roles of halogen chemistry and elucidation of the details
for various atmospheric environments has been important in improving
understanding of a number of processes including ozone depletion in the
stratosphere and in the Arctic boundary layer. In the troposphere, the
understanding of detailed mechanisms for halogen production and the implications
of the presence of halogens, in addition to other oxidants, is not complete and
requires further study. This collaborative project involving researchers from
four institutions will examine the role of halogen chemistry in the polluted
outflow plume off the coast of the northeast U.S. In particular, the influence
of halogen chemistry on the ozone budget, on nighttime radical chemistry, on
aerosol production and evolution, and on the interaction of the pollution plume
with marine boundary layer chemical and physical processes. This will be
accomplished by a comprehensive suite of analytical instrumentation measuring
important quantities during an observation phase of the study in the summer of
2004, followed by detailed analysis of these observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take advantage of, and contribute to,
the multiple field campaigns taking place in the summer of 2004 under the
umbrella of the International Consortium for Research on Transport and
Transformation (ICARTT). This will encourage synergy between the field programs
sponsored by NASA (Intercontinental Chemical Transport Experiment, INTEX-A),
NOAA (New England Air Quality Study - Intercontinental Transport and Chemical
Transformation, NEAQS - ITCT 2004), and European agencies (Intercontinental
Transport of Pollution, ITOP). In addition, the AIRMAP (Atmospheric
Investigation, Regional Modeling and Prediction) program at the University of
New Hampshire is enhancing measurement sites on coastal islands to contribute to
this effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to improving understanding of
halogen chemical processes in the lower atmosphere, thus leading to enhanced
ability to predict future changes in the atmosphere, this project will also
train graduate and undergraduate students and strengthen the partnership between
the participating institutions. There will also be significant public outreach
activities.