* 0401323
* Linear Partial Differential Equations on Singular Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Jared Wunsch, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 72,001.00

Proposal DMS-0401323&lt;br/&gt;Title: Linear partial differential equations on
singular spaces&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Jared Wunsch, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study
differential operators on manifolds with singular metric&lt;br/&gt;structures.
One project focuses on the wave equation on singular spaces;&lt;br/&gt;together
with Melrose, the PI has shown that in general, a singularity of&lt;br/&gt;a
solution to the wave equation interacts with a cone point to produce
a&lt;br/&gt;"diffracted" spherical wavefront emanating from the cone point.
The&lt;br/&gt;singularity of the diffracted front may be weaker than that of
the&lt;br/&gt;incident front if the latter is not too precisely focused on the
cone&lt;br/&gt;point. Melrose and the PI hope to generalize these results to
more&lt;br/&gt;complex singular geometries, perhaps eventually to include a
large class&lt;br/&gt;of stratified spaces. Another direction of research
involves the&lt;br/&gt;Schroedinger equation on noncompact manifold endowed with
"scattering"&lt;br/&gt;metrics (e.g. short-range perturbations of Euclidean
spaces). Together&lt;br/&gt;with Hassell and Tao, the PI is involved in a
project to prove sharp&lt;br/&gt;Strichartz estimates for the Schroedinger
equation in this geometric&lt;br/&gt;setting. Hassell and the PI also hope to
provide a precise description of&lt;br/&gt;the propagator for the Schroedinger
equation, extending an earlier result&lt;br/&gt;which yielded part of its
Schwartz kernel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central question in the mathematical
theory of quantum mechanics is: &lt;br/&gt;what is the relationship between the
classical dynamics of a particle and&lt;br/&gt;its corresponding quantum states?
Insights into this problem have come&lt;br/&gt;not only from the direct study of
the quantum mechanical energy operator&lt;br/&gt;or "Hamiltonian" itself, but
also from studying a host of other&lt;br/&gt;fundamental equations involving it,
such as the heat equation, the wave&lt;br/&gt;equation, and, naturally, the
time-dependent Schroedinger equation. The&lt;br/&gt;focus of the PI's research
is thus the geometric analysis of several kinds&lt;br/&gt;of partial
differential equations. One project investigates what happens&lt;br/&gt;to waves
as they interact with (a certain generalization of) sharp&lt;br/&gt;corners---
the geometry of how wavefronts move can be quite subtle in these&lt;br/&gt;cases
owing to the effects of diffraction. Another project is to study&lt;br/&gt;the
structure of solutions of the Schroedinger equation on
unbounded&lt;br/&gt;spaces; such solutions describe the time-evolution of a
quantum particle. &lt;br/&gt;A related focus of research is to obtain certain
estimates of solutions to&lt;br/&gt;the Schroedinger equation in order to
improve our understanding the&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear Schroedinger equation, which
arises in nonlinear optics and the&lt;br/&gt;theory of Bose-Einstein
condensates, among other physical applications.&lt;br/&gt;