* 0401148
* Electronic Sensitive Skin with Integrated Tactile, Infrared and Flow Sensors on Flexible Substrates
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Donald Butler, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2008
* USD 211,449.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensitive skin is a large area, flexible array of
sensors with data processing capabilities. The microsensors are integrated to
give the capability of sensing several stimuli, mimicking a real skin, including
but not limited to temperature, touch, and flow. The objectives of this research
are to integrate thermometers, micromachined infrared detectors, and pressure
sensors onto flexible substrates such as commercially available Kapton as well
as custom made inorganic polymers (poly (methylphenylphosphazene), [Me(Ph)P=N]n,
PMPP) developed under the current NSF grant. In addition, a feasibility study
will be done to incorporate flow sensors. The use of multi-sensory arrays is
particularly attractive to robotics applications where operators would like to
have a "human-like" sense of the environment. Micromachined, distributed multi-
sensory arrays will be fabricated on the flexible polymer substrates. The
mechanical, electrical and optical sensory performance of the micromachined
sensors will be measured. To maintain low cost, it will be important to utilize
standard Si fabrication equipment. This investigation will employ standard
micromachining techniques with polymer-coated wafers to allow standard
fabrication equipment to be employed. Upon completion of the fabrication, the
polymer will be released from the wafers to provide a flexible substrate. The
outcome of this research is NOT a product that would replace human skin, but a
product that would emulate the functions of a human skin on inanimate objects
such as robots, aircraft, and other macro- and micro-scale
machines.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This is the first known effort to build
micromachined, integrated, multi-sensory arrays on flexible substrates.
Challenges include thermal budget restrictions of the underlying polymer
substrates, mechanical integrity of the sensors on the flexible substrates,
surface roughness of these substrates, signal routing, adhesion of metals to
polyimide substrates, cross-talk between sensors and power supply requirements.
A primary consideration in the development of flexible electronic devices is
adhesion of circuit components to the flexible substrate. This is dependent upon
having a substrate surface that is chemically modifiable. The science and
technology developed through this investigation will enable a broad class of
distributed micromachined sensors that may be produced on flexible substrates.
The multisensory arrays developed in this investigation represent a step towards
the development of a sensitive skin that will also include signal processing
electronics. The IR microsensors will employ microbolometers that are capable of
detecting broadband infrared radiation extending into the far-infrared.
Piezoresistive tactile sensors with sensitivity greater than the human skin will
be developed. The tactile sensors will respond to the touch-pressure exerted on
the substrate as well as stress developed by bending the substrate.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: One of the PIs will participate in the Advanced
Summer Institute for Educators that provides training opportunities for high
school math and science teachers. In addition, 4th grade and 9th grade students
in an Elementary and High School have been targeted for in-class presentations
on flexible electronics by the research group. The activities described in this
proposal, especially the applications as an artificial skin, would be attractive
to youth and can be used to recruit students to science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;