* 0401987
* A Microbial Observatory for the Northern Temperate Lakes Long Term Ecological Research Site
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Eric Triplett, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2005
* USD 275,567.00

Triplett 9977903 Lakes are foci for biogeochemical processing on the landscapes
they drain. Most biogeochemical transformations in freshwater ecosystems are
mediated by bacteria. Thus, lakes offer tremendous opportunity for study of
microbial composition and diversity linked to ecosystem processes. This
Microbial Observatory will describe microbial dynamics and their relationship to
the fundamental processes of microbial production and respiration in three
contrasting lakes that represent the major trophic types of temperate
landscapes: oligotrophic, dystrophic and eutrophic. These lakes are part of the
North Temperate Lakes Long Term Ecological Research Site (NTL-LTER). The overall
goal of this project is to identify and characterize predominant bacterial
populations in north temperate lake ecosystems and their part in ecological
processes. Bacterial population dynamics are currently the least well understood
among all planktonic microbes. Phytoplankton and protozoa will also be described
because of their important roles in the microbial foodweb, and protozoa are a
priority group for the Integrated Taxonomic Information System (ITIS). The
spatial and temporal variability in freshwater microbial community structure and
function will be determined. The resource and food web factors that drive this
variability will also be studied. Predominant microbial taxa within contrasting
freshwater ecosystems will be identified, and characterization of these taxa in
terms of their biochemistry, physiology and ecology will be done. Traditional
microbiological and limnological techniques with will be combined with
molecular-based methodologies, and both comparative and experimental approaches
will be employed. Parameters being measured that are not currently monitored by
the NTL-LTER include total bacterial abundance, active cell count and
productivity, total community and microbial respiration, and microbial community
composition and diversity. This research should provide significant new insights
into the influence of microbial community composition and diversity on
fundamental lake ecosystem processes and the ways that lake properties affect
microbial dynamics. Strong new connections between the fields of classical
microbiology, molecular microbial ecology, limnology, and ecological theory are
expected.