* 0401168
* Interstellar Astrochemistry
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Eric Herbst, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2008
* USD 452,623.00

With this award, Dr. Eric Herbst will continue a program in astrochemistry,
which is the study of the role of molecules in the universe, where they are
found, how they are created and destroyed,&lt;br/&gt;and what they tell us about
the myriad of different sources in our galaxy and others. In particular he is
especially interested in what information observations of molecules yield about
the process of star formation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Much of what we know about
the interstellar medium is learned by observations of molecular spectra, which
can be analyzed to determine molecular abundances. Yet what do these abundances
signify? In order to understand fully what molecules are telling us about the
present and past of the objects in which they reside, it is necessary to
comprehend how the molecules are formed and destroyed, and how these formation
and destruction processes depend on physical conditions such as temperature and
density as well as the history of the sources. To understand molecular creation
and depletion, large networks of chemical reactions have been created, including
both gas phase and grain-surface processes. Used with physical models of
sources, either homogeneous or heterogeneous, these chemical networks allow the
modeler to calculate&lt;br/&gt;molecular abundances, both in the gas and on the
surfaces of dust grains. Successful comparison with observational data then
gives us information on physical conditions and lifetimes of sources. The
studies in this project build on earlier work from the laboratory, and are
mainly concerned with the process of star formation, which leads to a large
variety of different manifestations and stages. Through the study of molecular
spectra, as analyzed through the prism of chemical calculations, one can begin
to glimpse what is happening to gas and dust as stars form. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Herbst's work in astrochemistry has been instrumental in the
burgeoning use of molecules as probes of the interstellar medium. From its
beginnings in the late 60s and early 70s, the field of molecular astronomy has
become a world-wide endeavor in which observational astronomers, theoretical
chemists, experimental scientists, and modelers collaborate on problems of
mutual interest. Much of the knowledge of diffuse and dense interstellar clouds,
and especially star formation, now comes from an understanding of what molecules
in these regions are telling us. Moreover, the study of the synthesis of complex
molecules in interstellar clouds is an&lt;br/&gt;interesting field on its own
and is clearly relevant to the development of biology. In addition to continuing
a research program in astrochemistry, Dr. Herbst has tried to make the field
known to both scientists in other fields and to the lay public by publishing
review articles, giving interviews for magazines and newspapers, and by going to
local elementary, middle, and high schools to discuss the molecular universe. In
the last year, The Ohio State University has created a special interdisciplinary
Program in Astrochemistry to be headed by Dr. Herbst, and he will run a mini-
conference on astrochemistry each June as part of the larger spectroscopy
symposium held in Columbus, Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;