* 0401990
* A Scalable Skills Certification Program in Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* John Johnson, San Diego Mesa College
* Continuing grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 09/30/2008
* USD 749,847.00

The San Diego Educational GIS Consortium, comprised of San Diego State
University, San Diego Mesa College (part of the San Diego Community College
District), and San Diego City Schools, is developing a scalable GIS skills
certification program to prepare students for entry into a range of jobs in GIS-
related fields and for career advancement. The goals of the project are to
encourage underrepresented high school and community college students to pursue
careers in GIS, and to provide a ladder of certification and education that
enable students to work in GIS-related positions while pursuing further training
and education. The Consortium is developing GIS skills certifications, designed
to meet industry and employer needs, that can be combined to provide an
articulated educational program. These certificates build on each other and feed
into an associate's degree in GIS for more comprehensive technical training, a
bachelor's degree, and advanced degrees in the field. The Consortium is
developing a standards-based curriculum aligned across the three educational
levels, including Web-based introductory programs in GIS to encourage students
to pursue careers in the field and enhance enrollment in technician training and
educational programs. The Co-PIs are creating articulation agreements that
ensure that students are able to progress efficiently through the skills
certificate and more traditional educational programs, and are training college
faculty and secondary school teachers to teach the introductory courses and use
GIS materials in their classes. The project also develops new internships and
field experiences for students in the skills certificate and technician training
programs.

The Intellectual Merit of this project lies in the development of standards-
based GIS curricula and certification programs available to both traditional and
non-traditional students. The Broader Impacts of this project lie in the
development of seamless articulation agreements from the high school level
through to university degree programs, and in training teachers at the high
school and community college level to teach in this new program.

