* 0401688
* Studies in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Bruce Barnett, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Morris Pripstein
* 02/28/2005
* USD 299,988.00

This proposal requests funds for a program of experimental particle physics
research at the world's highest energy hadron colliders. The Johns Hopkins
University (JHU) group would continue their collaboration in the CDF experiment
at the Fermilab Tevatron and the CMS experiment at the CERN Large Hadron
Collider (LHC). CDF is currently in a data-taking phase and is expected to run
for a number of years. CMS is expected to begin operation in 2008. The specific
scientific goals of the proposed program are to determine the source of
electroweak spontaneous symmetry breaking and to make precise heavy quark
measurements that constrain physics beyond the Standard Model. The initial
program is concentrated at the Tevatron, where the short-term goal is to study
heavy quark physics, since many theoretical mechanisms of spontaneous symmetry
breaking include states that preferentially decay into heavy quarks or other
long-lived states. The most accepted theoretical ideas currently suggest that
mechanisms of spontaneous symmetry breaking should manifest themselves at the
LHC. The JHU group contributes to the silicon-based vertex tracking of both
experiments. This technology will permit the identification of long-lived states
by searching for secondary vertices displaced from the primary vertex.

The proposed work on silicon pixel detector technology has application to
instrumentation used at synchrotron light sources to study materials and
biological systems. In addition, the pixel simulation code may be applicable to
infrared pixel sensors used in satellite-borne telescopes. The proposed work on
distributed databases has strong overlap with work being done for several large
astronomy projects and could also have far-reaching application in all sectors
of society. The proposed research would provide direct support and training for
a number of graduate and undergraduate students. JHU hosts a QuarkNet center and
the group plans to work on a user-friendly web interface that will permit high
school students to submit particle physics queries to the Open Science Grid.
QuarkNet teachers will help in the design and debugging of the system with the
longer-term goal of making the system available to the general public.