* 0401147
* Problems in Extremal Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Tom Bohman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2007
* USD 105,000.00

This project has two parts: an investigation of the &lt;br/&gt;independence
numbers of the powers of fixed graphs&lt;br/&gt;and a study of the emergence of
a giant component in &lt;br/&gt;`guided' versions of the classical random graph.
The &lt;br/&gt;first part is motivated by the many open questions
&lt;br/&gt;regarding the Shannon capacities of graphs and focuses &lt;br/&gt;on
the possible behaviors of the sequence given by the &lt;br/&gt;independence
numbers of the powers of a fixed graph. &lt;br/&gt;The odd cycles and their
complements are particularly&lt;br/&gt;important examples and play a central
role in this part&lt;br/&gt;of the project. While a wide range of techniques --
&lt;br/&gt;including algebraic methods -- may be useful here, &lt;br/&gt;recent
progress has come through the interplay of novel &lt;br/&gt;constructions for,
and structural conditions imposed on&lt;br/&gt;large independent sets in these
graph powers. In the &lt;br/&gt;second part of this project we study the
component &lt;br/&gt;structure in the random graph processes known as
&lt;br/&gt;Achlioptas processes, processes in which a pair of &lt;br/&gt;random
edges is presented in each round and an on-line&lt;br/&gt;algorithm chooses
between them. Here we are interested &lt;br/&gt;in the existence, timing and
nature of a phase &lt;br/&gt;transition in the size of the largest component. A
&lt;br/&gt;principle tool here is the differential equations &lt;br/&gt;method
for establishing concentration in random graph
&lt;br/&gt;processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is in the area of
extremal combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;Questions considered in this field are of the
form: `How &lt;br/&gt;large (or small) can an object that lies in a
particular&lt;br/&gt;discrete mathematical system and satisfies a certain
&lt;br/&gt;condition be?' We are often concerned with the behavior &lt;br/&gt;of
the size of the extremal objects as the size of the &lt;br/&gt;underlying system
goes to infinity. Interest in such &lt;br/&gt;questions grew extensively during
the twentieth century. &lt;br/&gt;Pioneers of the field, such as Paul Erd\H{o}s,
posed &lt;br/&gt;many fascinating questions of this form and devised
&lt;br/&gt;powerful methods for solving them even before the close
&lt;br/&gt;connections between extremal combinatorics and various
&lt;br/&gt;other fields (including theoretical computer science,
&lt;br/&gt;statistical physics and information theory) were
&lt;br/&gt;discovered. The Shannon capacities of graphs are a &lt;br/&gt;classic
example of the close interaction between &lt;br/&gt;extremal combinatorics and
the theory of communication. &lt;br/&gt;The Shannon capacity gives a measure of
the optimal &lt;br/&gt;zero-error performance of a noisy communication channel
&lt;br/&gt;and is centrally important in information theory. At &lt;br/&gt;the
same time, it gives rise to natural questions in &lt;br/&gt;extremal
combinatorics and graph theory. Some of these&lt;br/&gt;questions are addressed
in this research project.&lt;br/&gt;