* 0401776
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Inequality in the Context of Liberalizing Agricultural Markets: Regional Patterns and Local Experiences in Mozambique
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Robin Leichenko, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The recently failed of international trade negotiations and the refusal of
developed nations to eliminate market-distorting farm subsidies highlight the
tenuous position of rural agrarian societies in many developing countries. While
neoliberal development policy urges developing nations to open their markets and
adopt trade-based growth strategies, regions and local communities often
encounter new sources of risk through the process of economic liberalization.
The changes associated with market liberalization can generate new landscapes of
inequality by transforming or contributing to the breakdown of traditional
social support networks. For women in particular, the loss of traditional
networks can lead to increased hardship, because they are often primary
caregivers as well as economic actors. This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement project will examine the changing distribution of income and
resources in rural Mozambique, where radical economic reforms are underway. The
project will address the following questions: (1) What is the impact of
contemporary market involvement on the distribution of resources and income
across regions? (2) How do patterns of inequality vary across scales, and what
do these spatial variations imply about differential vulnerability to negative
market externalities? (3) How is social and economic inequality affected by
gender and the structural changes within communities and households that
accompany economic reforms? This study will use a multi-scalar approach to
investigate market-inequality linkages. Geographic and multivariate statistical
analyses will be used to examine regional patterns. Field observation, household
surveys, and interviews will be used to explore local perspectives on
inequalities as well as community-wide and gendered impacts associated with
market involvement. The project is expected to demonstrate that market exposure
and integration interact with multiple factors across geographic scales (such as
global commodity prices, national politics, and local class and gender
relationships) with different effects within and across regions, communities,
and households. Furthermore, regional patterns of inequality, as measured by
static income and infrastructure data, are not expected to correspond to local
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will incorporate an understanding
of regional and local geographies into the investigation of how distributional
inequities are produced and performed across space. It is expected to contribute
to understanding of rural economies in the developing world by examining how
market exposure and global-local economic linkages impact rural agrarian
populations. It will explicitly investigate how experiences of economic change
are influenced by gender, and it will integrate qualitative and quantitative
research methods to explore the impacts of economic liberalization at the
regional and local scale. The study will also contribute to contemporary
geographical debates on the household as a scale of analysis. Findings from this
study should help increase the success of targeted poverty alleviation programs
by identifying those regions and households most likely to be marginalized by
new forms of economic liberalization. The Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award also will provide support to a promising student to strengthen
research skills and establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;