* 0401966
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Computational Investigation of the Semiclassical Limit of Loop Quantum Gravity
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Joshua Willis, Willis                  Joshua         L
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2007
* USD 87,872.00

0401966 Willis

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Joshua L.
Willis to work with Dr. J. Daniel Christensen at the University of Western
Ontario.

Reconciling Einstein's theory of gravity (general relativity) with quantum
theory is a central, fundamental problem in theoretical physics, and loop
quantum gravity is presently the only rigorously well defined candidate quantum
theory of gravity. Establishing whether or not it has the correct classical
limit is the key open question for this approach to quantum gravity. What this
work seeks to understand is whether the theory, which gives a description of
space and time at the smallest scales where it is essential to treat the
gravitational force quantum mechanically, is also able to describe the large
scales already successfully described by Einstein's general theory of
relativity. Thus, it is an important consistency check on the theory: it must
agree with the classical theory where the latter is valid. In this project, the
PI seeks to investigate the semiclassical limit of the full theory. Specically,
he proposes to continue existing work at the host institution as well as to
begin other work, each of which seeks to computationally investigate whether or
not the description of space arising in loop quantum gravity - an interconnected
network or lattice of "edges" joined together at vertices - can look on a large
enough scale like the smooth continuum of space that we see around us. We do
this by calculating, numerically, whether certain characteristic properties of
the continuum picture, such as the areas of surfaces, have values coming from
the quantum theory that are very close to those coming from the classical
theory. The results from simpler models have so far been encouraging, but firm
conclusions cannot be drawn until the full theory is investigated. UWO provides
a unique opportunity to do this as Dr. Christensen's group there is perhaps the
only one in the world where such a computational approach to quantum gravity is
being carried out. Even though the field of quantum gravity as a whole can be
rather abstract and involve mathematics not accessible to many undergraduates,
the computational aspects of the work are accessible and allow a "hands-on"
approach to learning both computational techniques and also the physics of the
model to which those techniques are applied. By its nature, this work must draw
on different disciplines, from pure mathematics, to physics, to computational
methods, and thus involves interaction between researchers and students in these
fields.