* 0401334
* Research in Hamiltonian Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Zhihong Xia, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 234,000.00

Abstract DMS-0401334&lt;br/&gt;PI: ZJ
Xia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conservative mechanical systems, such as our
planetary system, are examples of Hamiltonian systems. Geodesic flows are other
examples&lt;br/&gt;of Hamiltonian systems. One of the most important problems
in&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian dynamical systems is whether orbits in typical systems
are stable.&lt;br/&gt;In fact, the stability of our planetary system has long
been an important&lt;br/&gt;subject of mathematical research. Hamiltonian
systems usually exhibit some&lt;br/&gt;extremely complicated and chaotic
behavior. The proposed research will&lt;br/&gt;address various problems related
to stability and chaos, with research topics&lt;br/&gt;such as the Aubry-Mather
theory, Arnold diffusions, chaotic behaviors and the&lt;br/&gt;Newtonian n-body
problem. The ultimate goal is to show that typical near&lt;br/&gt;integrable
Hamiltonians in higher dimensions are topologically unstable.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research addresses problems with a long history and
wide&lt;br/&gt;applications to classical mechanics, celestial mechanics, as well
as areas of&lt;br/&gt;engineering. Professor Xia's research in Hamiltonian
systems and celestial&lt;br/&gt;mechanics has been featured in many popular
science magazines, books and&lt;br/&gt;even in some elementary undergraduate
textbooks. Another aspect of this work, is the study&lt;br/&gt;of escaping and
capture trajectories in the three-body problem, which may have potential
applications in NASA orbit design. Professor Xia will continue to be actively
involved in student training at both graduate and undergraduate level.
&lt;br/&gt;