* 0401467
* Multiscale Simulations and Experimental Studies of Nanoscale Plasticity and Damage in Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Cindy Rountree, Rountree                Cindy          L
* Fellowship Award
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 143,700.00

This Mathematical and Physical Sciences Distinguished International Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship award supports research on plasticity, fracture and stress
corrosion in glasses. The PI has just received her Ph.D., which involved
massively parallel molecular dynamics simulations of crack-front dynamics in
amorphous silicon. She will conduct research at Saclay, France and collaborate
with the University of Paris XI. The research involves: (1) multiscale
simulation of plasticity in glasses using finite element and molecular dynamics
techniques, and (2) atomic force microscopy experiments on stress-corrosion
fracture in glasses and algorithm design for the analysis of mechanical damage
in the experiments. Apart from broader impacts on the education of a member of
an underrepresented group and providing valuable experiences for a globally
competitive workforce, the research itself has potential impact on the problem
of long-term storage and processing of nuclear waste. %%% This Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Distinguished International Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
award supports research on plasticity, fracture and stress corrosion in glasses.
The PI has just received her Ph.D., which involved advanced computer simulations
of fracture in amorphous silicon. She will conduct research at Saclay, France
and collaborate with the University of Paris XI. The research involves advanced
computer simulation, atomic force microscopy experiments on stress-corrosion
fracture in glasses and algorithm design for the analysis of the experiments.
Apart from broader impacts on the education of a member of an underrepresented
group and providing valuable experiences in support of a globally competitive
workforce, the research itself has potential impact on the problem of long-term
storage and processing of nuclear waste. ***



















