* 0401619
* Orbifold Conformal Field Theory and Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Matthew Szczesny, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2006
* USD 96,533.00

DMS-0401619 Matthew M. Szczesny

The principal investigator proposes four projects relating conformal field
theory, vertex algebras, and algebraic geometry. The first one concerns
orbifolds of the chiral de Rham complex and their relation to Chen-Ruan's
orbifold cohomology. More precisely, the PI proposes to understand the product
structure on orbifold cohomology in terms of the orbifold chiral de Rham
complex. The second (with E. Frenkel and R. Donagi) relates spaces of twisted
conformal blocks and D-modules on generalized Prym varieties. The third project
involves the construction and study of sheaves of orbifold conformal blocks over
the stack of pointed G--covers. The objective here is to obtain an orbifold CFT
generalization of the KZ equations. Finally, the last project (with L. Borisov)
is concerned with a non-chiral generalization of the chiral de Rham complex. The
aim is to construct, for each Calabi-Yau manifold M, a sheaf of non-chiral
vertex algebras in the sense of Kapustin-Orlov, which computes the (2,2)-sigma
model with target M. This construction should have complexified Kahler
dependence.

The purpose of these projects is to apply ideas in conformal field theory (CFT)
( a type of quantum field theory) to algebraic geometry. This has already been
done successfully in the case of ordinary conformal field theories, leading to a
large number of beautiful results. Most of the above projects are concerned with
so called orbifold models, which arise when the CFT has additional discrete
symmetries. In this case, the connections with algebraic geometry have not been
fully explored, and the PI wants to extend some of the geometric results already
known in the case of ordinary CFT's to the orbifold setting. The last of the
projects proposed above focuses on rigorously defining and constructing an
important quantum field theory, called the sigma model. So far, only a partial
construction of "half" the theory exists.

