* 0401012
* Combinatorics in Representation Theory and Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Mark Shimozono, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 94,584.00

Professor Shimozono studies combinatorial structures arising
in&lt;br/&gt;representation theory and algebraic geometry. With&lt;br/&gt;Allen
Knutson and Ezra Miller, he proved a conjecture of Buch&lt;br/&gt;and Fulton for
the torus equivariant cohomology classes of&lt;br/&gt;degeneracy loci associated
with an equioriented type A quiver,&lt;br/&gt;which generalizes the Giambelli-
Thom-Porteous formula for&lt;br/&gt;determinantal varieties. He will study the
equivariant K-theoretic&lt;br/&gt;and cohomology classes of degeneracy loci
associated with other&lt;br/&gt;quivers. This research has applications to the
Schubert calculus&lt;br/&gt;and the geometry of flag varieties. Shimozono will
continue his&lt;br/&gt;research on combinatorial problems arising in the
representation&lt;br/&gt;theory of classical and affine Lie algebras and Weyl
groups. With&lt;br/&gt;Mike Zabrocki, he has discovered new creation operators
for&lt;br/&gt;characters of classical type, which, together with crystal
graph&lt;br/&gt;techniques, will be applied to the problem of finding
explicit&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial formulae for affine Kazhdan-Lusztig
polynomials. He&lt;br/&gt;also plans to continue his study of crystal bases
of&lt;br/&gt;finite-dimensional modules over quantum affine algebras,
with&lt;br/&gt;applications to branching and fusion multiplicities in
conformal&lt;br/&gt;field theories and statistical
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shimozono's research on quiver loci is related
to some classical&lt;br/&gt;mathematics with current applications. For example,
the cohomology&lt;br/&gt;classes of quiver loci may be viewed as polynomials
which&lt;br/&gt;generalize the classical polynomials known as
subresultants.&lt;br/&gt;Subresultants are used in computer algebra systems to
efficiently&lt;br/&gt;compute the greatest common divisor of a collection
of&lt;br/&gt;polynomials, and may also be used to find the number of
common&lt;br/&gt;zeroes of a pair of polynomials without factoring them.
His&lt;br/&gt;research on affine crystal bases involves the study of
certain&lt;br/&gt;highly symmetrical graphs with colored edges. The
symmetries&lt;br/&gt;exhibited by these graphs appear in many areas of
mathematics and&lt;br/&gt;physics, such as in the low-temperature behavior of
statistical&lt;br/&gt;mechanical models involving particles situated on
a&lt;br/&gt;two-dimensional lattice.&lt;br/&gt;