* 0401869
* Doctoral Disseration Research: Blue and Green Shades of Health: The Social Construction of Health Risks in the Labor and Environmental Movements
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Phil Brown, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2006
* USD 7,002.00

This dissertation project examines how labor and environmental movement
organizations discover and socially construct health risks in the workplace and
the general environment. Through examining the similarities and differences in
the social construction of health risks, this research will demonstrate the
likelihood of successful coalition formation between the two movements by
jointly considering occupational health and environmental health science, which
have historically been discrete areas. The research project poses several
research questions to explore the social construction of occupational health and
environmental health: 1) How does the social construction of disease etiology
differ between labor and environmental organizations? 2) How do differences in
the social discovery process lead to the framing of health risks within social
movement organizations and within professional bodies of knowledge? 3) How are
differences in the social construction of environmental health problems between
labor and environmental organizations negotiated in the coalition-building
processes? 4) How can concepts like "just transition" and the precautionary
principle be used to create a collaborative approach for occupational and
environmental health that appeals both to labor and environmental groups? This
project will seek to address these questions through two stages of data
collection and analysis. Both successful and unsuccessful attempts at labor-
environment coalitions will be identified through an extensive search of
academic and popular publications, as well as through the polling of leaders in
the environmental and labor movements. Professional groups that support labor
efforts, such as Committees on Occupational Safety and Health, will also be
interviewed. Once this descriptive task is complete, four detailed case studies,
two of successful coalitions and two of unsuccessful coalitions, will be
examined in further detail. These four cases will be examined and compared in
order to better understand the context and strategies that lead to successful
blue-green coalitions. This project has several broader impacts: The project
brings together medical sociology, environmental sociology, social studies of
science, social movement theory, and labor studies. The project provides a new
way to look at two key social movements that are concerned with science,
technology, health, and the environment. For medical sociology, the offers new
insights into the experience of illness, including the way that individual
experiences can become transformed into collective illness experience. For
environmental sociology and for STS scholars, the project can broaden the
understanding of how various social groups understand and act on environmental
issues and the scientific issues behind them. Also, the project can help social
movement scholars to expand their inquiries to include social movements in
science, technology, health, the environment, and labor unions. By examining the
difficult-to-attain blue-green alliances, this work can help us to better
understand other social movement alliances, which are increasingly a focus of
social movement research. Further, because the ethics and values of the blue and
green components are often divergent, we can learn about how ethics and values
affect social movement mobilization. Finally, this project can help labor
studies scholars better understand the obstacles to environmental awareness on
the part of labor organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;