* 0401723
* LSAMP- Washington Baltimore Hampton Roads Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2010
* Clarence Lee, Howard University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2010
* USD 8,126,750.00

Program Summary &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over the past three years of Phase II of
the Washington-Baltimore-Hampton Roads &lt;br/&gt;Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (WBHR-LSAMP), three new state-based
&lt;br/&gt;institutions were added. The original four partners for Phase I
included Howard University (HU), &lt;br/&gt;Hampton University (HAU), Morgan
State University (MSU) and the University of the District of &lt;br/&gt;Columbia
(UDC). The new Phase II partners included Bowie State University (BSU), Norfolk
&lt;br/&gt;State University (NSU) and Virginia State University (VSU). The
addition of these three partners &lt;br/&gt;expanded the diversity of student
populations served by the WBHR-LSAMP programs as well as &lt;br/&gt;expanding
the numbers of programs available to students enrolled in science, technology,
&lt;br/&gt;engineering and mathematics (STEM) within the Alliance.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual and Technical Merit &lt;br/&gt;The principal objective
for Phase III of the WBHR-LSAMP Alliance is to continue to
&lt;br/&gt;institutionalize the . best practices. and . lesson-learned. from
Phases I and II of the Alliance &lt;br/&gt;and to build the necessary
instructional and research infrastructure that will ensure the successful
&lt;br/&gt;progression and transition of undergraduate students towards B.S.,
M.S and Ph.D. degrees in &lt;br/&gt;STEM fields. The specific objectives for
Phase III are to: &lt;br/&gt;Provide direct support for junior and senior-level
students in order that they can &lt;br/&gt;successfully transition into graduate
programs in STEM fields and ultimately replace the &lt;br/&gt;graying.
professoriate in major research universities and the scientists and engineers at
&lt;br/&gt;national and industrial laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
develop seamless relationships and partnerships with major research universities
so &lt;br/&gt;that students within the WBHR-LSAMP programs completing B.S. and
M.S. degree &lt;br/&gt;programs can continue their graduate work with joint
mentoring by professors at WBHR-&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP institutions and those offering
Ph.Ds by .building bridges for the doctorates.. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To build
synergistic research efforts for all STEM students so that institutionalization
of &lt;br/&gt;the WBHR-LSAMP initiatives will become permanent mechanisms for
degree &lt;br/&gt;production at all levels in the postsecondary educational
pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;Based on the trendline
data, more than 7,500 African Americans have received B.S. &lt;br/&gt;degrees in
STEM fields from this WBHR-LSAMP Alliance over the past 10 years and
&lt;br/&gt;approximately 30 percent or 2,200 of these students have gone on to
enroll in graduate degree &lt;br/&gt;programs and have received M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees as well as other professional degrees. The &lt;br/&gt;WBHR-LSAMP has
documented evidence that the LSAMP students are more likely to return to
&lt;br/&gt;HBCUs than other students. It is also clear by the number of Ph.Ds
produced within the WBHR-&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP institutions, as well as the number of
new assistant professors who have been hired &lt;br/&gt;within the WBHR-LSAMP
Alliance, that the impact of the WBHR-LSAMP Alliance is not just
&lt;br/&gt;within the alliance, but the impact is national as well as global. We
believe that that quality of &lt;br/&gt;African American students attending
institutions within the WBHR-LSAMP alliance is among &lt;br/&gt;the highest in
the United States. Furthermore, the establishment of new research partnerships
will &lt;br/&gt;have as its foundation the establishments of doctoral.level
research at WBHR-LSAMP &lt;br/&gt;institutions. The combination of improved
instructional and research facilities at WBHR-LSAMP &lt;br/&gt;Institutions will
have synergistic affects and benefits for all of the WBHR-LSAMP institutions,
&lt;br/&gt;as well as the major research institutions that become research
partners. In particular, students &lt;br/&gt;participating in collaborative
research benefit because they can be actively involved in a
&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive approach to research and development that is typically
difficult to achieve in &lt;br/&gt;smaller focused research groups such as those
normally found in HBCUs and MIs where research &lt;br/&gt;resources are usually
limited.