* 0401468
* Division Algebras and Field Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* David Saltman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2009
* USD 255,000.00

NSF proposal: ``Division algebras and field invariants''&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: David
J. Saltman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fractions of integers, which we all learned
about in the early grades,&lt;br/&gt;form a system called a ``field''. But this
field is not large enough,&lt;br/&gt;since in this so called ``rational'' field
you cannot take the square&lt;br/&gt;root of 2, or write down pi. It has become,
therefore, a truism that we&lt;br/&gt;need to study all fields. But even the
study of all fields is not&lt;br/&gt;encompassing enough, because in physics, or
when using matrices, one&lt;br/&gt;finds one must study objects which are field-
like, but which are&lt;br/&gt;noncommutative, meaning A times B might not equal
B times A. Such&lt;br/&gt;objects are called division algebras. The question, in
the largest&lt;br/&gt;sense, that this grant considers is the classification of
all division&lt;br/&gt;algebras in terms of the better understood fields, with
particular&lt;br/&gt;reference to the ``center'' of the division algebra, which
is inside&lt;br/&gt;the division algebra and is a field. Coupled with the center
is the&lt;br/&gt;``degree'' of a division algebra, which is a positive integer
that&lt;br/&gt;measures how much bigger the division algebras is as compared to
its&lt;br/&gt;center. Division algebras are an old subject, with a great deal
of&lt;br/&gt;information known when the center is one dimensional. For example
when&lt;br/&gt;the center is close to the rational field, any division algebra
is&lt;br/&gt;known to be so called ``cyclic'', which means there is a very
good&lt;br/&gt;description in terms of fields. The focus of this proposal is the
study&lt;br/&gt;of division algebras whose centers have dimension 2. For
example, a&lt;br/&gt;major focus is the case where the center comes from a curve
over a&lt;br/&gt;p-adic field, a very special case of a 2 dimensional field. In
this&lt;br/&gt;case, not all division algebras are cyclic, but the proposers
hopes to&lt;br/&gt;use algebraic geometry to show that when the division algebra
has&lt;br/&gt;degree a prime integer, and the center comes from a p-adic curve,
then&lt;br/&gt;cyclicity does hold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perhaps the most
important tool in studying division algebras is Galois&lt;br/&gt;cohomology,
because the set of all division algebras with fixed center&lt;br/&gt;F form a
group isomorphic to the second Galois cohomology group with&lt;br/&gt;unit
coefficients. Since second cohomology can be hard to compute,&lt;br/&gt;often
one attacks this group by using ramification. In more detail,
any&lt;br/&gt;discrete valuation defines a map to a first cohomology group, and
by&lt;br/&gt;using all possible discrete valuations one hopes to capture
the&lt;br/&gt;division algebras. In special cases this is known to work, for
example&lt;br/&gt;for rational field or the fields arising from p-adic curves.
In both&lt;br/&gt;cases, one shows, or hopes to show, cyclicity by showing there
is a&lt;br/&gt;cyclic Galois extension which splits all the ramification of
the&lt;br/&gt;division algebra. This leads to a more fundamental question. If D
is a&lt;br/&gt;division algebra of prime degree, is there always a cyclic
field&lt;br/&gt;extension, of the same degree, which at least splits all
the&lt;br/&gt;ramification?&lt;br/&gt;