* 0401258
* International Conference on Properties and Phase Equilibria for Product and Process Design; May 16-21, 2004; Snowbird, UT
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2004
* John O'Connell, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2004
* USD 20,000.00

John P. O'Connell Engineering Conference International (ECI)

This is a proposal for travel support for approximately 30 U.S. academic
researchers to attend the "International Conference on Properties and Phase
Equilibria for Product and Process Design" to be held in Snowbird, Utah, May
16-21, 2004.

Intellectual Merit: The International Conference on Properties and Phase
Equilibria for Product and Process Design (ICPPEPPD) is held every three years.
For the first 21 years the locations alternated between North America and
Europe. In 2001, the conference was held in Asia for the first time, making this
a truly global activity. The first nine conferences have produced highly
desirable interactions between academic and industrial and government workers in
this vital area for chemical process and product design and simulation. The
meetings have also become the most important gatherings for workers from all
over the world. The Ninth Conference held in 2001 in Kurashiki, Japan attracted
247 technical participants from 27 countries. There were 28% industrial
participants, mainly from the US, Japan and the U.K. Academic and industrial
organizations from everywhere in the world are now heavily influencing theory,
experiment and application of "Fluid Properties and Phase Equilibria for
Chemical Process and Product Design." The 21st Century is moving toward
nontraditional systems, especially for sustainability, population growth and
economic development. This means that periodic international conferences should
continue to be held to review progress and uncover the next problems and their
possible solutions. This is especially important as industries worldwide
dramatically decrease their research.

Broader Impact: Each conference has produced important collections of papers in
reviewed archival proceedings volumes. The 9th Conference provided over 1000
pages of reviews and new research published as volumes 194-197 of the
international journal Fluid Phase Equilibria. The Tenth Conference is scheduled
to have a similar format that has been successful at the previous Conferences,
including workshops and new session topics. Similar participation is expected
for the 10th Conference as previously.

In the current era of global technology, international interactions must focus
on subjects of widespread interest that affect industrial practice for process
and product development and quality, as well as economics and competitiveness.
The 10th conference is intended to give the participants (industrial,
governmental and academic) a review of the state of the art with presentations
focusing on the many recent developments in a logically structured manner, to
provide directions for the development of both new theories and important
practical problems to be solved, to discuss the current professional climate for
the discipline, and to expose young researchers to the themes and people of the
area.

In addition, this project will benefit young researchers who traditionally have
a harder time obtaining the finances needed to attend this major international
conference.