* 0401251
* Multi-Channel Optical 3R Regeneration and Buffering for Networking Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Prem Kumar, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 12/31/2007
* USD 210,001.00

0401251&lt;br/&gt;KUMAR&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the critical features that
are likely to hinder massive deployment of optical networks using already
existing technologies is their inability to perform optical IP routing
functions. Optical buffering is one of the key techniques for efficiently
implementing optical/photonic packet switchers or IP routers. Buffers are needed
for queuing packets at the access nodes in order to bridge the photonic-electric
speed gap, for enabling receivers to handle data at rates faster than can be
processed, and for rate conversion in conjunction with optical switches. A
preliminary analysis shows that the loop-type dynamic storage techniques are the
most efficient for practical implementation of optical buffering, although the
issue of integrability of such devices still needs to be addressed. It is
desirable to have a long storage time, extending to tens of seconds, if
possible. Given the fact that in fiber storage loops the signals are stored
dynamically, it is equivalent of several million kilometers of distance traveled
by the stored signals. For this reason optical 3R regeneration (retiming,
reshaping, and retransmitting) is a key enabling technology. It is needed to
prevent distortion of the data signals that get impaired by the amplified
spontaneous emission noise, chromatic and polarization-mode dispersion, and
optical nonlinearity in the buffer components. Furthermore, the existing optical
buffering technologies allow data storage only at a single channel. On the other
hand, it is clear that the next generation optical networks will use massive
wavelength-division-multiplexing. From this standpoint it is highly desirable to
have a buffer that is capable of storing multi-channel data in a single device
versus the conventional approach in which a separate buffer has to be dedicated
to each channel. The multi-channel buffering approach provides more efficient
and economic solution in terms of smaller footprint, lower power consumption,
and smaller number of components needed for handling the same number of packets.
In addition, for networking applications it is important to have optical add-
drop multiplexer (OADM) functionality in the buffer. To the best of the PI's
knowledge, thus far, OADM functionality has not been demonstrated in existing
and proposed optical buffers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project a 4-channel
optical buffer using a nonlinear asymmetric loop mirror (NALM) and a synchronous
electro-absorption modulator (EAM) operating at 20 Gb/s data rate per channel is
proposed. The OADM functionality will be demonstrated, i.e., adding additional
packets (at additional wavelengths) to the buffer without affecting the packets
already stored and dropping from the buffer stored packets leaving the packets
at other channels intact. The multi-channel optical buffer will have
simultaneous 3R regeneration feature for all channels, allowing tens of seconds
of storage time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed and accurate numerical
simulation and parameter studies of the proposed multi-channel buffering system
will be performed. The goals of the modeling include: 1) maximum packet storage
time and its limiting factors, 2) degradation of the signal-to-noise ratio
versus storage time, 3) limits to system scalability in terms of data rate per
channel and the number of channels. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of
the proposed activity: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will address
two of the fundamental roadblocks to widespread deployment of packet-switched
optical networking, namely, 3R regeneration and optical buffering. Theory and
practice will need to go hand-in-hand for a successful outcome. The PI and co-PI
bring a unique combination of theoretical and experimental expertise and skills
to bear upon the problem. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed
activity: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will get involved in cross-
disciplinary work. They will be trained in the network engineering concepts in
addition to the usual curriculum in electro-physics and photonics. The ECE
department at Northwestern University has a strong group in communications
networks. Consequently, a full menu of courses is available to the students for
formal learning and a diverse student body exists for peer-to-peer learning.
Outreach activities through the Center for Photonic Communication and Computing
at Northwestern will be undertaken to have a much wider impact on the community
at large. Full scale efforts will be made through all resources available at the
University to engage underrepresented students in this project. See the Project
Description for further details. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;