* 0401912
* A Joint US-EU Workshop on Genomics and Environmental Biotechnology, Rockville, MD, March 29-31, 2004
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Barbara Methe, Institute for Genomic Research
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2005
* USD 20,769.00

In order to increase scientific interchange between early career scientists in
the US and EU, a joint United States-European Union Workshop on Genomics and
Environmental Biotechnology will be held at The Institute for Genomic Research
(TIGR), Rockville MD, US on March 29-31, 2004. The goals of this Workshop
include the following. 1) An exploration of current applications of genome
science to environmental biotechnology- what is the present state of the art? 2)
The examination of future roles that genomics can play in environmental
biotechnology- what are the potential applications for the future and what needs
must be met to realize this potential? 3) To provide a forum for scientific
exchange of knowledge and ideas by researchers investigating these issues
thereby presenting new opportunities for collaboration. 4) To encourage the next
generation of leaders in the field. Topics to be discussed through formal oral
presentations and poster presentations include the following. 1) The use of
metagenomics approaches and their relevance to studying environmental diversity
and biotechnology. 2) The use of bioinformatics to examine sequence information
derived from metagenomic approaches. 3) The application of genomic approaches to
understanding bioremediation and biotechnology. The Workshop will foster the
exchange of knowledge and ideas between early career and senior scientists from
both the US and EU, and its broader impacts will be to engage young, creative
scientists in the field of environmental biotechnology, to foster international
collaborations, and to train researchers in bioinformatics tools. Eighteen
Senior Scientists (nine from the EU and nine from the US) attending the workshop
will be asked to identify a promising early career scientist (Graduate Student,
Post-Doctoral Fellow or Junior Investigator) who will also be invited to
participate. Additional training will be provided in the use of bioinformatics
tools through the organization a special half-day iahands onla session focused
on the use of a web-based bioinformatics platform.