* 0401508
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Driving Fluids with Rotating and Beating Semiflexible Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Alfredo Alexander-Katz, Alexander-Katz          Alfredo
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/2006
* USD 132,900.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month
research fellowship by Dr. Alfredo Alexander-Katz to work with Dr. Roland Netz
at the University of Munich, in Germany. This project will be supported by the
Math and Physical Sciences Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nature has developed a variety of methods to
move microorganisms within viscous media. Typical strategies for producing
hydrodynamic drag in this regime involve either (a) rotating polymeric spirals
(flagella) or (b) beating semiflexible polymers that normally form quite densely
grafted areas (cilia). Within this project, the PI will perform a theoretical
study of the intricate coupling between the elastic properties and the
hydrodynamic interactions within the moving polymer (and with the supporting
cell surface), which leads to shape deformations at large driving forces.
Although the underlying hydrodynamic equations are linear, the coupling to
elastic degrees of freedom leads to non-linearities that play an important and
hitherto neglected role for the production of directed drag. In the first stage
of the project, the PI will analyze and understand the two biologically relevant
situations of a rotating flagella and beating cilia, and in specific calculate
the resulting shape deformations of the polymers as a function of applied
torque. The second part of the project will be destined to develop in a
biomimetic fashion strategies for pumping or mixing fluids within micro-fluidic
chips using beating synthetic ciliae, or magnetically driven rotating
semiflexible polymers (either single filaments, or polymer brushes).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;