* 0401196
* Design and Fabrication of a Micro Flagellar Motor Based Dynamo
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Steve Tung, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2008
* USD 215,834.00

We propose to explore a novel biologically inspired power supply that has both a
high power density and a small package size. The micro flagellar motor dynamo or
FMD is a microscale hybrid system fabricated from MEMS devices and a non-
pathogenic, genetically engineered strain of Escherichia coli (KAF95) flagellar
motor. This&lt;br/&gt;flagellar motor is a nanoscale molecular motor capable of
a large rotary torque and high power output (relative to other molecular
motors). When tethered down to a microfabricated surface, the motor turns at a
stable rotational rate, providing a natural mechanical power generator. The FMD
converts this mechanical power into an electrical one by combining the flagellar
motor with a copper microcoil and micro ferromagnetic beads. With the
ferromagnetic beads attached, the tethered motor generates a rotating magnetic
field that induces a voltage in the stationary microcoil due to Faraday's Law.
Based on a preliminary study, this induced voltage can potentially provide the
same power density level as that of a methanol fuel
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is an important step towards the development of an effective
electrical power supply for current and future MEMS and NEMS. It uniquely
combines the technologies in microbiology and microfabrication to design and
fabricate a hybrid biological/artificial power system that is both compact and
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will generate significant educational
opportunities for students at both the college and K-12 levels. The UA graduate
and undergraduate students supported under this effort will benefit greatly from
diversified experience in microbiology and microfabrication. The K-12 students
and teachers recruited for the project will become more aware of MEMS and
microbiology, which can lead to more K-12 students pursuing science and
engineering as a career path. The PI will actively recruit underrepresented
students through his current role as a mentor for women and minority engineering
students. He will also expand his activities in NSF-RET programs to involve more
minority K-12 teachers.&lt;br/&gt;