* 0401545
* Locally analytic representation theory and p-adic interpolation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Matthew Emerton, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 185,904.00

The goal of the proposed project is to make progress on
two&lt;br/&gt;fundamental problems in the arithmetic of automorphic
forms:&lt;br/&gt;the construction and study of p-adic analytic families
of&lt;br/&gt;Hecke eigenforms, and the construction and study of p-adic
L-functions;&lt;br/&gt;and to do so by employing the methods of group
representation theory.&lt;br/&gt;Developments in number theory over the last few
decades have led&lt;br/&gt;to a broadening of the concept of automorphic form,
to include notions&lt;br/&gt;such as p-adic automorphic forms, which can be
interpolated in&lt;br/&gt;p-adic analytic families, and the related p-adic
L-functions to which&lt;br/&gt;they give rise. These objects play an
increasingly important&lt;br/&gt;role in number theory, but they can be
difficult to study, because&lt;br/&gt;the powerful representation theoretic
methods that plays such a crucial&lt;br/&gt;role in the classical theory of
automorphic forms do not apply to them.&lt;br/&gt;Work of the proposer shows
that they can be studied representation&lt;br/&gt;theoretically, however, by
using methods from the recently introduced&lt;br/&gt;locally analytic
representation theory of p-adic groups. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;project will
employ these methods to construct p-adic analytic families&lt;br/&gt;of
automorphic Hecke eigenforms for arbitrary reductive groups, and
to&lt;br/&gt;construct and study p-adic L-functions attached to these
automorphic&lt;br/&gt;forms. An integral part of the project will be the
development of&lt;br/&gt;the representation-theoretic tools that underlie these
constructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Number theory is the branch of mathematics
that studies phenomena&lt;br/&gt;related to properties of whole numbers. A
typical number theoretic&lt;br/&gt;question is to determine the number of whole
number solutions of some&lt;br/&gt;equation of interest. The answers to such
questions can often be&lt;br/&gt;encoded in certain mathematical functions.
Automorphic forms and&lt;br/&gt;L-functions are two kinds of functions that
arise in this way,&lt;br/&gt;and that play a particularly important role in
number theory.&lt;br/&gt;One traditional approach to studying these functions is
to use&lt;br/&gt;representation theoretic methods. These are methods that
exploit&lt;br/&gt;the many symmetries of automorphic forms and L-functions to
analyse&lt;br/&gt;their mathematical properties. A more recent approach to their
study,&lt;br/&gt;that is playing an ever more important role, is to use p-adic
methods. &lt;br/&gt;These are methods that involve using divisibility properties
with respect&lt;br/&gt;to some fixed prime number p to study the Taylor series
coefficients&lt;br/&gt;of the automorphic forms and L-functions. A large part of
their&lt;br/&gt;usefulness comes from that fact that they allow one to
group&lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms and the related L-functions into
families&lt;br/&gt;called ``p-adic families'', and study the members of the
families&lt;br/&gt;simultaneously. Until recently, the representation theoretic
approach&lt;br/&gt;and the p-adic approaches have remained quite distinct. The
goal of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed project is to unite the two approaches using
methods of so-called&lt;br/&gt;``locally analytic representation theory'' (an
emerging branch of&lt;br/&gt;representation theory). The proposer will develop
new tools in this theory,&lt;br/&gt;and apply them to construct and study new
examples of p-adic families of&lt;br/&gt;automorphic forms and L-functions, as
well as to improve our understanding&lt;br/&gt;of those families that are
already known to exist.&lt;br/&gt;