* 0401174
* Qualitative Properties of Nonlinear Differential and Integral Equations or Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Congming Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2007
* USD 111,451.00

DMS-0401174&lt;br/&gt;Title: Qualitative properties of nonlinear differential
and&lt;br/&gt;integral equations or systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Congming Li
(University of Colorado,
Boulder)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will study qualitative properties of solutions for nonlinear
integral&lt;br/&gt;and differential equations or systems, especially those
arising from physical&lt;br/&gt;sciences or from differential geometry where the
physical or geometrical&lt;br/&gt;background provides very strong intuitions.
Research of this type is&lt;br/&gt;fundamental in the understanding of many
physical and geometrical problems.&lt;br/&gt;Many aspects of natural phenomena
are related to each other by the natural&lt;br/&gt;laws governing them and very
often these relations are mathematically&lt;br/&gt;described by differential or
integral equations. The study of these equations&lt;br/&gt;is very important in
understanding the related phenomena. It is often the case&lt;br/&gt;that to
solve differential equations computationally with sufficient
accuracy,&lt;br/&gt;the most effective and economical way is to exploit the
properties of&lt;br/&gt;solutions of the equations and then to develop
algorithms in accordance.&lt;br/&gt;Besides being very useful in applied
science, the study of various kinds of&lt;br/&gt;structures and properties of
solutions to various types of equations&lt;br/&gt;invariably leads to new
research endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the PI's will
continue the development of a class of very&lt;br/&gt;powerful techniques,
namely the Method of Moving Planes for both differential&lt;br/&gt;and integral
equations or systems, to the calssification and quantization
of&lt;br/&gt;solutions to various fundamental systems of equations, to the study
of local&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic symmetry of singular solutions and a priori
estimates of solutions.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also continue the joint work with
W. Chen on the geometric problem&lt;br/&gt;of finding a conformal metric with a
prescribed Gaussian or scalar curvature.&lt;br/&gt;The PI is also involved in
the study of certain parabolic systems arising form&lt;br/&gt;other branches of
sciences. The center problem the PI will study is the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
Hardy-Littlewood-Sobolev inequalities including the weighted&lt;br/&gt;version
of them. These inequalities are the most important ingredients in
the&lt;br/&gt;study of Sobolev spaces and are extremely important in the study
of nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations.
The first task will be&lt;br/&gt;the classification of all regular critical
points of the functional associated&lt;br/&gt;with these inequalities. The
second is to study the singular critical points.&lt;br/&gt;Further developing
the method of moving planes in both differential and&lt;br/&gt;integral forms is
essential for making progress in the above two tasks and
is&lt;br/&gt;interesting in its own.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;