* 0401407
* Synthesis of Directional and Alternating Co-polymers through Quadruple Hydrogen Bonded Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Oren Scherman, Scherman                Oren           A
* Fellowship Award
* Katharine Covert
* 10/31/2006
* USD 154,000.00

The MPS Distinguished International Postdoctoral Fellowship Program (MPS-DRF)
enables U.S. scientists to conduct research abroad. The fellowship allows
awardees to establish long-term international collaborations that will benefit
them and the U.S. scientific community by developing international connections
and perspectives in future science leaders.

This award will support a 24-month research fellowship for Dr. Oren A. Scherman
to work with Professor Egbert W. Meijer and his group in the Laboratory of
Macromolecular and Organic Chemistry at Eindhoven University of Technology in
the Netherlands. The proposed work will develop new methods to use non-covalent
bonds to direct the assembly of high molecular weight co-polymers with well-
defined architectures. The ability to control material morphology from the
molecular level has great potential for studying energy and charge transfer
processes in self-assembled structures and in developing new technologically
useful materials.

Prof. E. W. Meijer is a leading authority in the field of supramolecular polymer
chemistry and is known for his strong efforts in training and mentoring
students. The Meijer lab will provide a productive environment for Dr. Scherman
to extend his background in polymer synthesis to supramolecular chemistry and
dynamic self-assembly. This broadening will provide Dr. Scherman with a strong
foundation to return to the U.S. to pursue his plans for an academic career in a
research area of growing importance.