* 0401721
* Strengthening an Existing Precision Agricultural Technology Program through the Creation of a Related Natural Resource Technology Associate of Applied Science Degree
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Tim Sharp, Jackson State Community College
* Standard Grant
* David A. Hanych
* 04/30/2006
* USD 199,840.00

Jackson State Community College (JSCC) is developing a hands-on Natural
Resource&lt;br/&gt;Technology (NRT) Program for support of, and in conjunction
with, the Precision Agriculture Technology's (PAT) innovative and successful
curriculum. This project strengthens the existing Precision Agricultural Program
by adapting the extensive capital investment of the PAT program with a new
Natural Resource Technology A.A.S. degree program. This goal of this program is
to produce multi-disciplinary precision agricultural and natural resource
technicians with the knowledge, comprehension, and skills to support the need
for trained technicians who understand important farming and environmental
issues and management challenges of the future. An important aspect of the
program is the recruitment of area high school students. The project enables
stakeholder groups to participate in collaborative scientific studies in the
fields of agronomic science, wildlife and fisheries management, forest
management and environmental science. This project also creates versatile
technologically-trained individuals who understand the interconnectedness of the
science of agronomy, wildlife, water and forest management and the natural
environment at a level to meet industry and research needs; increases employment
opportunities for students through service-learning relationships with wildlife,
water and forest management agencies, area farm producers and agribusinesses;
and enhances connections between the community college and the natural resources
community by creating opportunities for collaboration on mutual research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;