* 0401177
* Global Regularity and Development of Singularities for Geometric Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Joachim Krieger, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 99,851.00

This project aims at establishing global regularity/asymptotic Stability
&lt;br/&gt;results for certain geometric/physical nonlinear wave equations.
Also, it &lt;br/&gt;is hoped that further insight into possible singularity
formation is&lt;br/&gt;gained. The first goal is to generalize the PI's earlier
result on gobal&lt;br/&gt;regularity of Wave Maps with small energy and smooth
data from the three&lt;br/&gt;dimensional Minkowski space to the Lobachevskyi
plane to enompass the case&lt;br/&gt;of arbitrary targets of bounded geometry,
using partly the PI's method(this &lt;br/&gt;is jointly with D. Tataru). The
next goal is to analyze the global stability &lt;br/&gt;of certain large-energy
Wave Maps (geodesic, spherically symmetric, &lt;br/&gt;equivariant) under small-
energy perturbations of the initial data &lt;br/&gt;(assumed smooth). It is
expected that certain geometric properties of &lt;br/&gt;the target (geodesic
convexity, negative curvature) should ensure that the&lt;br/&gt;Wave Maps behave
like a free wave at infinity. A related goal is to&lt;br/&gt;establish the
stability of stationary Wave Maps, expected based on&lt;br/&gt;physical
intuition. Finally, the PI hopes to make progress on understanding
&lt;br/&gt;possible singularity formation either for Wave Maps(when the target
is a &lt;br/&gt;sphere) or related equations, such as Yang Mills. One toy
problem would be &lt;br/&gt;to investigate the stability of self-similar blow-up
solutions for Wave Maps, &lt;br/&gt;e.g., known in dimensions four and
higher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this work consists in hopefully
paving the way for a&lt;br/&gt;better understanding of the extremely complex
Einstein's equations(these&lt;br/&gt;are related to the Wave Maps discussed
above) which govern the spacetime &lt;br/&gt;geometry of our universe, as well
as other nonlinear wave eqations coming &lt;br/&gt;up in the description of
fundamental natural phenomena, for example &lt;br/&gt;equations of elasticity or
the Yang-Mills equations describing elementary &lt;br/&gt;particles. The subject
is beautifully situated at the crossroads of several &lt;br/&gt;purely
mathematical disciplines, such as Harmonic Analysis and Geometry, &lt;br/&gt;as
well as more applied areas, such as Numerical Mathematics(computational
&lt;br/&gt;simulations of partial differential equations), Physics and
Cosmology. &lt;br/&gt;Indeed, one of the motivations for studying the
qualitative behavior of&lt;br/&gt;breakdown of solutions, as occurs for example
during gravitational&lt;br/&gt;collapse (Black Hole formation), is to lead to
more accurate numerical modelling. &lt;br/&gt;The PI hopes that his research
will not only be of interest &lt;br/&gt;to pure mathematicians but also
researchers in these other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;