* 0401542
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Systematic Design and Evaluation of Synthetic Virus-like Particles for Gene Delivery: Overcoming Barriers for In Vitro
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Ayesha Ahmad, Ahmad, Ayesha
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 06/30/2006
* USD 84,000.00

0401542 Ahmad

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Ayesha
Ahmad to work with Dr. Andrew Miller at Imperial College in London, United
Kingdom. Gene Therapy refers to the process of curing inherited and acquired
diseases by adding, replacing, or correcting genes through the introduction of
foreign DNA. A viable vector has to be able to, among other things, package the
DNA, deliver the DNA to the cell, and release the DNA into the nucleus thereby
allowing the cell to use its machinery to express the therapeutic protein.
Biological methods, chemical methods, and physical methods, are all currently
being used, with their various advantages and disadvantages, in the development
of this field. This proposal focuses on using chemical or synthetic methods,
which have attracted considerable attention due to their inherent advantages
including ease of production, lack of immunogenic response, and variable
preparation.

Despite their advantages over viral-based gene delivery systems, synthetic gene
delivery systems have met with limited success. Although there is an abundance
of and variation in synthetic vectors, a full characterization and understanding
of the interactions and processes that occur at the many different steps of the
gene delivery course is lacking. Several biological barriers have been
identified that impede the path of non-viral vectors at several steps in the
gene delivery process. The key to improving non-viral delivery systems is to
identify the interactions that occur between the synthetic DNA complexes and the
cells at these various barriers. This allows directed alteration and
optimization of vector structure and complex formulations to overcome the
various biological impediments and barriers the complex encounters. At the
Imperial College Genetics Therapy Centre, researchers have developed a synthetic
non-viral vector platform system known as liposome:mu:DNA (LMD). The LMD system
is a ternary LD system built around the ? (mu) peptide associated with the
condensed core complex of the adenovirus. LMD systems are not considered an end
in themselves but represent a firm platform on which to build clinically viable
synthetic non-viral vector systems in the future. LMD represents a well-
characterized, well-understood transfection vehicle constructed from a primary
tool-kit of well-defined chemical components. Given this firm foundation, the
next generation of LMD systems, LMDII, will now be developed in a sequential and
logical fashion for clinical readiness by making modular adaptations to this
primary vehicle using new secondary tool-kits comprised of supplementary sets of
chemical components. The proposed research program is considered the only
systematic way to reach a clinically viable non-viral gene therapy vector. The
need to merge physicochemical - cellular biology - pharmaceutical
characterization of the novel virus-like nanoparticles, is critical in terms of
developing non-viral gene therapy vectors, therefore offering clinically viable
alternatives to the effective, yet precarious, viral vectors predominantly
employed in clinical trials today.

