* 0401486
* Low Temperature Studies of Novel Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Peter Schiffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2008
* USD 246,414.00

This project is a research program to study magnetic materials that display
unusual physical properties at low temperatures. The research will focus on two
classes of materials: geometrically frustrated magnets and perovskite
manganites, although the research will also extend to explore the physics of
other interesting magnetic materials such as ferromagnetic semiconductors.
&lt;br/&gt;Geometrically frustrated magnets are materials in which the
interactions between atomic spins compete with each other due to the geometry of
a structurally well-ordered magnetic sublattice. These materials have been shown
to display a variety of exotic behavior at low temperatures, including
glassiness in the presence of minimal disorder, spin liquid states, and "spin
ice" (a magnetic analog to the frustrated protonic state found in frozen water).
The research will probe the physics of geometrically frustrated magnets with
particular emphasis on investigations of glassy slow dynamics and quantum
relaxation in systems of large rare earth spins. &lt;br/&gt;The perovskite
manganites are magnetic oxides based on manganese. These materials have a strong
coupling between the magnetic, electronic, and lattice degrees of freedom, and
they show a wide range of unusual physical properties. Recent experimental and
theoretical work has indicated that intrinsic magnetoelectronic phase separation
into charge-ordered and conducting ferromagnetic regions is an important element
of the physics of these materials. The research will investigate novel magnetic
phenomena resulting from this microscopic coexistence of different
magnetoelectronic phases. One area of research will be investigations of time-
dependent behavior related to phase separation. This behavior is analogous to
that observed in spin glass materials, yet it is quite different in origin,
since it arises from the large scale coexistence of different phases. A second
area of research will be an investigation of unusual low temperature
metamagnetic transitions, which are extremely sharp and appear only at
temperatures well below the energy scale of the spin-spin interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on the physical properties
of magnetic materials. Such materials are important in that they demonstrate
fundamental principles which cannot be accessed in other systems. They also are
important technologically, particularly in computer memory applications. The
impact of this work will be in the development of a better understanding of
these fascinating material systems. In particular, the research will elucidate
the nature of a class of materials known as geometrically frustrated magnets. In
these materials, the magnetic atoms are arranged such that the local energy of
the atomic interactions cannot be simultaneously minimized throughout the
system. Understanding geometrical frustration in magnets has implications for
complex systems as diverse as superconducting junction arrays and neural
networks, and has the potential for providing insight into systems that may form
the foundation for novel future computational paradigms. Another class of
materials, which will be studied is the "colossal magnetoresistance" manganites,
which are materials whose electrical resistance changes drastically when placed
in a magnetic field. The research will focus on their unusual phase-separated
properties at low temperatures, whereby the samples spontaneously separate into
microscopic regions, which conduct electricity and regions which do
not.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the research will be in the enhanced
educational experience of a broad range of students. The principal investigator
has a strong record of working with both graduate and undergraduate students in
every stage of the research process, and the proposed research would support
this educational &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;