* 0401206
* Novel Compact Sensor Based on Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering of Gold Nanoparticle Aggregates and D-Shaped Fibers
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Jin Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 03/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

0401206&lt;br/&gt;Gu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this research
is to develop and demonstrate a novel sensor based on nanoparticle surface
enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and D-shaped fibers for chemical, biological,
and environmental detection with emphasis on understanding both the fundamental
principles and critical engineering issues underling the sensor design and
operation. The sensor will be highly sensitive, molecular specific, reliable,
label-free, non-invasive, inexpensive, easy to produce commercially using
existing technologies, compatible with existing lasers and detectors, and
applicable to a large number of molecules of interest. This is made possible by
the unique sensor architecture based on a combination of D-shaped fibers and
novel SERS substrates, where SERS provides the high sensitivity (106-1015
enhancement factor), molecular specificity, and applicability to a wide range of
compounds, while the novel D-shaped fiber provides the compactness, reliability,
low cost, and ease of production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
approach to the compact SERS sensor is to deposit a layer of nanoparticle
aggregates on top of the polished surface of a D-shaped fiber. Light propagating
inside the fiber is coupled to the nanoparticle layer where SERS is employed to
detect the sample. The development encompasses the combined expertise of the two
PIs, Gu, who specializes in photonic materials and devices, and Zhang, who
specializes in synthesis and optical properties of nanomaterials. The long-term
goal is not only to develop a reliable and robust sensor that satisfies the
above desired features but also to understand the fundamental and technical
issues underling the design, fabrication, and operation of this sensor. The
developed sensor will be tested in the detection of several important chemical
and biological systems including glucose, proteins, DNA, and bacteria. It can
also be useful for in situ detection of chemical warfare agents, explosives,
food pathogens, toxins, and blood or tissue proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in a better understanding of
both the fundamental and technical issues underling the design and development
of nanophotonic devices such as chemical and biological sensors. Advanced
sensors are urgently needed for national security, military, and civilian
applications. The fundamental knowledge gained from this research will be useful
to the design and development of other devices based on nanomaterials such as
detectors, displays, lasers, and light emitting diodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this research is mainly in advancing nanoscience and
nanotechnology, with emphasis on novel sensor technologies for detection of
chemical, environmental, and biological agents. The society as a whole is
expected to benefit tremendously from progress and breakthroughs in nanoscience
and nanotechnology research. Novel sensing technology based on nanomaterials is
a major and integral part of nanotechnology. This proposed research will lead to
multidisciplinary education and training of students. As part of this research,
the PI plans to have regular joint group meetings between the two groups and
joint seminars among Chemistry, Physics, Biology, and EE. The training of
students in the fast growing fields of nanoscience and nanotechnology is
critical to maintain the competitive edge of the US in these fields. &lt;br/&gt;