* 0401784
* Sedimentary Processes in Pyroclastic Density Currents: Insights From the Deposits of Nevado de Toluca Volcano, Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 09/30/2003,05/31/2005
* James Gardner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2005
* USD 72,020.00

EAR-0309703&lt;br/&gt;Gardner&lt;br/&gt;Pyroclastic density currents are the
largest natural examples of flowing granular matter and display complex patterns
of size and density segregation. This project will study their deposits to gain
insight into processes controlling mixing and segregation patterns difficult to
study in smaller-scale granular flows. Analysis of the topology and particle
sizes and densities of both massive and stratified facies will be used to
reconstruct the internal workings of the parent current. The site to be studied
is an explosive eruption of Nevado de Toluca, Mexico. Facies changes that will
be explored by the means of three subsets of a GIS database, which will
integrate sampling data obtained by determining componentry and grain size
analysis with stratigraphic columns, GPS coordinates, and photographs. The first
subset will allow determining the depositional mechanism of the massive facies,
en masse or aggradation. This step will unlock the meaning of the reverse
coarse-tail grading present at Toluca, a rare sedimentary pattern of broad
interest because it is the opposite of the normal grading found commonly in
other volcanoes. The local variations of the stratified facies given by the
second subset will be compared to predictions from various models in order to
assess whether surges are quasi-steady currents with strong internal
fluctuations in particle concentration, or unsteady currents controlled by
fluctuations at the source vent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be extended
to other hazardous geophysical flows where similar sedimentation processes
occur, such as snow avalanches, debris flows, and landslides. The results will
also be applicable to industrial, chemical, and pharmaceutical applications
attempting to avoid segregation during powder
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;