* 0402128
* Remote Studio Laboratory for Distance Learning Technology Education
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Thomas Dunbar, Corning Community College
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 10/31/2006
* USD 116,314.00

This project addresses the need for a hands-on laboratory component for
technology education using a novel distance learning approach, the Remote Studio
Laboratory (RSL). Specialized technology programs at two-year college
institutions and educational outreach programs in high schools benefit from the
implementation of the RSL.

The goal of this project is to enhance recruitment and training of technicians
through the development of a remote studio laboratory concept. The goal is being
met by increasing faculty ability to produce distance learning laboratory based
curricula utilizing the studio approach, adapting materials being developed
under an existing grant to a distance laboratory format, designing and
developing a remote student laboratory prototype system where the laboratory is
local to the student, and evaluating the distance lab prototype as an
educational outreach tool to increase the awareness of the technician career
choice at the high school level. Examples of activities include the development
of a data and image acquisition portable laboratory and a set of laboratory
exercises for an introductory physics and optoelectronics technology course.

Project outcomes include students with working knowledge of hands-on experiments
which reinforce concepts in introductory courses. The RSL approach removes
geographic and other barriers and is used to improve student learning. The RSL
enhanced course is being used in high schools as a recruiting tool for
technology education.

This project is in collaboration with National Instruments, the Infotonics
Technology Center, Imaging and Sensing Technology, the COPE alliance, and
Southern Tier Tech Prep. This network includes technology education partners at
the high school, two-year college, four-year technology college, supplier, and
industry level. Members at each level are evaluating the RSL hardware and
laboratory experiments developed.

Materials developed by this project are being disseminated by web sites and via
the Academic Solutions CD-ROM of National Instruments. Publication of the RSL
prototype is expected in articles in The Physics Teacher, the International
Journal of Engineering Education and at professional conferences.

