* 0402900
* NER: Mathematical Modeling of the Constitutive Response of Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Hamid Bellout, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Jimmy K. Hsia
* 05/31/2006
* USD 79,999.00

Mathematical Modeling of the Constitutive Response of Carbon
Nanotubes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: &lt;br/&gt;Hamid Bellout
and Frederick Bloom&lt;br/&gt;Department of Mathematical
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;Northern Illinois University&lt;br/&gt;DeKalb, IL 60115
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale and Engineering Initiative NSF 03-043, Category NER
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using molecular dynamics simulations at the atomic scale,
the principal investigators construct a mathematical model for the constitutive
behavior of a graphitic sheet; this is accomplished by applying homogenization
theory to a hexagonal array of carbon atoms with a specific chirality vector.
The molecular dynamics simulations generate a set of periodic, rapidly varying,
elastic constants for the graphitic sheet which incorporate the previously
ignored torsional component of strain. The analysis is then extended to specific
arrays of carbon atoms on the surface of a single-walled nanotube of the same
chirality with the goal of determining the deformation which takes the graphitic
sheet, modeled as a continuum, onto the nanotube surface. The derived effective
constitutive relations for single-walled nanotubes allows for the computation of
an effective thickness for nanotube shells and for an extension of the modeling
effort to multiwalled nanotubes. In particular, the research leads to new
results concerning the compressive buckling of single-walled and multi-walled
carbon nanotubes and predictions of their ultimate strength in nanotube
composites; it also obviates the need for an expanding array of expensive and
time-consuming molecular dynamics studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considerable
interest has been generated in nano-structured non-metallic materials because of
their potential for providing significant improvements in both mechanical and
physical properties with respect to traditional structural materials. Carbon
nanotubes, in particular, are believed to possess a strength which is unmatched
by any other known material and composite materials based on carbon nanotubes
have the potential of providing strength-to-weight ratios exceeding those of any
materials currently available. Because small fiber composites are relatively
easy to process, the mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes make them
outstanding candidates for the fabrication of the optimal carbon fiber
reinforced materials. The present research effort is geared towards the
development of theories for predicting the mechanical properties of individual
nanotubes; such knowledge is a prerequisite for understanding the bulk
mechanical properties of nanotube-polymer composites in terms of the molecular
structure of the polymer, the nanotubes, and the polymer/nanotube interfaces.
Nanotube reinforced polymer composites are already being thought of as the ideal
structural materials of the future for applications which range from advanced
components for the next generation of civilian, military, and space vehicles and
aircraft to protective uniforms for members of the armed
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;