* 0402070
* Planning Visit to New Zealand and Australia for Cooperative Research on the Evolution of Respiratory Systems in Ancient Reptiles
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Dona Boggs, Eastern Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 04/30/2005
* USD 5,500.00

0402070&lt;br/&gt;Boggs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a planning grant that
involves visits by Dr. Dona Boggs of Eastern Washington University to several
parts of New Zealand and to Melbourne, Australia in order to gather information
and make arrangements for an international collaborative research effort that
will involve several investigators and several types of animals. The general
focus of the research collaborations being planned by the PI is the evolution
and interaction of respiratory and locomotor systems in extinct and living
vertebrates. The PI intends to collect data from museum specimens on some
musculo-skeletal features of a living ancient reptile-like animal, the tuatara,
which is found only on several islands off the New Zealand mainland. She will
also develop more detailed research plans for studying several species of birds
(flying, flightless, and diving species) in New Zealand and megachiropteran bats
in Australia. This trip will also enable her to arrange the necessary research
permits by meeting in person with representatives of Departments of Conservation
in both countries and with authorities of the Maori community of New Zealand.
The latter is required by New Zealand law. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This trip is a preliminary step toward a project
that would advance our knowledge of the coevolution of ventilatory and locomotor
systems in several groups of vertebrates . Most of the later field research will
be done in the countries being visited and will include investigators from those
countries as well as experts in Germany. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate research project will enhance
partnerships in research across four nations. The participants will include
three female investigators as well as undergraduate and graduate student
participants from a small regional American university. The results will be
broadly disseminated to the scientific communities interested in comparative
physiology and vertebrate functional morphology and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;