* 0402239
* Collaborative Research: High Resolution Records of Holocene Climate Change, Drought Variability and Monsoon Behavior from the Uinta Mountains of Utah
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Glen MacDonald, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David J. Verardo
* 04/30/2008
* USD 82,475.00

This award funds the development of records of multi-centennial drought events
over the past 10,000 years from fossil biotic and geochemical indicators of
hydrological conditions and environmental temperatures preserved in Uinta
Mountain (UM), Utah lake sediments. These records could increase the science
community's understanding of climate-forcing mechanisms causing droughts in the
UM by examining links with North Atlantic sea surface temperature variations
during the early to mid-Holocene due to northward displacement of the monsoon.
The researchers have already collected surface sediments and environmental data
from several lakes spanning 1,000 meters of elevation across the current
northern limits of significant summer monsoonal precipitation. Diatom and
chironomid-inference models for temperature, specific conductivity, and depth
will be developed from these and other sites. Isotopic analysis of lake sediment
cellulose will provide information on the source of precipitation. The research
aims to develop paleoclimate data and time series from a region susceptible to
drought that is becoming densely populated. This information will be of value to
a broad spectrum of paleoclimate researchers and water resource planners as they
struggle to understand natural climate variability and its environmental impact
in Utah and other parts of the Upper Colorado River Basin.