* 0402824
* Research in Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Jiming Jiang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 09/30/2009
* USD 120,148.00

In this project, the principle investigator (PI) proposes&lt;br/&gt;research on
four important topics aimed to develop methods&lt;br/&gt;of statistical
inference and model diagnostics in cases of&lt;br/&gt;correlated observations.
These topics are: (i) partially&lt;br/&gt;observed information and inference
about non-Gaussian&lt;br/&gt;linear mixed models; (ii) iterative weighted least
squares&lt;br/&gt;procedures for analysis of longitudinal data; (iii) A
test&lt;br/&gt;of global maximum for dependent observations; and
(iv)&lt;br/&gt;generalized linear mixed model diagnostics. Linear
mixed&lt;br/&gt;models are widely used in practice for correlated
observations.&lt;br/&gt;A typical assumption regarding these models is that
the&lt;br/&gt;observations are normally distributed. However, the
normality&lt;br/&gt;assumption is likely to be violated in practice. It is known
that&lt;br/&gt;normality based methods such as REML still produce
consistent&lt;br/&gt;estimators even if normality fails. However, the
estimation&lt;br/&gt;of standard errors of these estimators is complicated,
because&lt;br/&gt;for non-Gaussian data the asymptotic covariance matrix of
the&lt;br/&gt;Gaussian estimator involves additional unknown
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;Project (i) aims to completely solve this long-standing
problem&lt;br/&gt;of practical interest. Furthermore, project (ii) proposes
an&lt;br/&gt;iterative weighted least squares procedure for
computing&lt;br/&gt;efficient estimators of the regression coefficients in
linear&lt;br/&gt;models for longitudinal data analysis and studies its
properties.&lt;br/&gt;Project (iii) aims to extend a method developed in the
i.i.d.&lt;br/&gt;case for checking whether a root to the likelihood
equation&lt;br/&gt;corresponds to the global maximum of the likelihood
function.&lt;br/&gt;Project (iv) develops goodness-of-fit tests and methods
of&lt;br/&gt;informal model checking for generalized linear mixed
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correlated responses are often encountered in
practice. For&lt;br/&gt;example, in medical studies repeated measures are often
collected&lt;br/&gt;from the same individuals over time. It would be reasonable
to&lt;br/&gt;assume that correlations exist among the observations from
the&lt;br/&gt;same individual. Linear and generalized linear mixed models
are&lt;br/&gt;two important classes of statistical models widely used in
cases&lt;br/&gt;of correlated observations. For linear mixed models methods
of&lt;br/&gt;inference have been developed, but mostly under the
assumption&lt;br/&gt;that the observations are normal (or Gaussian). However,
the&lt;br/&gt;normality assumption is likely to be violated in practice.
The&lt;br/&gt;PI aims to develop a powerful method for inference
about&lt;br/&gt;non-Gaussian linear mixed models. For generalized linear
mixed&lt;br/&gt;models, the PI proposes to develop methods of model
checking&lt;br/&gt;that fills an important gap in the applications of these
models.&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed are likely to have impact in other
fields&lt;br/&gt;of statistics as well as in fields such as biomedical
research,&lt;br/&gt;genetics, biology, economics, education and social
science.&lt;br/&gt;