* 0402167
* The Gulf Coast - Technology Articulation Partnership (GC-TAP)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Nikos Kiritsis, Houston Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2010
* USD 299,999.00

Engineering-Engineering Technology (58) Houston Community College - Northeast
(HCC-Northeast) and McNeese State University (MSU) are the foundation of a Gulf
Coast - Technology Articulation Partnership (GC-TAP), which provides technicians
for the Texas/Louisiana petrochemical industry. The project is developing
articulation agreements between McNeese State University and the Houston
Community College System to provide AAS degree holders the opportunity to
continue their education and achieve a baccalaureate degree in process
technology. The project includes Lee College as a partner to test the
transferability of the process to the other community colleges within this
region that have petrochemical AAS degree programs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project includes significant outreach component and support systems to attract
and retain Hispanic students. Methods include meeting with parents of high
school students, developing promotional materials in Spanish, providing
scholarships to students attending both institutions, developing yearly one-day
workshops at each institution for counselors and high school teachers to become
more informed of process technology and to raise their student's awareness about
the opportunities in process technology, creating student cohorts that includes
mentoring support, and providing trips to McNeese State University to understand
how job opportunities in process technology are enhanced by obtaining a four-
year degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, GC-TAP is
implementing a seamless pathway between the two institutions by involving highly
trained faculty with industry experience throughout the process; offering
college faculty as well as secondary education teachers and counselors
opportunities for professional development through seminars, workshops and
specialized training; developing a Co-op program at each institution; and
developing a co-enrollment agreement between the two institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing web based instructional material
to provide access to specialized classes at remote campuses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;