* 0402699
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Infrared and Optical Studies of Quantum Phase Transitions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Norman Armitage, Armitage                Norman         P
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/2005
* USD 79,000.00

0402699 Armitage

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a sixteen-month research fellowship by Dr. Norman P.
Armitage to work with Dr. Dirk van der Marle at the University of Geneva in
Switzerland.

This project concerns the study of optical and infrared properties of condensed
matter systems near so-called quantum phase transition (QPTs). This a topic at
the forefront of some of the most challenging and interesting problems in
condensed matter physics. Once thought to be a theoretical curiosity, it is
becoming increasingly clear that the existence of nearby QPTs may hold the key
to understanding the unusual behavior of many systems at the forefront of
condensed matter physics. The optical and infrared response of correlated
electron systems, such as superconductors and novel magnetic states, are being
investigated as they are tuned via an external parameter (e.g. pressure, carrier
density, or magnetic field) through such a transition between various magnetic
and superconducting ground states near absolute zero temperature. The work is
being done in the group of Prof. Dirk van der Marel at the University of Geneva
using both the state-of-the-art facilities of Dr. van der Marel's lab and new
infrared systems being currently installed at the Swiss Light Source (SLS)
synchrotron. Prof. van der Marel's present work concentrates on the low energy
excitation spectra of strongly correlated electron systems, using various
infrared and optical spectroscopic probes. The lab in Geneva is uniquely
equipped for this project as one of the top laboratories in the world for such
investigations. However, the optical study of pressure-tuned QPTs (such as those
found in heavy fermion systems), necessitates the use of small beam spots for
coupling into a diamond anvil pressure cells. This is a requirement incompatible
with traditional lab based infrared or optical sources, but made possible by the
advent of infrared synchrotron radiation (IRSR) sources. One of the unique
aspects of this project is the use of newly commissioned infrared beamlines at
the SLS.