* 0402567
* Creating Pathways II for New IT Professionals
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Peterson, Virginia Community College System IE-IT
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 06/30/2008
* USD 783,619.00

Computer Science (31) This Virginia Community College System (VCCS) Institute of
Excellence for Information Technology (IE-IT) project improves education in
information technology (IT) and student academic and employment outcomes by (a)
disseminating and implementing the products of its current ATE project (Creating
Pathways for New IT Professionals) throughout Virginia from grades 9 through 16;
(b) piloting and evaluating a model dual-enrollment program and new pedagogical
models of IT education; and (c) developing and implementing activities in
curriculum development, professional development, technical assistance, coaching
of IT faculty, articulation, and student recruitment and retention. Partners
include the Virginia Department of Education, the statewide Tech Prep program,
universities in Virginia, and other ATE projects both inside and outside of
Virginia. Intellectual Merit: The VCCS IE-IT, the ATE-funded Consortium on IT
Education in Virginia, and partners upgrade and align IT curricula from grades 9
through 16 and provide clear, well-defined pathways in IT education for students
and professional development opportunities for secondary and post-secondary IT
instructors, incorporating and synthesizing technical training with new models
of instruction. Using input from the IT industry, existing pilot programs at
Northern Virginia Community College (NVCC), and the work of other ATE projects
at Nashville State Community College (NSCC), the University of Arkansas at Fort
Smith, and DeAnza College, this project pilots and evaluates new pedagogical
methodologies, including problem-based learning activities, value-delivery
skills, NSCC Case Files, story-centered curricula, performance-based assessments
of students, student and faculty IT communities of practice, and student
reference resources containing learning objects and up-to-date IT career
information. Broader Impacts: With 23 colleges on 40 campuses, the VCCS enrolls
more than 65 percent (92,944, one-third minorities, almost 60 percent female) of
undergraduates in Virginia. This project impacts the IT programs, faculty, and
students in secondary schools and two and four-year colleges in Virginia through
the project's statewide Consortium on IT Education, with online communications
and collaboration software, development of a faculty handbook on new models of
instruction, professional development, technical assistance, and an online
portal. The communities of practice encourage and support women and minority
students in obtaining leadership roles in delivering IT services. The project
impacts IT programs in community colleges in other states and the national
educational community through the NVCC National IT Community of Practice,
empirical studies of components of a new model of IT education, published
articles, and presentations at national conferences.