* 0402664
* High-Resolution Quantitative Reconstructions of Holocene Climatic Changes and Their Impacts on Environment and People in the Central Canadian Arctic
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Glen MacDonald, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 10/31/2004
* USD 397,002.00

This award will be used to obtain quantitative estimates of summer temperature
variations during the Holocene Thermal Maximum (HTM) and assess its impact in
the Arctic. Specifically, the researchers will document the occurrence and
magnitude of the 8,200 year before present (B.P.) event (a sharp climatic
reversal distinct in Holocene ice core records), examine the influence of solar
variability on Arctic climate, and investigate the impact of climate change on
native people.

The researchers will sample fossil chironomids, diatoms, and pollen from lake
sediment cores to produce a transfer function of summer temperatures for
Victoria Island and adjacent continental Canada. Records of the HTM will be
examined to assess the impact of prolonged warming on the Arctic. This warming
indicates that the HTM was not a unimodal event, but a series of temperature
peaks occurring between 1,500 and 6,500 years B.P. This suggests a positive
correlation with solar variability.

The archaeological record shows that Paleoeskimos were established on Victoria
Island by 4,500 years B.P. but suffered a rapid population decline by 3,800
years B.P. High-resolution records during this period would help determine if
the decline was from human influence (i.e., over-harvesting of musk-ox) or if a
change in climate led to the human population crash.

This research will examine Arctic climate variability, a key issue of scientific
concern to the broader scientific and science policy communities. The award will
enable extensive national and international partnerships in science and support
several American graduate and undergraduate students as partners in the
research.