* 0402075
* Factory Wise: Preparing Underserved Students for Higher Education and Careers in Highly Automated Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Kim Grady, Maricopa County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2008
* USD 898,362.00

The project is developing a 600 contact-hour college-credit program of
instruction and mentoring to draw 200 at-risk students into education and career
paths that lead to jobs in highly automated manufacturing. The project is based
at the Maricopa Skill Center, located in a low-income neighborhood of Phoenix,
Arizona, and targets underserved minorities and women. The program's
instructional plan includes 12 multimedia learning modules targeted to the
National Skill Standards for Technicians in Highly Automated Manufacturing;
hands-on laboratory activities using an innovative, industry-subsidized
simulator; intensive student mentoring for college and job options; and an
individualized education/employment plan for each student. The project also
offers faculty development for some 126 community college and high school
instructors and is holding two national demonstrations for college
deans/department heads and industry trainers. The teaching core of the Factory
Wise project is a realistic simulation of a highly automated manufacturing
environment that the partners are creating in Skill Center laboratories. The
simulation uses the HAS (Highly Automated System)-200 training system recently
developed in collaboration with industry and with support from the Intel Corp.
Faculty coach students in working with HAS-200 and Factory Wise materials to
learn the concepts, skills, and attitudes they need to succeed in an AAS-degree
path or entry-level work in industry. The modules are adaptable to instruction
with the full HAS-200, with selected stations of it, or without it. The
intellectual merit of the project lies in testing the proposition that close
mentoring in a highly interactive learning environment can motivate academically
challenged students to choose STEM pathways leading to well-paid manufacturing
jobs. The project impacts broadly beyond Arizona by a) leveraging MATEC's
curriculum development expertise to provide modules and learning activities to
collaborating educational institutions; and b) disseminating an efficient
learning and program building model (adaptable for use with and without the
trainer, in industries from pharmaceuticals to semiconductors) for motivating
difficult-to-reach students to pursue degrees and careers in advanced
manufacturing.