* 0402309
* Power Up:Creating Leaders for Community College and High School Technology/Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Christine Shaw, Museum of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Ginger H. Rowell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 772,533.00

The Power Up!: Creating Leaders for Community College &amp; High School
Technology/Engineering project is a professional development program for high
school and community college educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The project meets five critical needs: &lt;br/&gt;1) The need to engage
college students just starting engineering/technology programs with creative and
realistic problem-solving activities; &lt;br/&gt;2) The need for instructional
programs at the high school level that lead students to consider pursuing
technical studies at college; and &lt;br/&gt;3) The need for high school and
college faculties to work together to smooth the transition from high school to
college. &lt;br/&gt;In order to bring the benefits of the proposed program to a
wider audience, 4) a cadre of teacher leaders is being developed and 5) the
program is increasing awareness among high school guidance counselors, college
faculty advisors, and parents about the importance of technology and engineering
programs that are open and accessible to all students at the high school and
college levels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on one area of
engineering/technology education: energy and power technologies. At a national
level, energy and power technologies are becoming increasingly important for
society's continued development and growth. Engineers and technicians are needed
to manage and maintain the current sources and grids while simultaneously
alternative sources need to be explored for the future. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Power Up! is a collaboration between the Museum of Science, Boston;
four community colleges in Massachusetts: Bunker Hill Community College, North
Shore Community College, Quinsigamond Community College, and Springfield
Technical College; three industry partners: Keyspan Energy, Northern Power, and
The Engineering Center; eight school districts; and the Department of Education
Tech Prep Network. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project is
developing, pilot-testing, and refining a systemic model for how high schools,
community college, and industry partners can collaborate to develop new
technology/engineering programs and pathways for students that can be
disseminated nationwide. The project also fosters the creation of articulated
pathways to enhance curriculum for sequences through high school, community
colleges, and beyond in the field of engineering and technology. Finally the
Power Up! content courses for high school and community colleges and
instructional units that revolve around energy, power engineering and technology
and the active, project-based learning and materials for counselor and public
workshops are available for use across the state and nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;