* 0402294
* Geometric PDE in Confromal Geometry and Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Jie Qing, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 102,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal DMS-0402294&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Jie Qing
(University of California, Santa Cruz)&lt;br/&gt;Title: Geometric PDE in
conformal geometry and
relativity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jie Qing
proposes to study conformally compact Einstein manifolds. &lt;br/&gt;Conformally
compact Einstein manifolds play crucial roles in the&lt;br/&gt;so-called AdS/CFT
correspondence, which is a very promising theory that &lt;br/&gt;predicts
certain connections between quantum gravitational theory and&lt;br/&gt;certain
conformal field theory. In mathematics it has been known&lt;br/&gt;that
conformally compact Einstein manifolds provide a powerful approach
to&lt;br/&gt;the study of conformal geometry. Recent development in the study of
the&lt;br/&gt;scattering matrix in providing rather global, natural way to
understand&lt;br/&gt;the holography principle in physics seems very fascinating
and promising. &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jie Qing is also interested in developing and
study theory about&lt;br/&gt;asymptotically AdS/dS space-times. For a start, one
considers static&lt;br/&gt;asymptotically AdS/dS space-times. The theory is not
as well-known as the&lt;br/&gt;study of asymptotically flat space-times. But it
is as significant, if not&lt;br/&gt;more, in the classic relativity and quantum
gravitation theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is to study the
primary object in the&lt;br/&gt;theory of holography principles that relate
quantum gravitation theory &lt;br/&gt;and some conformal field theory. It has
become a part the field where &lt;br/&gt;mathematicians and physicists can
interact. It is a part of&lt;br/&gt;the efforts to find a unified theory for all
fundamental interactions&lt;br/&gt;including the strong and weak nuclear
interactions, electromagnetism, and&lt;br/&gt;gravity. Advancements in this
field will greatly improve our understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the nature in theory.
The proposed research is a very important part of&lt;br/&gt;the undergraduate
and graduate education programs in the department of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics at
University of California, Santa Cruz. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;