* 0402326
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developing A Holocene Chronology of the Laurentide Ice Sheet, North America
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Peter Clark, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,000.00

During the Last Glacial Maximum, Northern Hemisphere ice sheets affected
atmospheric circulation patterns and climate at scales ranging from the regional
to the hemispheric. Retreat of these ice sheets caused shifts in these
circulation patterns, and their melting raised sea level. The Laurentide Ice
Sheet was the largest of the Northern Hemisphere ice sheets and had the greatest
effect on climate and sea-level rise during deglaciation. While its retreat up
to the Pleistocene-Holocene transition, approximately 11,700 years ago, is
relatively well constrained by radiocarbon dates, the subsequent Holocene
chronology of the Laurentide Ice Sheet is poorly known. This lack of chronologic
control in the Holocene has led to large uncertainties in basic understanding of
the ice sheet's role in climate change and sea-level rise. To help resolve these
issues, this Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project will develop a
Holocene retreat chronology for the Laurentide Ice Sheet using Beryillium-10
dating of boulders along two transects from central Manitoba to the Quebec-
Labrador border, the final location of the Laurentide Ice Sheet. Thirty samples
will be collected and analyzed for Beryillium-10 content using accelerator mass
spectrometry. The accumulation of Beryillium-10 in rock is dependent upon the
period of exposure to the atmosphere, and by measuring the amount of
Beryillium-10 in a surface, the exposure age of the surface can be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will constrain the
timing of retreat and ultimate demise of the Laurentide Ice Sheet, thus
significantly improve knowledge regarding the ice sheet's contribution to
climate and sea-level change. It also will provide a better understanding of the
ice sheet's response to a warming climate. Discerning the sensitivity of the
last, large Northern Hemisphere ice sheet to a warming climate will aid in
predicting the future of the Greenland Ice Sheet under the present warming
conditions. This chronology of the Laurentide Ice Sheet also will help resolve
disagreements between general circulation model simulations of early to mid-
Holocene climate and paleo-proxy records of climate. From this chronology, the
amount of Holocene sea-level rise attributable to the Laurentide Ice Sheet will
be estimated. This will improve understanding of the amount of sea-level rise
from the Antarctica Ice Sheet, which was the only other Holocene source of
significant sea-level change. These estimates will help predict the amount of
sea-level rise yet to come from continued deglaciation of the Antarctic Ice
Sheet given anticipated effects of global warming on this ice sheet. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;