* 0402420
* Surface-Directed Assemblies of Complex Nanoscale Materials:  Fabrication, Structure, Dynamics, and their Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Ralph Nuzzo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2007
* USD 473,000.00

Abstract CHE-0402420 Nuzzo/Illinois

With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor
Nuzzo and his colleagues at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign are
investigating the detailed mechanisms of self assembly and soft lithographic
methods for nano-patterning of materials. They are working to develop new
methods for characterizing these nano-patterned materials, and are exploring the
mechanisms of self-assembly and growth of the modified layers. One aspect of the
work concentrates on the dynamics of liquid crystalline materials. Another
aspect deals with decal transfer lithography, and a third with microfluidic
depletion lithography. This third area of study is applied primarily to protein
patterning on surfaces. Results of these investigations promise to enhance our
fundamental understanding of these emerging technologies for the fabrication of
electrooptic, molecular electronic devices, and sensors.

The detailed understanding of self-assembly and growth of organic thin films and
monolayers is essential to the development of emerging technologies for the
fabrication of organic electronic and electrooptical devices. Using
spectroscopic methods, these complex materials systems are being characterized
and developed. Lithographic methods for the production of nanopatterned
materials are being explored, with subsequent application in electronic
materials processing.

