* 0402569
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Globalization of Markets for Technological Products and Economic Development: Cross-National Analysis and the Case of the Spanish Pharmaceutical Ind
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* David Knoke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

In the quarter of a century framed by Spain's 1898 loss of its last overseas
colonial possessions and the 1923 coup initiating the Primo de Rivera
dictatorship, Spanish cities were sites of intense struggle over political
identity. On city streets, republicans, socialists, and anarchosyndicalists
competed for support, with different outcomes across cities. This project is a
comparative study of the construction of working-class political identity in
Barcelona, Valencia, and Alicante that seeks to explain why cities within the
same national context had very different patterns of working-class political
affiliation during this era; specifically why the radical anarchosyndicalist
movement was much more successful in some cities than in others. The
dissertation develops a new theoretical approach to understanding the
determinants of political identity, one which emphasizes the importance of forms
of urban political practice in the construction of political citizenship, and by
extension in the construction and consolidation of national states. Hypotheses
will be tested through historical-comparative analysis of the development of
forms of political action in these three cities throughout the 25-year period.
The primary data source will be periodicals located in specialized archives in
each locality and at the International Institute of Social History, Amsterdam;
additional evidence will be obtained from local administrative archives. The
broader impacts of this research include: This research will be of interest to
scholars interested in understanding the process of political identity-
formation. The project will draw upon a neglected empirical case to produce an
original theoretical framework with broader implications for understanding both
historical processes and contemporary phenomena, including the relationship of
radical movements to urban protest in the Middle East and Latin America, and,
more broadly, the legitimization of the state versus alternative political
forms. The public presentation of evidence in the form of a photographic
exhibit, documenting the political participation of women and other
underrepresented groups, will contribute to the study's broader dissemination.