* 0402648
* Erosion Study of the Rodeo-Chediski Fire Area, Arizona: Model for a High-School Student-Based Research Program
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Wendy Woodward, Show Low Unified School District
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2006
* USD 50,627.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project to engage students from Show Low
High School in an investigation of local environmental issues, specifically the
effects of wildfires and logging on soil erosion in the Rodeo-Chediski fire
area, White Mountains, central Arizona. The goal of this project is to give
students an opportunity to understand and have an impact on environmental
decisions in their community, and to let them experience scientific inquiry
first hand. They will challenge to examine their own and others. existing ideas
about the ecology of forests and forest management practices and have them
explore new ideas about forest management from a scientific perspective. Through
this process they will generate real data on the erosion rates resulting from
wildfires and the logging of burned wood. As this project develops, the PIs will
simultaneously create and disseminate a model of scientific inquiry that is
portable to other high schools desiring to undertake similar studies. We will
develop instructional materials to facilitate dissemination and adoption of the
program, and promote the sharing of the data. We will distribute the curriculum,
data and results of this project on our web pages and within DLESE, poster
sessions and presentations at regional and national meetings, publications, and
workshops. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;