* 0402565
* Investigating Climate-Related Changes in Meridional Overturning Circulation during the Holocene
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Roger Francois, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/2008
* USD 503,926.00

Under this award the PIs hope to improve documentation and understanding of
climatic changes during the Holocene which would provide insight into possible
future man-induced climatic perturbation. Specifically the PIs will try to
reconstruct changes in the intensity of the Atlantic meridional overturning
circulation (MOC), often viewed as one of the key factors that could affect the
future evolution of global climate. Variations in the rate of the MOC have the
potential to cause, amplify, and/or propagate climatic change regionally and
even globally. The PIs are proposing to investigate the possible occurrence of
Holocene climatic changes associated with changes in the MOC and to relate these
changes to North Atlantic surface hydrography. Changes in MOC will be
constrained by measuring ex.231Pa/ex.230Th (Pa/Th) at high resolution in three
high accumulation rate cores from the North Atlantic. Pa/Th is a dynamical proxy
providing quantitative estimates of the rate of MOC but which could be obscured
by changes in particle scavenging. To take into account the latter, the PIs will
also measure Pa/Th in three cores representing the major regions of boundary
scavenging in the North Atlantic. The three primary cores span a depth from
1650m to 4500m and thus hold the potential to document changes in circulation
that influence intermediate and deep waters. These changes will be compared
directly to variations in planktonic foraminifera d18O, sea surface temperature,
and drift ice indices in the same cores to establish the relationship between
North Atlantic surface hydrography and MOC. The Pa/Th record will also be
compared to benthic foraminifera d13C and sortable silt sediment grain size, two
complementary measures of the intensity of Atlantic MOC. These profiles will
then be related to existing marine, terrestrial and ice records to evaluate the
importance of Atlantic MOC in overall Holocene climate trends as well as
shorter-term variability (e. g.,8.2 ka event, Little Ice Age, "1.5 kyr cycle").