* 0402023
* Faculty Development in Collaborative Design and Rapid Tooling and Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Scot Rabe, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2008
* USD 314,223.00

New design technicians need experience in Collaborative Design and Rapid Tooling
and &lt;br/&gt;Manufacturing processes. In this project, faculty from community
colleges engage in hands-on learning that is resulting in curriculum
enhancements and improved student learning back on their home campuses. This
project provides comprehensive professional development on collaborative Design
and Rapid Tooling and Manufacturing for engineering and design technology
faculty. During the summers of 2005 and 2006, engineering faculty members are
participating in Summer Institutes offered concurrently in Dayton. OH and
Ventura, CA in the two tracks. Web-based discussion groups and dissemination
activities are designed to support faculty as they implement the curricular
material presented in workshops. A unique feature is that the Dayton and Ventura
workshops are held simultaneously permitting real-time cross-continental faculty
collaboration. Faculty can e-mail files to Sinclair to produce parts during what
would normally be downtime of its rapid prototyping equipment. Each year 40
engineering technology faculty members (20 in Dayton and 20 in Ventura)
participate in each of the two tracks. Faculty teams in Ohio and California
collaborate as industrial design teams via the Internet to design parts and use
rapid prototyping technologies to manufacture the parts. This experience
provides an accurate simulation of the Collaborative Design and Rapid Tooling
and Manufacturing processes routinely used in business and industry.
Participating faculty use the processes and simulations in their classrooms to
enhance the laboratory components. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project recruits
faculty who are from underserved populations and who teach at institutions with
large numbers of underserved populations. Faculty participants are expected to
infuse curriculum improvements developed during the Summer Institutes, providing
underserved students with cutting-edge learning opportunities. All lessons and
laboratory experiences created through the project are posted to the project web
site.&lt;br/&gt;