* 0402614
* Doctoral Dissertation: A Sociological Analysis of Generalized Information Exchange
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Karen Cook, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 7,328.00

The goal of this dissertation research is to understand how generalized
information systems emerge and persist when information, as the object of
exchange, produces a collective good. In this type of generalized exchange,
individuals contribute to a collective good (pool of information), and the
rewards that an actor receives come from this collective good. Because it is
rational to free ride by receiving rewards from the public pool of information
while not contributing to it, understanding how generalized information exchange
emerges and persists requires individuals to overcome a social dilemma. I
develop a theoretical argument that specifies how social psychological processes
act as selective incentives that increase individual contributions to a public
pool of information. In particular, when the costs associated with contributing
information are small, social psychological factors such as the popularity of
one's own information and the normative obligation associated with observing
cooperative behavior can have a relatively profound effect on cooperation. The
data for this research will be collected at the Stanford University Laboratory
for Social Research in the Department of Sociology. Approximately 150
experimental subjects will participate in one of five experimental conditions
that use a computerized exchange program that was developed specifically for
this research. The broader impacts of this research include the following: In a
world where the instantaneous transfer of information is crucial to world
business, education, economics, and politics, understanding how information
exchange systems can emerge and persist is a central problem for our
increasingly interconnected societies. The results of this study have broader
implications for both generalized exchange theory and real world generalized
information exchange systems. This dissertation extends theory and findings on
generalized exchange, collective action, and social dilemmas by focusing on
information as the object of exchange and the role of social psychological
selective incentives in generalized exchange systems. Additionally, this
research can help us to understand the underlying processes that lead to the
emergence of real-world generalized information exchanges such as those found in
peer-to-peer networks on the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;