* 0402657
* GEM: The Dynamics of Solar Wind Ion Entry into the Magnetosphere during Magnetic Storms
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Vahe Peroomian, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* kile baker
* 04/30/2007
* USD 187,447.00

This project will use a combination of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations of
magnetic storms and individual particle tracing to investigate the storm-time
entry of solar wind ions into the magnetosphere. It will determine how particles
are accelerated as they cross the magnetopause, and will investigate what role
these solar-wind particles play as a seed population for the inner
magnetosphere. The specific questions that will be addressed include: What
contributions do solar wind protons make to the storm-time magnetosphere? Does
the compression of the magnetosphere by solar wind pressure pulses assist or
hinder the entry of solar wind ions into the magnetosphere? Do stretched
magnetic field lines, resulting from intense storm-time current sheets, lead to
the nonadiabatic motion of ions within the plasma sheet? What are the
consequences of this motion? How do the processes of ion entry through the
magnetopause and ion acceleration in the magnetopause reconnection regions
differ during storms and during quiet times? The research will use particle
trajectory calculations to follow ions in global time-dependent electric and
magnetic fields obtained from MHD simulations of the solar wind and
magnetosphere. Particles will be traced from launch points in the solar wind,
upstream of the bow shock. The particles will be followed through the
magnetopause current layer, and into the magnetosphere. In the process it will
be possible to identify entry locations and acceleration mechanisms, and
identify the processes whereby solar wind ions gain access to the inner
magnetosphere. The particle tracing technique to be used has yielded significant
new results for solar wind entry during quiet times. The work described is a
natural extension of that previous work and will support comparisons between
entry mechanisms operating during quiet times and during magnetic storms.

Four specific magnetic storms will be used in the study. These storms are chosen
to include magnetic clouds, stream-stream interactions, and large storms with
significant pressure pulses, and thus will allow comparison of particle entry
characteristics of the different storms and the multiple storm phases. The
comparison of results for different types of storms will also shed light on
differences in ion populations and acceleration mechanisms. The study promises
to provide a significant contribution to the puzzle of determining and
forecasting the occurrence of high-energy particles in the inner magnetosphere
and will help mitigate the space weather hazards caused by these particles on
space-based systems and on astronauts.