* 0402425
* Isotope Dendroclimatology in Tropical Asia
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Daniel Schrag, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 331,854.00

This award supports research to examine the interplay of tropical oceans and
global-scale atmospheric circulation processes at seasonal to inter-annual time
scales using isotope dendroclimatolgy, a novel and evolving investigative tool
for extracting stable isotope measurements from tree
cellulose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researcher and his colleagues
will develop annually resolved proxy estimates of rainfall variability from
tropical Asia for the past several centuries using isotope dendroclimatology.
The data will be used to examine relationships between regional rainfall
patterns (including drought cycles) and broader patterns of climate variability
such as the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the Asian monsoon, and Pacific
decadal variability). The investigator and his colleagues have demonstrated the
potential of this new approach using trees from Costa Rica, Indonesia, and
Thailand and now will expand this research to samples collected by several
different research teams working in tropical forests throughout
Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher and his colleagues will focus their
efforts on the monsoons of Southeast Asia and ENSO to better understand the
natural patterns of climate variability in the tropics at seasonal, inter-
annual, and decadal scales thereby improving the scientific community's
abilities to predict the effects of climate variability on human society and
natural ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of paleoclimatology owes many
of its recent strides in knowledge to data derived from tree rings. However, the
field of tree ring research has been primarily limited to collecting data from
the mid to high latitudes because in these regions, trees develop growth banding
due to differences in temperature and precipitation as a result of seasonality.
In general for the tropical regions, seasonality is broadly described as
relatively wet and dry. Such environmental factors have conspired with botanical
evolution over time to create a situation in which the trees do not readily give
up the climate information they may possess using the traditional visual methods
of growth analyses because not all tropical trees create obvious growth bands.
This has created something of a problem for paleoclimatolgists because the
Tropics cover a significant area of the Earth yet the climate data they possess
has barely been tapped because trees have not been available as a data archive.
This research holds the promise of opening up that archive to quantitative
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;