* 0402503
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Fluvial Geomorphic Adjustment in Sub-Watersheds of the Hatchie River in Western Tennessee
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Carol Harden, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2006
* USD 9,531.00

River systems respond to natural and human-induced disturbances by adjusting the
shape and slope of their channels. In the case of channelization, a prevalent
form of human-induced disturbance, changes in channel shape and slope occur when
there is an increase in erosion in some parts of a watershed that occurs
simultaneously with increased sedimentation in other parts of the same
watershed. Adjustment processes occurring in channelized tributary streams of
the Lower Hatchie River in west Tennessee are resulting in accelerated
sedimentation in the Lower Hatchie River. Spatial patterns and rates of change
for channel shape, channel slope, and erosion/sedimentation adjustments in river
systems are not entirely understood. Existing studies do not focus on system-
wide changes and often do not analyze changes in sediment behavior over time.
This study aims to identify and explain spatial and temporal patterns of changes
in channel shape, channel slope, and erosion/sedimentation in response to
historic channelization in three sub-watersheds of the Lower Hatchie River by:
(1) examining channel shape throughout each sub-watershed using standard
surveying techniques, (2) measuring contemporary rates and locations of erosion
and sedimentation throughout each sub-watershed to construct a budget of
sediment inputs, outputs, and storage, (3) analyzing core samples of floodplain
deposits to reconstruct historic erosion and deposition rates to compare with
contemporary erosion and deposition rates, (4) using the data collected to
develop a geographic information system to examine spatial variations in channel
shape, locations of erosion and deposition, and to determine if the presence of
artificial levees and/or dredging activity in some reaches affects adjustment
process, and (5) comparing the spatial patterns identified using the geographic
information system to spatial patterns predicted by existing models of channel
shape, channel slope, and erosion/sedimentation adjustments to test the
applicability of these models in channelized tributary streams.

The results of this dissertation research will address theoretical and applied
questions of river system response to human disturbance. Existing studies
concerning river system response to disturbance lack spatial and temporal
detail. This study applies a more spatially and temporally comprehensive
approach by examining changes in channel shape, channel slope, and sediment
processes (historic and contemporary) on a stream reach basis for entire sub-
watersheds. Results will help determine if current estimates for rates of river
system recovery after disturbance are grossly underestimated and if physical
processes integral to recovery after disturbance have been overlooked. The Lower
Hatchie River is prized for its biological diversity and hardwood bottomland
habitat. An understanding of adjustment processes and rates will aid restoration
projects planned by national, state, and non-profit agencies for tributaries of
the Lower Hatchie River, as well as restoration projects in other disturbed
rivers. Consideration of adjustment processes in resource management decisions
would result in greater success for restoration projects because the focus of
such plans should no longer be the symptoms of change but the underlying
processes and causes of change. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
Award, this award will also provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.