* 0402581
* Foundation of Technical Careers
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Anthony Ucci, Bristol Community College
* Continuing grant
* Ginger H. Rowell
* 06/30/2008
* USD 599,956.00

The Department of Engineering and Technology at Bristol Community College and
ten high schools in the region are collaborating with business, industry, and
governmental agencies to identify, recruit, and prepare technicians for the new
economy.

Summer Institutes in Technology are offered for high school and college faculty.
The themes are project-based, and workshops include discussion of teaching and
learning styles and national and state standards; field trips to industry and
speakers are incorporated. Themes include underwater robotics, nanotechnology,
and MATEC Factory Wise modules for HAS-200 Highly Automated System.

Foundations in Technical Careers is a certificate program including:
Introduction to Engineering and Technology, Computer Tools for Engineers,
Computer Aided Drafting, Technical Communication Skills, and Technical
Applications of Mathematics. Three courses are new, designed to address curious
but undecided students. Assessments, course content, and personal advisement
will help to direct students toward appropriate fields of study and a technical
career. Courses are tuition-free, except for fees and texts of approximately
$500, a significant incentive for BCC's low-income students. Other
implementation activities include a strong outreach and recruitment plan, the
improvement of technology labs for project-based learning and discovery,
convocations to support professional development, workshops, and a website.

Intellectual Merit: The program design and the content of the institutes and the
certificate program address the regional educational needs at the secondary and
postsecondary level. The activities include plans for meaningful assessment of
participants' progress, appropriate pedagogy and content for nontraditional
students, and enhancement of labs for project-based learning.

Broader Impacts: A significant aspect of this project is the aim to close the
skills gap in technical fields by creating a pathway between secondary and
postsecondary levels.

Efforts are grounded in a strong collaborative organization that brings all the
players together to implement the project. Every aspect of the project is
outcomes-oriented and designed to have a broad impact, including cultivating
public awareness of engineering disciplines and their relationship to society
and supporting career opportunities for a large region that is undergoing
economic redevelopment.