* 0402533
* Collaborative Research: Changing Holocene Environments of the Eastern Tropical Atlantic (CHEETA)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Timothy Eglinton, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/2008
* USD 327,137.00

Under this award the PIs will core deep sea sediments that will develop new
Holocene records of variations in NW African climate and vegetation and tropical
Atlantic SSTs and SST gradients. The PIs will go on a 28-day coring cruise to
recover a series of multicore/gravity core pairs from high accumulation rate
sites forming a zonal transect along the NW African margin (35oN-10oS). Four of
the most promising cores will be used to develop detailed (~40 year resolution)
multiproxy records of Holocene variations in African climate and vegetation, and
subtropical and tropical Atlantic upwelling and SSTs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed records of Holocene climate variability from the
tropics are rare and this proposal aims to fill this observational gap. Tropical
Atlantic SSTs and NW African climate are dynamically linked to variations in
North Atlantic SSTs at interannual-multidecadal (and millennial) timescales.
Recognizing these linkages between high- and low-latitude Atlantic climate, the
PIs propose to explore signatures of tropical ocean and African climate
variability associated with high-latitude cooling events during the
Holocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to develop molecular biomarker
records of vegetation change (plant waxes and lignin-derived phenols) by
applying a new design of gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer (GC/TOF-MS) to
monitor African vegetation shifts during the Holocene. Changes in African
climate will be reconstructed also using terrigenous (eolian) dust fluxes and
grain size, and XRF elemental core scanning. Holocene variations in tropical
Atlantic SSTs will be reconstructed for this same transect of cores using
alkenones, and foraminiferal Mg/Ca and stable isotopes, and foram census count
measurements. Subtropical to tropical tropical SST changes along the transect
will be particularly diagnostic for tracing the centuryscale high-latitude
cooling events into the tropics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project
will ultimately be used to define the amplitude and phasing relations of these
tropical climate, vegetation, and SST signals relative to each other, and
relative to known changes in North Atlantic climate. A key scientific dividend
of this research will be to define the amplitudes of tropical Atlantic climate
variability over centennial-millennial timescales, and to understand their role
in these abrupt societally-relevant climate shifts.