* 0402260
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Power Through Process: Non-decision Decisions in WTO Dispute Resolution
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Richard Appelbaum, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2006
* USD 7,500.00

The World Trade Organization (WTO) has been the target of criticism -- from both
scholars and social movements -- for establishing and enforcing free trade rules
that favor powerful economies over weaker ones. But there is little available
research on factors that affect WTO decisions. Almost no empirical work has
attempted to test claims that the WTO's dispute resolution mechanism is biased
in favor of the most powerful countries. The Dispute Settlement Understanding,
one major result of the Uruguay Round of negotiations that established the WTO,
provides a mechanism for countries to litigate when they believe their rights
under the terms of the WTO agreements have been violated. Over 300 disputes have
been initiated to date, and the WTO maintains an online database with extensive
details on each case. This dissertation uses this unique database to examine
various kinds of outcomes of the dispute resolution process: disputes that
conclude through litigation, disputes that end amicably in a formal mutually
agreed solution, and disputes that are inactive, withdrawn, or otherwise
abandoned. The analysis focuses not just on winners and losers in formal WTO
decisions, but also on the more ambiguous category of cases that are dropped --
often after protracted negotiation -- without any formal resolution. The study
will use event history techniques to analyze an expanded data set of all WTO
cases initiated between January 1, 1995 and December 31, 2003 (the entire case
history of the WTO dispute settlement process to date). The findings of this
updated model will be supplemented and expanded upon with twenty interviews with
well-placed relevant actors involved in a small set of exemplary cases. The
findings will address the equity of WTO practices and legal processes, which has
potential broader implications for both scholars and activists. It will
contribute to on- going debates in globalization, world systems, and the
sociology of international law about the structure of global governance, the
role of the nation-state therein, and the nature of power in international
institutions.