* 0402553
* Molecular Literacy for Biotechnology and Nanotechnology Careers
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2004,09/30/2007
* Boris Berenfeld, Concord Consortium
* Continuing grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2007
* USD 947,386.00

This three-year project enhances science and technology teaching in grades 10-14
by providing Molecular Literacy content in support of careers in biotechnology
and nanotechnology. The project develops new materials that use highly
interactive molecular dynamics and quantum mechanics models, and embeds these
models in learning activities that are appropriate for both core science courses
and specialized courses teaching biotechnology and nanotechnology workplace
competencies. Concord Consortium is partnering with Middlesex Community College,
Bedford, Massachusetts, its feeder high schools, additional community colleges,
biotechnology and nanotechnology companies. CORD, an educational non-profit in
Texas, is providing national dissemination. Concord, working with Middlesex
teachers, is developing assessments that indicate student attainment of these
standards, and is preparing drafts of activities. Initial activities undergo
formative evaluation at the collaborating institutions using the project-
generated assessments. After a revision cycle, the final materials undergo
summative evaluation in ten technical high school and community college
classrooms nationwide. Both student learning and teacher use of the materials
are evaluated.

The project utilizes sophisticated modeling tools based on accurate physical
theories of atomic interactions. Collaborators identify those bio/nanotech
standards appropriate for model-based activities. Model-based activities are
developed both as individual explorations that can be easily inserted into
instruction, and also grouped together into coherent thematic sequences of
explorations. The activities link the models with related macroscopic
representations and laboratory technologies. The project involves developing a
quantum mechanics modeling engine simplified for education, adding functionality
to an existing molecular dynamics engine, and adapting these resources to the
learning of the science and to processes of biotechnology and nanotechnology

Using highly interactive models, students can experience the nano world, develop
intuitions about what is normal, and learn how to predict, without the need for
difficult theoretical formalism. At the conclusion of the project, partners make
all software, activities, professional development materials, and reports freely
available, and the Concord Consortium continues to host the activities.