* 0402640
* Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Gordon Emslie, Oklahoma State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 04/30/2010
* USD 4,474,005.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (OK-
LSAMP) in Science,&lt;br/&gt;Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
comprises the three comprehensive research&lt;br/&gt;institutions (Oklahoma
State University Oklahoma University and Tulsa University) ,
six&lt;br/&gt;Regional Universities ( East Central University, Northeastern
State University, University&lt;br/&gt;of Central Oklahoma, Northwestern State
University Southeastern State University,&lt;br/&gt;Southwestern State
University , and Cameron University) and the 1890 Land
Grant&lt;br/&gt;institution (Langston University). i&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma State
University is the lead institution; however, the programs will
be&lt;br/&gt;coordinated through the graduate schools on the four partner
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;The OK-LSAMP program proposes to significantly increase
number of targeted students&lt;br/&gt;pursuing entering into graduate programs
preferably to earn the doctorate over the next&lt;br/&gt;five years . The goal
is to have a minimum of 10% of the available baccalaureate
degree&lt;br/&gt;graduates for enrollment and subsequently graduation. We hope
to accomplish this through&lt;br/&gt;the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;*
Formation of a strong research experience in their last two undergraduate years
with two&lt;br/&gt;full summers of research and two academic years of research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;* Full participation in the Graduate School Preparation
component as outlined in the Plan&lt;br/&gt;* Institutionalize a graduate
education culture within the underrepresented group culture&lt;br/&gt;and
environment .&lt;br/&gt;These are the specific objectives that are alliance wide
in implementation. Individual&lt;br/&gt;partners have the autonomy to implement
these objective according to the structure and&lt;br/&gt;organization of
programs on each campus. For example two of the campuses have a
McNair&lt;br/&gt;program and they will work in concert with the McNair
program.&lt;br/&gt;The specific programs and activities include:&lt;br/&gt;v
Weekly meetings in the beginning of each semester to report progress&lt;br/&gt;v
Enhanced stipends for students that present research papers and become co-
authors&lt;br/&gt;v Mentoring workshops for faculty mentors&lt;br/&gt;v Special
teaching workshops for students&lt;br/&gt;v One required Seminar on Scientific
Integrity&lt;br/&gt;v Mandatory participation in the annual OK-LSAMP Research
Symposium&lt;br/&gt;v All participants must present a research paper at a
regional or national meeting&lt;br/&gt;v All alliance participants will take the
GRE Prep course