* 0402635
* Partnership in Cybersecurity and Information Assurance
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Mete Kok, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2009
* USD 861,151.00

This project is comprehensively integrating cybersecurity concepts into the
curriculum of the Computer Information Systems (CIS) Department at Borough of
Manhattan Community College (BMCC). In addition, the project is offering an
eight-week summer instructional program (a "bridge" program) for high school
students; arranging internships for students in conjunction with industry
partners; developing a cybersecurity laboratory; and providing professional
development for college and high school faculty through in-person and online
workshops and training sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is
creating four courses and redesigning seventeen other courses in order to
integrate computer security concepts into each major (Computer Operations,
Computer Programming, and Computer Science) in the college's CIS curriculum. The
computer security concepts included in these courses are derived from objectives
specified by CompTIA's Security+ certification and the Common Body of Knowledge
(CBK) specified by the International Information Systems Security Certifications
Consortium [(ISC)2] for the Certified Information Systems Security Professional
(CISSP) and System Security Certified Practitioner (SSCP) certifications. The
concepts covered in the courses are also tied to job competencies defined in the
computer security skill standards that have been developed by the National
Workforce Center for Emerging Technologies (NWCET). In addition to redesigning
the curricula for CIS majors, the project team is redesigning a non-major CIS
course to raise the cybersecurity awareness of students in non-technical
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By infusing cybersecurity concepts throughout the
subject matter of existing curricula, this project takes a different approach
than traditional security instruction, which presupposes a certain body of
knowledge prior to introducing security concepts to students. This different
approach extends the impact of this project by enabling students with diverse
academic backgrounds to engage in different activities within the context of
computer security. At one end of the spectrum, it encourages computer science
majors to do research on the underlying theories of security, while at the other
end, it raises awareness and teaches secure computing practices to non-CIS
majors. The project also includes high school students recruited through a
summer "bridge" program, and enables graduates to continue their education
through articulation agreements with four-year
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is also attracting minorities and
women into information technology careers. Over 75% of BMCC's students are
African American or Hispanic, and over two thirds of BMCC's students are women.
The college has developed a "collaborative learning model" that has proven
particularly effective in engaging and retaining female and minority students in
science, technology, and mathematics fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BMCC's
partners in the project include Louis D. Brandeis High School, Herbert H. Lehman
College, Alcatel Corp., the New York Software Industry Association, the U.S.
Secret Service Electronic Crimes Branch, and the New York City Regional
Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;