* 0402695
* Extending the Forest Ecosystem and Agroforestry Management  Program (C.A/A.S.) to Kaua`i Community College, and linking to Four Year Colleges and Secondary Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Fred Stone, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Hanych
* 06/30/2007
* USD 397,245.00

This project extends a successful pilot two-year Certificate of Achievement and
Associate of Science program in Tropical Forest Ecosystem and Agroforestry
Management (Forest TEAM) to Kaua'i Community College. Articulation agreements
between Hawai'i Community College and four-year colleges are being developed as
well. Students are trained in advanced technology in the areas of digital
surveying and environmental data logging, use of Global Positioning Systems
(GPS), and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). On-line courses are being
developed, which is necessary because of the geographic isolation of the
islands. Due to a need for improvement in basic math and English skills by high
school students applying for the program, the Forest TEAM program works with
secondary schools in Hawai'i to get students involved with the Natural Resources
Career Pathways program of the State Dept. of Education so the students will
have the academic skills to enter college programs and succeed. Activities such
as summer programs that include math, English and computer skills in applied
settings; mentoring between students in the Forest TEAM program and high school
students; and tutoring students entering the Forest TEAM program in math and
science skills, ensure their academic success. The program consists of a
collaboration with the Hawai'i Forest Industry Association, the Workforce
Development Council of the State Department of Labor and Industrial Relations,
the Hawai'i Department of Education's Natural Resources Career Pathways program,
UH Hilo College of Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resource Management, the UH
Hilo Ecology, Evolution and Conservation Biology program, and the College of
Tropical Agriculture and Human Resources at UH Manoa.&lt;br/&gt;