* 0402690
* Creating Pathways for Prospective Science and Mathematics Teachers in a Technology Enriched Environment: A Comprehensive Partnership for Program Improvement
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Jessica Harper, Antelope Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 06/30/2008
* USD 350,159.00

The purpose of the Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
Pathways Program is to increase the number, diversity and quality of prospective
science and mathematics middle school teachers. Students enroll in technology-
rich mathematics and science classes at Antelope Valley College, transfer to
California State University Bakersfield-Antelope Valley, graduate, and begin a
career teaching mathematics and science at the middle school level. The program
is supported by a large community which, in 2001, established the Mathematics
Science Engineering Technology (MSET) Consortium comprised of over 50 regional
businesses, government agencies and K-16 school districts including Antelope
Valley College, California State University Bakersfield, NASA Dryden, Edwards
AFB, Air Force Research Laboratory, Boeing, Lockheed-Martin, Northrop-Grumman,
the cities of Lancaster and Palmdale, and the Lancaster, Palmdale, Westside and
Antelope Valley School Districts. The MSET Consortium is committed to supporting
educational development and is contributing technical expertise and other assets
to the Pathways Program. &lt;br/&gt; To increase the number and diversity of
prospective students, the STEM Pathways Program actively recruits under-
represented students. A safety net of support services, including academic
advising, tutoring, career development, faculty mentoring and mentoring from
MSET members, is provided by the Pathways Program during their collegiate
careers. The students, as a learning community, are encouraged to develop strong
interrelationships and to use their knowledge as peer counselors for future
students. &lt;br/&gt; A variety of strategies is being employed to increase the
quality of mathematics, science and technology education available for
prospective teachers at Antelope Valley College and California State University
Bakersfield. These strategies include developing mathematics and science courses
and curricula which incorporate technology and hands-on, inquiry-based learning,
creating field experience opportunities in middle school mathematics and science
classrooms, and providing intensive Summer Institutes twice each year for in-
service middle school teachers to introduce them to new pedagogical approaches
in the learning and comprehension of mathematics and science. &lt;br/&gt;