* 0402242
* Planning Grant for the National Center of Excellence for Welding Education
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Charles Albright, Lorain County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 03/31/2007
* USD 70,000.00

Partners in this ATE/NSF project are developing a plan for a Center of
Excellence for Welding Education to serve two-year colleges and other
educational institutions. The project is building ways to support the needs of a
$34.1B industry that reports shortages of competently trained welding
technicians. Plans are being developed on how the center can research, prepare,
and disseminate all levels of curriculum, provide faculty training to certified
levels and standards, and disseminate both curriculum and training from basic
through advanced welding applications.

Building upon previous related NSF funded projects, the project is preparing to
adopt, adapt, and devise curriculum to meet both the general and highly
sophisticated welding needs of the nation's industry. Primarily serving two-year
associate degree granting institutions, the project is also developing
articulated curriculum for the secondary and postsecondary bachelor degree
institutions to provide seamless movement of students from high school to
community college to university known as 2+2+2 models. The project plans to
disseminate curriculum and provide training support for its use. Planning for
the Center and its management structure, curriculum development, training, and
dissemination functions includes two and four-year colleges experienced in
welding education and the extensive network of education and industrial
affiliates of the American Welding Society.

Intellectual Merit: Evolving and improved instructional methodology and
technological advances in the field of welding require a focused effort to
assure that high impact educational practices are understood and utilized.
Combining the knowledge, expertise, and resources of Lorain County Community
College, Moraine Valley Community College, The Ohio State University, and the
American Welding Society (its network of college affiliates and contacts in
industry and government), the partners are well-positioned to conduct the
planning, development, and implementation activities. While making available
curriculum and faculty training necessary to provide skilled workers, highly
trained technicians, and welding engineers for the nation's manufacturers, the
planning team is also moving relevant research in workforce needs and advanced
technology to the education setting. The partners are positioned to bring their
leadership, skills and knowledge to a coordinated effort to address and improve
welding education.

Broader Impacts: The field of welding is evolving as with all other
manufacturing technologies and requires the flow of information from education
to industry and from industry to education. From basic gas welding to the
joining of heat sensitive materials in a clean room, the field is dynamic. The
national shortage of welding technicians, and the old image of the field of
welding, creates great concern within American industry, causing many to seek
workers from outside the country or to move their operations. A great deal can
be done to attract new and diverse students with improved curriculum and better-
trained faculty. This planning grant focuses on welding education through a
coordinated program of educational enhancements, industry leadership and the
dissemination of high quality educational materials.