* 0402477
* San Juan County Initiative for the Enhancement of Pre-Service and In-Service Math/Science Teacher Education Through Curriculum Development and Internship Experiences in Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Jana Wallace, San Juan College
* Standard Grant
* Karen F. Zuga
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

San Juan College is providing a 9-credit hour block of workshops designed to
provide in-service and pre-service teachers with instruction in teaching math
and science grades 5-8. The overall goals of this project are: (1) improved
quality of math and science instruction based upon use of teaching pedagogy,
curriculum materials, and technology that address the standards, benchmarks, and
competencies, (2) gains in children's knowledge of and interest in math and
science as indicated by improved standardized test scores and increased
enrollment in high school math and science classes, and (3) gains in recruitment
and retention of math and science teachers.

The project is training pre-service teachers planning to endorse in math and/or
science and in-service math and/or science teachers during summer weekdays and
Saturdays during the fall. During the spring, each pre-service teacher works
with his/her mentor teacher as a team teacher for 40 hours in the mentor
teacher's classroom, presenting the lessons and activities learned in the
workshops. The intellectual merit of this project is evident in the variety of
the topics and activities that do not comprise components of the standard
teacher education math and science curriculum. The use of technology in the
delivery of the workshop content and in the public school classroom as a tool to
promote exploration, investigation and discovery learning, is a major and
integral component of the project design. The broader impacts resulting from
this project include a systematic, directional, sustainable, and measurable
improvement in a quality learning setting in San Juan County's math and science
classrooms. Teachers more highly trained in the development and implementation
of math and science classroom activities using technology are more
knowledgeable, enthusiastic, and self-confident. These traits, in turn, produce
students who are excited about math and science and who are critical,
procedural, and analytical thinkers and problem solvers.