* 0402718
* RUI:  Pentaarylcyclopentadienyls as Facially Directing Ligands in Chiral Lewis Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2011
* Wayne Tikkanen, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2011
* USD 336,999.00

Dr. Wayne Tikkanen, Chemistry Department, California State University - Los
Angeles, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program
of the Chemistry Division for the development of pentaarylcyclopentadienyls as
facially directing ligands in chiral metallocenes. Chiral zirconium and niobium
complexes that contain a pentaarylcyclopentadienyl ligand and a chiral mono- and
bi-dentate alkoxide or amido ligand will be prepared. The chiral alkoxide and
amido ligands will bear large groups that will force the aromatic rings on the
pentaarylcyclopentadienyl group into a chiral conformation. This should result
in chiral amplification and the complexes will be evaluated as catalysts for
asymmetric C-C bond forming reactions. Specifically, they will be tested for
their efficacy in the catalysis of [4+2] cycloaddition of acrylate dienophiles,
silylcyanation of aldehydes and oxo-ene reactions. The mechanism of catalysis
will be probed in order to determine the factors underlying selectivity. This
information will be used to design more effective catalysts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge of the stereo-selective formation of carbon-
carbon bonds to form single enantiomers from achiral reactants is a problem with
both academic and practical importance. This challenge is especially important
in the synthesis of bioactive molecules. For example, medications sold as single
enantiomers make up half of the top 100 selling drugs. The intellectual merit of
this proposal derives from the determination of the relationship between
catalyst structure and product distribution applied to the development of useful
catalysts. Another impact from this work will be to increase the number of
under-represented groups in the scientific workplace. Undergraduates will be
involved in all aspects of this work, from bench-work to experimental design to
dissemination at meetings and in publications. Since the student body of Cal
State Los Angeles is comprised mostly of under-represented minorities, the
students participating in this work will be from those groups. &lt;br/&gt;