* 0402849
* Silk Polymer Models for Structure-Function Relationships
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Peggy Cebe, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 04/30/2007
* USD 365,000.00

Intellectual Merit - Silk proteins are a useful model system for the study of
novel functional properties derived from hydrophobic polymers in aqueous
systems. The impressive mechanical properties of spun silk fibers rest with the
unusual control of structure development in glands in silkworms and spiders, all
achieved through control of water content in combination with appropriate
sequence chemistry. The objective is to understand the mechanistic basis for
silk protein assembly, through control of water content in silk solutions, as a
route to new and improved processing options for hydrophobic polymers in
general. This insight has strong implications for: (a) new materials engineering
from silks, and (b) for new polymer chemistries/sequences that mimic silk in
that the designs (chemical sequences) must consider processing environments as
well as functional outcomes. A systematic investigation will be undertaken into
the formation and structural features of silk gels containing high
concentrations of protein achieved via osmotic stress, and subsequent
transitions and structural and morphological features induced through chemical
and mechanical factors. Specifically, the following aims will be pursued: (a) to
compare structure development in aqueous systems by systematic control of water
content, including comparisons between native gels from silkworm glands and
reconstituted silkworm silk; and, (b) to study the role of specific
environmental factors (e.g., pH, divalent cations, temperature) on rates and
nature of structure and morphology development at different water contents. To
address these questions, model materials will be characterized using
spectroscopic techniques (Fourier Transform infrared, FTIR; Raman), scattering
techniques (wide and small angle X-ray scattering, WAXS/SAXS; small angle light
scattering, SALS), and imaging techniques (atomic force microscopy, AFM;
scanning electron microscopy, SEM; optical ellipsometry; differential
interference contrast microscopy, DIC) to assess morphologies and structures at
a variety of length scales. These assessments will permit the formulation of
phase diagrams for quiescent silk gels. Then, to approximate the step of fiber
formation, the effects of stress (using tensile deformation and shear) on
structure evolution and the corresponding mechanical properties of reconstituted
silks will be studied. The planned studies build off the recent discoveries from
the lab on the solution behavior of silk proteins and control of this behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - The proposed experiments represent an
interdisciplinary approach to the study of this unique polymer, including a
biochemist (David Kaplan) and a physicist (Peggy Cebe). The graduate and
undergraduate students involved will gain direct insight from both perspectives
during their research, while also contributing to new directions in polymer
science and engineering. The research approaches and outcomes will be exported
into classroom settings in a number of ways for a broader audience of students
including lecture modules in both undergraduate and graduate courses, windows on
research laboratory experiences for undergraduate students, and specific
programs for deaf and hearing impaired students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;