* 0402256
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Chinese Film Industry in the Post-Mao Era: An Organizational Analysis of the Field of Cultural Production Since 1978
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Neil Fligstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 7,500.00

The Chinese market transition has brought about substantial challenges and
opportunities for organizational transformation. A number of sociological
studies have attempted to grasp the change by examining both state-owned and
private enterprises, however, few have focused on the organizational
transformation in the culture industry which has its own institutional
constraints and opportunities. This study will examine the organizational
characteristics of one sector of the Chinese culture industry-the Chinese film
industry. I will examine how actors, both individual and organizational, in the
field of cultural production are coping with uncertainties brought about by the
policy of Reform and Opening from the late 1970s to the present. The research
will be conducted in Beijing, China, and will rely on interviews with key actors
in the industry as well as on detailed archival research of its history and
present conditions. I ask the following research questions: 1) What are the
characteristics of organizational configurations that comprise the Chinese film
markets? 2) What are the strategies and structures being adopted by
organizations embedded in the organizational field? 3) What is the relationship
between the textual content of films being produced and the industrial system
and organization of production-in other words, how do "text" and "context"
interact to produce the contemporary Chinese film field? 4) What are the roles
of the state in the above processes? The broader impacts of this research
include the following: The scientific knowledge provided by this research will
be shared with various professional organizations in the industry including the
Beijing Film Academy in the form of presentations of the research findings as
well as collaborative workshops. In addition, since this research utilizes
theory and methods from a number of disciplines other than sociology (i.e.,
Chinese studies, organizational studies, film and media studies) results of the
study will be disseminated in multi- and interdisciplinary conferences,
workshops, and and other professional venues.