* 0402814
* Photoemission Experiments of Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Daniel Dessau, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 330,000.00

High resolution angle resolved photoemission (ARPES) will be used to study the
electronic structure of correlated electron systems, particularly colossal
magnetoresistive (CMR) oxides and high Tc superconductors. The project will
utilize a new high resolution endstation at the Advanced Light Source beamline
12, as well as a unique laser-based photoemission system in Colorado. Both
setups bring excellent spectral resolution, with the laser additionally allowing
reduced surface sensitivity compared to standard ARPES experiments. This reduced
surface sensitivity should enable the extension of ARPES experiments to a wider
range of materials such as the high Tc superconductor YBa(2)Cu(3)O(7) which do
not have excellent cleavage properties. In addition the measurements should be
more immune from sample ageing on surfaces which are considered to cleave well.
This should overcome one of the major limitations of ARPES, enabling cleaner and
more trustworthy data which ultimately may answer fundamental questions such as
the origin of the pairing interactions in high Tc superconductors. An important
component of the activity is the interdisciplinary training of students in the
fields of optics, solid state physics, and synchrotron radiation. In addition,
the P.I. leads an REU (Research Experience for Undergraduates) program and will
continue to include undergraduates in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Einstein received his Nobel prize for the
photoelectric effect, in which an incident photon (individual packet of light)
ejects an electron from a solid. This technique has matured into what is
arguably the most powerful probe of the quantum-mechanical state of the
electrons within a solid. This individual investigator award supports a project
that will apply the technique to study some of the most interesting and
potentially useful solids - high temperature superconductors (materials with
zero resistance to electric flow) and colossal magnetoresistive oxides
(materials which undergo a "colossal" change in their electrical resistance if a
magnetic field is applied to the sample). The goal is to understand the basic
quantum mechanical interactions in these materials that are responsible for the
unique electrical and magnetic properties of the materials. Two novel and
powerful sources will be utilized for the generation of the photons to be used
in the experiment. One is a new beamline at the Advanced Light Source, Berkeley,
which is the nation's preeminent synchrotron radiation facility producing soft
X-rays. The other is a laser system, which the PI's research group has built in
their laboratory. With this home-built system, the group has made what they
believe is the first demonstration of laser-based angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy. An important component of the activity is the interdisciplinary
training of students in the fields of optics, solid state physics, and
synchrotron radiation. In addition, the P.I. leads an REU (Research Experience
for Undergraduates) program and will continue to include undergraduates in this
research.