* 0402304
* Collaborative Research: An Inverse Model Study of Abrupt Climate Change
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Olivier Marchal, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Howard J. Spero
* 04/30/2007
* USD 138,652.00

Under this award the PIs will use data assimilation techniques developed in the
framework of optimal control theory and Bayesian stochastic inversion, to
combine the Greenland paleotemperature record and numerical models of the ocean-
atmosphere system in the Atlantic (a relatively simple box model and the more
complex Stocker/Wright zonally-averaged model). The PIs hope to estimate the
temporal evolutions of the Atlantic MOC, Fh, and surface freshwater forcing
during the marine isotope stage 3 (24.1-59.0 ka BP) that are consistent with
both the Greenland record and the physics embedded in the models. The estimated
evolutions, in concert with paleoceanography records from Atlantic sediments,
will be used to assess the adequacy of the theory to explain rapid climate
change. Paleoclimate records, in particular those from the North Atlantic area,
document a series of warm phases during the last glaciation, commonly referred
to as Dansgaard-Oeschger interstadials (DOI). The onsets of DOIs recorded in
Greenland ice corresponded to extremely large temperature jumps (7-16oC) that
occurred within a span of a few decades. The discovery of DOIs demonstrates that
it is dynamically possible for the climate system to make an abrupt transition
to a new climate state. Understanding the origin of DOIs is an important part of
assessing the possibility for future 'surprise' transitions. A leading theory of
abrupt change invokes the susceptibility of the meridional overturning
circulation (MOC) and zonally- and depth-integrated heat flux (Fh) in the
Atlantic, to glacial meltwater discharges from northern hemisphere ice sheets.