* 0402116
* International Research Fellowship Program: Prestige and The Origins of Social Inequality
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Aimee Plourde, Plourde Aimee M
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 02/29/2008
* USD 113,128.00

0402116 Plourde

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Aimee
Plourde to work with Dr. Stephen R. Shennan at the Centre for the Evolutionary
Analysis at University College London, in the United Kingdom.

The emergence of social ranking and political hierarchy in human society
constituted a fundamental departure from the small, egalitarian group structure
thought to characterize society for most of our species' history. Social ranking
allowed other changes in social organization to occur, such as economic
specialization and intensification, which in turn supported the formation of
novel social institutions, including formalized governing bureaucracies,
standing armies, and the like. Explaining the origins of social ranking is thus
key to understanding the underlying structures of modern human societies, and
the evolutionary processes that have generated them. By generating evolutionary
models and then testing them against archaeological case studies of emerging
social rank, the PI will address the question of how political hierarchy came to
exist in human societies. The objectives of the proposed postdoctoral research
are to produce a series of formalized mathematical models of prestige good use
by group members competing for status at increasing levels of political
hierarchy. These models will be grounded in costly signaling theory. Agent-based
simulations will be created to investigate the spatial component of how
competition for rare material items affects trade network growth and political
hierarchy. These models will then be evaluated using both archaeological and
historical data sets from different times and geographical locations. Dr.
Shennan's long-standing interest in, and work on, the evolution of prestige and
social differentiation in middle-range societies complements the PI's research
objectives. Her research also complements work on mathematical models of
artifact evolution and agent-based models of resource inheritance, parental
investment and sexual selection currently being conducted by scholars at the
Centre. This experience will provide her with the opportunity to acquire skills
in mathematical and agent-based modeling.