* 0402263
* Highly Automated Technology Education: - The Future Is Now
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Joseph Mattoon, Mohawk Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 07/31/2008
* USD 326,910.00

This project is creating a new course, curriculum, and program materials for the
education of technicians in highly automated manufacturing environments. Working
from a set of nationally validated skills standards developed during a
comprehensive study by the Maricopa Advanced Technology Education Center
(MATEC), Mohawk Valley Community College (MVCC) is partnering with twelve
community colleges, industry leaders, and MATEC in this effort. Faculty
development includes activities to identify and gain knowledge in key
technologies and partnerships with experts in the field to develop methods of
delivery and assessment for the subject materials. Wider dissemination to
regional industries and secondary education teachers and students is through
regional workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project
involves addressing a key need to meet educational requirements for operators
and technicians in the evolving worldwide manufacturing market. Highly automated
manufacturing operations are emerging in semiconductor, pharmaceutical,
automotive, food processing and other industries. Education of personnel to
maintain, install, upgrade, and troubleshoot these systems is therefore of
significant national importance. The project addresses these needs by developing
program enhancements that will be applied to existing Electrical, Mechanical,
Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology and other degree programs at MVCC. Hands-
on laboratory experiences using a highly automated system trainer provide real-
time experiences by simulating current production methods. MVCC is partnering
with MATEC to call upon their extensive experience in educational materials
development to guide faculty in the creation learning activities using
innovative concepts and delivery systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this project are attained through wider dissemination of the
materials and concepts developed, and the collegial relationships with other
institutions and industries that the project provides. MVCC, as a partner with
MATEC and 12 other colleges, is sharing the results of these efforts with a
significantly larger group of individuals than would be addressed through a
local effort alone. Through cooperation with industries supporting this program,
including INTEL, IBM, SMC-IT, and regional industries, closer alliances between
industry and education are being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MVCC is an
active supporter of several initiatives to encourage secondary school students
to pursue careers in the technologies. The project is enhancing this effort
through sponsorship of professional development workshops for secondary
education teachers and demonstrations for students interested in entering this
highly challenging field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;