* 0402716
* FRG:  New Magnetoelastic Materials with High Stress Sensitivity and Low Hysteresis
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* David Jiles, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 04/30/2009
* USD 300,335.00

This Focused Research Group award from the Division of Materials Research to
Iowa State University is to characterize, understand, and improve upon a new
class of magnetostrictive composite material discovered by Professor Jiles and
collaborators, who were supported by a previous NSF-sponsored research
(DMR-9902415). Primary thrust of the research would be to investigate both
theoretical and experimental ways to enhance response linearity and to reduce
hysteresis by exploiting an atomic substitution scheme at appropriate lattice
sites in the material to reduce exchange-coupling leading to nonlinear
hysteretic effects. The PIs will explore magnetoelastic composites based on
cobalt ferrite in a metallic binder for use as stress sensitive materials in
axial and torsional non-contact sensors. Alloys of cobalt ferrite with Silicon,
Manganese and Cobalt (substituting these for the Iron in the ferrite) will be
prepared to reduce the Curie temperature to room temperature thereby minimizing
undesirable hysteresis. These new class of materials are expected to
significantly improve magnetoelastic characteristics over competitive materials.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award could accomplish substantial research
experience combined with promotion of teaching, training, and learning both at
the graduate and undergraduate levels. The proposed collaboration with Moravian
College, a leading undergraduate institution would be a broadening experience
for both institutions and will likely create a synergistic relationship for
years to come. A successful outcome of this award could be a significant
technology transfer to a number of industries in the use of these stress
sensitive materials in axial and torsional non-contact sensors in energy
conservation and safety applications&lt;br/&gt;