* 0402002
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Stigma, Social Structure, and Adolescent Mental Health
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Jane McLeod, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 7,500.00

The dissertation research examines the relationship between sexual orientation
and adolescent mental health by assessing the social determinants of mental
health problems among lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) youth. The project
examines the premise that the experience of being a LGB adolescent leads to
stigmatizing social support and social network experiences which in turn produce
a high risk of mental health problems. The dissertation has two research goals.
The first goal is to use a nationally-representative dataset to generalize about
the social support experiences of LGB and evaluate how these experiences affect
their mental health. For the second goal, the project uses social network data
to describe and compare the social network experiences of LGB and heterosexual
adolescents as they contribute to mental health outcomes. The dissertation uses
two samples from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add
Health). The first sample is a nationally-representative sample of 18,924 U.S.
adolescents from grades 7 to 12 who were initially interviewed in 1995 with two
follow-up interviews in 1996 and 2001-2002. The second sample is a social
network sample of 7,106 students. This sample contains data from all enrolled
students in 16 schools who participated in the Wave I interview. A nationally-
representative sample gives a more accurate description of the social support
experiences of LGB adolescents. A social network sample of peer networks in
school provides greater understanding on how structural arrangements in social
groups have consequences for mental health. The broader impacts of this research
lie in the utility of its findings to better inform clinical and policy
strategies at the individual and community levels in reducing mental health
problems among LGB adolescents.