* 0402939
* FIBR Planning: Cortical Organization and Limits of Human Potential
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Sandra Kelly, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 49,676.00

This project focuses on how the acquisition of complex skills interacts with and
influences cortical organization. Borrowing a conceptual framework from
evolutionary biology, both adaptive and nonadaptive skills are being considered.
It has been suggested by research and in the popular press that there is
sometimes a positive interaction, such as between musical and mathematical
skills, and sometimes a negative interaction, such as between computer and
socioemotional skills, when complex skills are acquired. This project will use
both humans and rats as subjects and would examine acquisition of the skills
during various times during development and in adulthood. Analyses include both
behavioral and neuroanatomical measures. Cortical organization will be examined
using neuroimaging and ERP technology in humans and neuroanatomical techniques
in animals. Studies in humans include laboratory, field and cross-cultural
studies. The planning process includes three meetings to develop concepts and
define tasks and approaches, two trips to facilitate the cross-cultural studies,
and initial experiments to gather pilot data from both humans and rats.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal resides within the novelty and
importance of the question to be answered and the interdisciplinary approach.
The impact of acquisition of multiple skills on cortical organization in intact
individuals is not well understood. While many studies have demonstrated effects
of the acquisition of one skill on cortical organization, few, if any, have
considered the possible interactions of multiple skills. The data from the
proposed studies will provide information about the basic processes of cortical
organization in the face of environmental demands and also about the
interactions of skill acquisition on a behavioral level. The PI and co-PI bring
their expertise in neuroscience and cognitive science together to propose an
interdisciplinary approach to the question. The planning activities involve
others with expertise in development, neuroimaging, statistical modeling, and
evolutionary biology. The planning activities will be instrumental in developing
the initial concepts outlined above to the point where a full proposal can be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are at several levels.
Given that there is increasing pressure to acquire non-adaptive skills at
younger and younger ages in Western society, understanding the effects of this
pressure on other skills, both adaptive and non-adaptive, is essential. The
outcome of the project will have basic implications for the education system in
this society. In addition, the planning activities include recruitment of
researchers outside of biology to participate and some of these individuals will
be from the five traditionally black colleges within a 60 mile radius of the
home institute in South Carolina. The involvement of both postdoctoral and
graduate students will be crucial to the success of the full proposal and they
are involved in the planning process as well. Importantly, the planning process
and the actual studies proposed will involve collaboration of individuals across
a number of different disciplines, including biology, psychology, education, and
statistics and will require training in the various fields of all involved
individuals. &lt;br/&gt;