* 0402136
* International Research Fellowship Program: When Does Nature Favor Chaos?: Metapopulation Dynamics, Life History Evolution, and Multi-Level Selection
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Jeffrey Fletcher, Fletcher Jeffrey A
* Fellowship
* John Snyder
* 09/30/2007
* USD 79,790.00

0402136 Fletcher

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Jeffrey A.
Fletcher to work with Dr. Leticia Aviles at University of British Columbia in
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

This project is about metapopulation dynamics, life history evolution and
multilevel selection. The social spiders and malaria parasites are two examples
of strongly subdivided metapopulation systems where biased sex ratios and fast
rates of local growth may be associated with intrinsic dynamical instability and
multiple levels of selection. With such model systems in mind and a combination
and empirical and theoretical methods, the PI and host will explore: (1) the
factors that allow locally chaotic dynamics to evolve and be evolutionary
stable, (2) how different degrees of population subdivision and rates of
extinction and recolonization influence multilevel selection on life history
traits that affect population dynamics; and (3) how natural selection acting
among and within groups partitions changes in brood size and sex ratio to arrive
at a particular local population growth rate. These questions are investigated
with: (1) an individual-based computer simulation model with coevolving traits
for sex ratio and clutch size, and variable degrees of population subdivision;
(2) a cross-species study using existing population census time series data as
well as existing literature on relevant life history traits and degrees of
population subdivision; (3) collaborative empirical studies on various related
species of neotropical social spiders. This project is expected to take two
years and involve two month-long trips to Latin America. Expected outcomes of
this work include: (1) development of sharable software to study the
relationship between levels of selection, life history traits, and population
dynamics; (2) enhanced understanding of how life history traits influence
population dynamics in other highly subdivided populations including endangered
species living in highly fragmented environments and parasites living in hosts
(e.g. malaria); (3) involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in this
project; and (4) sharing findings through guest lectures in classrooms and
seminars for audiences of various educational levels.