* 0402066
* International Research Fellowship Program: Device Reliability and Fracture of Electroceramics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Jacob Jones, Jones Jacob L
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2006
* USD 130,196.00

0402066 Jones

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two month research fellowship by Dr. Jacob L.
Jones to work with Dr. Mark Hoffman at the University of New South Wales in
Sydney, Australia for 12 months, and Dr. Ersan Ustundag at Iowa State University
for 10 months.

Ferroelectric materials couple electrical and mechanical energy, making them
ideal for active components in actuators, sensors and transducers in
applications including medical ultrasonic imaging, piezoelectric buzzers,
ultrasonic motors, sonar, and high-precision measurement systems. In medical and
other sophisticated applications, failure of the ferroelectric device,
particularly by fracture, is unacceptable. This research quantifies the role of
microstructure in crack initiation, propagation and failure of cyclically loaded
ferroelectric devices, leading ultimately to enhanced reliability. Damage
initiation including subsurface microcracking and change in fracture toughness
as a function of crack extension (R-curve) is observed and characterized using
techniques offered by Dr. Hoffman. Microstructural parameters including strain,
texture and composition are quantified in situ during crack propagation
experiments using novel diffraction technologies applied extensively in Dr.
Ustundag's research. The results from these experiments are combined to develop
a model for damage evolution in ferroelectric and ferroelastic materials