* 0402707
* EU-US ECOHAB. EC-NSF Cooperative Activity in Environmental Res: Mating Incompatibility Among Toxic and Non-Toxic Populations of Alexandrium: Ecological and Practical Implications
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 04/30/2010
* USD 729,093.00

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) are a serious and growing problem in the US and the
world. Among the multiple poisoning syndromes linked to HABs, Paralytic
Shellfish Poisoning (PSP) is arguably the most widespread and significant on a
global basis. Dinoflagellates within the genus Alexandrium (and in particular
within the tamarensis and minutum species complexes) are responsible for many of
these PSP outbreaks in the US and in Europe. Several characteristics of the
temporal and spatial pattern of Alexandrium species are noteworthy. First, over
the last several decades, the distribution of species within both complexes has
expanded geographically as a result of natural and human-assisted dispersal
mechanisms. Second, there are both toxic and non-toxic varieties of certain
species within each of these complexes, and sometimes these bloom in relatively
close proximity to each other. This latter observation is particularly
noteworthy given recent results, which demonstrate that toxic, and non-toxic
strains of A. tamarense can mate and produce resting cysts, but the cells that
germinate from these cysts quickly die as they attempt to divide. A reproductive
barrier thus exists for at least some strains of this species. The overall
objective of this project is to investigate mating compatibilities among toxic
and non-toxic members of the tamarensis and minutum species complexes of
Alexandrium. This will involve a combination of laboratory and field studies in
a direct collaboration between US and EU partners under the EC-NSF Cooperative
Activity in Environmental Research. Specific objectives are to: 1) Establish and
characterize additional toxic and non-toxic Alexandrium cultures from the
northeastern U.S. and Europe; 2) Determine mating compatibility between toxic
and non-toxic strains of A. tamarense and A. minutum; 3) Identify a genetic
marker to distinguish between toxic and non-toxic minutum; 4) Develop methods to
determine the toxic/non-toxic genotype of planktonic cells and cysts; 5)
Determine mating selectivity of toxic and non-toxic A. minutum and A. tamarense
strains; 6) Participate in European field surveys to map Alexandrium populations
in the plankton and sediments; and 7) Employ growth rate, grazing rate and
mating preference data to model the outcome of a variety of invasion scenarios
and to evaluate the potential of introduced non-toxic Alexandrium species as a
bloom control or mitigation strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific merits
of the proposed study are significant, as the mating incompatibilities to be
explored may explain observed distributions of toxic and non-toxic Alexandrium
species throughout the world and relate directly to the potential success of an
invasion of one toxin-type into the domain of the other, such as through natural
currents and storms, or ballast water discharge. The broader impacts are also
significant. HABs represent a serious threat to public health and efficient
utilization of coastal resources. In addition to practical implications with
respect to species dispersal via ballast water discharge or other human-assisted
means, a novel bloom control or mitigation strategy of potential value to
society will be investigated whereby a non-toxic strain of Alexandrium could be
introduced to an area subject to toxic outbreaks in a manner analogous to the
release of sterile males to control insect pests. Other broad impacts include
strengthening the EU-US HAB network of scientists, communicating results via
conference presentations, scientific publications, and articles in the popular
press, and training and education of young scientists. In the latter context,
students and postdoctoral investigators from both the US and the EU will work in
the PI's laboratory on this project, supported by outside fellowships, EU funds,
internal WHOI funds (Summer Student Fellowships, Minority Traineeships), and REU
(Research Opportunities for Undergraduates) support, for which proposals will be
submitted. The PI has always placed a high priority on the integration of
research and education, and this project will be no exception.&lt;br/&gt;