* 0402249
* Collaborative Research:  Holocene/Deglacial Abrupt Climate Change and Variability of the Western Pacific Warm Pool from Multi-decadal to Century-scale Coral Climate Records
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2007
* R. Lawrence Edwards, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Howard J. Spero
* 04/30/2007
* USD 78,325.00

Under this award the PIs will use fossil corals from the western Solomon Islands
and eastern Papua New Guinea to reconstruct high-resolution Holocene/ Deglacial
paleoclimate records. The study area is located near the heart of the Western
Pacific Warm Pool (WPWP), a region that serves as the heat engine of the
planetary climate system and a primary source of water vapor to the atmosphere.
Studies of the instrumental record show that variations in the thermal and
hydrologic properties of the WPWP have global ocean and atmospheric
ramifications. This project would generate monthly resolved, multidecadal to
century-scale proxy records of thermal and hydrologic variability in the WPWP
via paired isotopic (?18O) and elemental ratio (Sr/Ca, Mg/Ca, U/Ca)
determinations in fossil corals. These geochemical determinations will be made
after the fossil coral samples have been evaluated for potential diagenetic
alteration using petrography and mineralogy criteria and after they have been
precisely dated by TIMS U-series analysis. The coral proxy climate records will
be used to 1) identify and define the timing and magnitude of abrupt transitions
and extremes in Holocene/Deglacial climate in the WPWP and determine how abrupt
changes in the tropics are related to previously defined intervals of abrupt
change in the extra-tropics; and 2) determine how changes in the mean climate
state of the WPWP tropical region influence the nature of tropical climate
variability on interannual to centennial timescales during the Holocene.