* 0402435
* Geographical Information Systems Technology Implementation Project (GIS-TECH)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Gary Jeffress, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 05/31/2009
* USD 749,063.00

The main goal of the Geographical Technology Implementation Project (GIS-TECH)
is to build both the capacity and infrastructure for training GIS technicians.
To this end, the GIS-TECH project is modeled after the highly successful Cisco
Networking Academy model, which Del Mar College has taught since 1999. Like
Cisco, GIS-TECH creates a model academy that emphasizes a train-the-trainer
curriculum and encourages mentoring of minority and female students into the GIS
technology field. The GIS-TECH project will create a sustainable system to
provide GIS training to secondary teachers, industry technicians and first
responders. The mentoring component of the project is critical to providing
effective and sustainable results. The GIS-TECH program provides mentoring in
two distinct ways: 1) training of secondary teachers who will then become
advocates for the GIS program in high school and 2) collaboration with the GO
Force and TACHE minority recruitment and mentoring programs. The GIS-TECH
project is also developing new, domain-specific GIS curricula. Leveraging the
talents and efforts of experts in the field, the project is developing three new
domain-specific GIS courses. The project provides a model for the seamless
transition of GIS technicians from high school to community college to the
university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
its targeted approach to GIS education, focusing the computer technology aspects
of GIS implementation and use that are normally missing from such programs. The
broader impacts of the project lie in diversity of the project's intended
student audience, which includes large percentages of Hispanic and female
students.&lt;br/&gt;