* 0402047
* Isomonodromy Transformations of Difference Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Alexei Borodin, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2007
* USD 149,999.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two major parts. First, we take a
rather&lt;br/&gt;non-obvious definition of "monodromy" for difference equations
due&lt;br/&gt;to Birkhoff and aim to develop a general theory of
transformations&lt;br/&gt;of difference equations which preserve the monodromy.
The&lt;br/&gt;resulting structure bears some similarity to the classical
theory&lt;br/&gt;of isomonodromy deformations of differential equations
and&lt;br/&gt;degenerates to it in a certain limit. Second, we apply
the&lt;br/&gt;isomonodromy transformations of difference equations to
evaluation&lt;br/&gt;of the so-called gap probabilities in discrete
probabilistic&lt;br/&gt;models of random-matrix type which arise in many
different domains&lt;br/&gt;including combinatorics, representation theory,
percolation&lt;br/&gt;theory, tiling models, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theory of isomonodromy deformations of ordinary differential&lt;br/&gt;equations
with rational coefficients is a classical subject&lt;br/&gt;developed in the end
of the XIXth -- beginning of the XXth century&lt;br/&gt;by Riemann, Schlesinger,
Fuchs, and Garnier. Since then the&lt;br/&gt;isomonodromy deformations have
found numerous applications in very&lt;br/&gt;different domains of mathematics
and mathematical physics, from&lt;br/&gt;algebraic and differential geometry to
random matrices and&lt;br/&gt;representation theory. On the other hand, in
recent years there&lt;br/&gt;has been considerable interest in analyzing a
certain class of&lt;br/&gt;discrete probabilistic models which in appropriate
limits converge&lt;br/&gt;to well-known models of random matrix theory. The
sources of these&lt;br/&gt;models are quite diverse, they include
combinatorics,&lt;br/&gt;representation theory, percolation theory, random
growth&lt;br/&gt;processes, tiling models and others. The goal of the
research&lt;br/&gt;presented in this proposal is to develop a general theory
of&lt;br/&gt;"isomonodromy transformations" for linear systems of
DIFFERENCE&lt;br/&gt;equations with rational coefficients. In these
probabilistic&lt;br/&gt;models mentioned above, we often see how two problems
which seem&lt;br/&gt;to be unrelated to each other, and which even come from
parts of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics that do not seem to have any overlap, lead to the
same&lt;br/&gt;final result. We believe that the project will provide a
visible&lt;br/&gt;common ground for many of such coincidences and thus will
promote&lt;br/&gt;and accelerate the exchange of methods and ideas accumulated
by&lt;br/&gt;different groups of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;