* 0402766
* RUI:     Electronic Device Fabrication Based on Conducting Polymer Nanofibers:     Motivating Undergraduate Students Towards Research in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Nicholas Pinto, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

This project began three years ago with NSF funding for the preparation of
conducting polymer nanofibers, for device fabrication based on these nanofibers,
and for motivating undergraduate students to pursue graduate degrees in science
and engineering. The nanofibers were fabricated using the electrospinning
technique. In this renewal proposal, we will extend the past work done on device
fabrication based on polymer nanofibers and also include the use of the Atomic
Force Microscope (AFM) to probe at the nanoscale level, the charge transport
properties of these conducting polymer nanofibers. Polymer nanofibers will also
be produced using the interfacial polymerization technique. Crossed polymer
nanofibers will also be studied in order to understand the electrical properties
of the resulting nanojunction, and how to join nanofibers together to form
multiterminal devices and ultimately complex circuits.

The intellectual merit of this proposal is the ease with which nanofibers of
conducting polymers can be prepared using the electrospinning technique or the
interfacial polymerization technique as compared to other complex methods used
to prepare for example carbon nanotubes. The processing and fabrication of
devices based on conducting polymers is relatively easy and cheap. This has the
potential of being able to fabricate large surface area flexible electronic
devices. We will also use a biased AFM tip to locally probe (local gating) the
conduction along the length of the polymer nanofiber in order to study the role
of defects on electrical conduction and hence be able to shed additional light
on the metallic state in conducting polymers. The use of the AFM as an active
instrument in the electrical characterization of individual polymer nanofibers
and crossed nanofibers has not been studied in detail as compared to carbon
nanotubes and so the local gating effect proposed with the AFM is could lead to
new results and suggest new experimental methods (using the AFM) of studying
conducting polymers.

The broader impact of this proposal is significant. All of the experiments
proposed are within the intellectual grasp of undergraduate students and are
also aimed at motivating the students to pursue graduate studies in science and
engineering. Modified experiments based on the proposed research are planned to
be included into the Intermediate Laboratory course that the PI has taught for
the last five years thus integrating research and education. The instrument
requested in this proposal will strengthen the institutional infrastructure,
increase faculty collaboration and also have a broader impact of improving the
research facilities on the South-East part of the island. This proposal will
also increase the number of undergraduate students that participate in
scientific research and who are underrepresented in the fields of science and
engineering. Finally, the PI and his Departmental colleagues have written a
proposal to the UPR board of directors to begin a new Master's program in
Materials Science. This program will be unique on the island. By improving the
research infrastructure and enhancing research collaboration within the
Department, this proposal will help us reach a critical mass of faculty that are
active in research and hence boost our chances of having a successful MS program
in Materials Science.