* 0402430
* Getting Results:  ATE Teaching in Community Colleges - Large Scale Materials Development for Professional Development
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Denise Blumenthal, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ginger H. Rowell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,298,228.00

The WGBH Educational Foundation, in partnership with the League for Innovation
in the Community College, is developing, field testing, and disseminating
multimedia resources to foster the use of effective teaching and learning
practices among Advanced Technology Education faculty members. The materials are
adaptations of Learning Exchange Networks modules, a research based professional
development curriculum written specifically by and for community college
teachers. The customized materials feature video segments illustrating exemplary
practices and online resources and strategies targeted to ATE disciplines. The
primary audience of the materials is comprised of adjunct faculty who are
teaching in ATE programs. These materials are also useful to new and experienced
community college faculty who are interested in revisiting their instructional
strategies within the context of teaching for
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These resources are being field tested in 13
ATE centers and programs in community colleges across the country, revised to
increase their effectiveness and ease of use, then further evaluated at a
representative group of 10 additional ATE programs across the country, and
disseminated through a network of over 750 League for Innovation in the
Community College member colleges and 112 corporate partners. In addition, the
American Association of Community Colleges is assisting in the dissemination of
the materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of these resources is
ensured by the active engagement of experts from industry as well as academia,
including substantial representation from ATE programs and the community college
system; and by the decades-long track record of WBGH in developing compelling
teacher training resources that fully engage and inspire the viewer. The
Community College Leadership Program at the University of Texas is conducting
formative and summative evaluation activities to ensure that the new materials
are rigorously tested at each stage of development.