* 0402549
* Wisconsin Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2010
* Donald Woolston, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2010
* USD 2,500,812.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;What is the intellectual merit of the proposed
activity? &lt;br/&gt;Wisconsin (WI) is a state with a rapidly changing ethnic
and racial demography. The number of Hispanics has more than doubled in the last
decade to over 200,000, there are over 400,000 acres of American Indian tribal
lands, and 25% of the nearly one million residents in the large urban area
around Milwaukee are African American. While not counted in tallies of
underrepresented minorities for this proposal, WI also has the third largest
population of Hmong in the United States, a group also underrepresented in
higher education. This proposal would establish the Wisconsin Alliance for
Minority Participation (Wisc-AMP)through the NSF Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program. Wisc-AMP brings together 21 public and
private institutions of higher education in Wisconsin committed to collectively
doubling the number of underrepresented minority students (URMS) receiving
baccalaureate degrees in science and engineering majors. Wisc-AMP partners are
also committed to the more fundamental goal of transforming the culture of our
institutions to support and sustain diversity at all levels. The University of
Wisconsin-Madison (UW-Madison) will be the lead institution. Few universities
can equal UW-Madison's capacity to enroll large numbers of students or match the
breadth and depth of its cutting-edge research rograms in science and
engineering. Through individual interviews, data gathering, and document
analysis, it was determined that the support provided through LSAMP would be
best leveraged in two ways: 1) address retention and persistence of URMS in
science or engineering majors at UW-Madison by expanding and improving on
successful models already in place and 2) build the alliance. The initiatives at
UW-Madison focus on several aspects of academic enhancement especially in the
gatekeeping courses with new efforts to tutor not only those struggling but
those who can be pushed to excellence as well as an enhanced summer research
experience that encourages undergraduate students to share personal experiences
and scientific inquiries with a network of peers and trains graduate students to
be more effective mentors to undergraduate URMS. Alliance building involves
several efforts aimed at developing a Network of Champions at participating
sites as well as a Small Grants Program to facilitate collaboration and
encourage individual partners to customize initiatives to their local
environments. Wisc-AMP will be administered jointly by the Diversity Affairs
Office and the Women in Science and Engineering Leadership Institute in the
College of Engineering at UW-Madison. A Governing Board consists of
Provosts/Vice Chancellors/Presidents from Wisc-AMP partners, students, an
industry representative, and selected academic and community leaders in
education and research. Increasing the recruitment and retention of URMS in
science and engineering with the goal of transforming the institution involves
buy-in from many departments and units. Therefore, at UW-Madison, the Provost is
the principal investigator and two well-respected faculty members are co-
principal investigators, faculty in prestigious positions are members of an
internal Advisory Committee, staff who have been in the trenches working on the
issues and administrators from the Admissions Office and the Registrars Office
who are at key student entry points are involved as co-investigators or
advisors. Formal evaluation of Wisc-AMP will use quantitative and qualitative
methods to identify if and how well the goal of the program is met and which
aspects of Wisc-AMP work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader impacts of
the proposed activity?&lt;br/&gt;As the United States becomes an increasingly
diverse society, it is imperative that institutions of higher education train a
similarly diverse workforce. NSF has publicly proclaimed its commitment to
broadening opportunities and enabling participation of all citizens as essential
to the health and vitality of science and engineering. By investing in efforts
to increase the number of URMS graduating with baccalaureate degrees in science
or engineering, this proposal directly aligns with NSF's goal. Project
innovations will be disseminated locally through meetings, discussions, and
presentations; regionally through the alliance structure; and nationally through
publications in scientific journals, proceedings of scientific meetings, and
participation in annual LSAMP meetings. The results of Wisc-AMP's formal
evaluation can be used to continue or re-direct proposed efforts and to advise
developing alliances on successful and unsuccessful elements of each initiative.