* 0402114
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Solid-State NMR Studies of Amyloid Fibrils
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Jeremy Flinders, Flinders                Jeremy         C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2006
* USD 112,200.00

0402114 Flinders

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Jeremy C.
Flinders to work with Dr. Hartmut Oschkinat at Institute for Molecular
Pharmacology in Berlin, Germany.

Amyloid fibrils are misfolded protein aggregates associated with a number of
serious diseases, including prion and Alzheimer's disease, type II diabetes, and
Huntington's disease. The exact mechanism of formation for these fibrils is
currently not understood, primarily due to a lack of sufficient atomic-level
structural information. The structures formed by such misfolding have
traditionally been difficult to study, since they comprise long, thin filaments
that are insoluble and do not crystallize. They are, however, suitable for study
using recent solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques.

The focus of this research project is determining the high-resolution structure
of a model amyloid system and using this information to investigate fibril
formation. Since sample quality directly affects the resulting data, current
methods of sample preparation are also being optimized. Existing techniques for
collecting NMR data are not sufficient for the goals of this project, therefore
novel NMR and sample preparation techniques are being developed and refined to
gather the needed data for structure determination. Considerable effort is being
made to extract structural information from all types of nuclei in samples,
despite inherent issues of strong interactions among them. Short and long-range
distance constraints obtained are being inputted into structure calculation
programs.

Also being intensely studied is the kinetics and thermodynamics of fibril
formation. Approaching this problem from two fronts allows for a better
understanding of the sometimes ambiguous or complicated data collected. A
working model of fibril formation is constantly being tested and altered using
information from several biochemical and biophysical techniques.