* 0402238
* SPRITE Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Rebecca Hartzler, Edmonds Community College
* Continuing grant
* Sharon M. Locke
* 02/29/2008
* USD 698,723.00

A collaborative effort between Edmonds Community College, University of
Washington, and the Bothell and Edmonds School District, the SPRITE Project
seeks to attract underrepresented groups, particularly girls and women, to STEM
through research-based educational activates centered on computer gaming. The
project is named after the animated character, SPRITE that moves around a
computer screen. Secondary and post-secondary students will learn mathematics
and physics by building computer animated scenes and games which incorporate
art, music, and communication. Over the course of the three years, 100 students
and close to 200 teachers will be directly served by the project.

Project partners include high schools, community colleges, universities,
professional organizations and the computer game industry. Retreats, summer
institutes and ongoing support for college and high school faculty, as well as
summer day camps for high school students and incoming freshmen, will be
offered. Graduate students will provide assistance and support during the summer
activities and will be available as aids to teachers during the school year.
Project curriculum for all sessions will feature new industry-guided modules
developed by high school and college faculty in association with game industry
representatives to investigate mathematics, physical science and computer
technology. By project end, 40 curriculum modules for use in traditional
classrooms will be available. A longitudinal evaluation will track enrollments
and retention in science and mathematics form 10th grade through two years for
both participants and non-participants. The evaluation will also investigate
gender differences.

