* 0402186
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Blending Commerce and Community: Feminist Bookstores and the Negotiation of Hybrid Identity
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Timothy Dowd, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 7,500.00

Feminist bookstores, whose ideological commitments often complicate their
struggles to survive as small-businesses, exemplify organizations with hybrid
identities. They embrace multiple, incongruous identities that are based on
competing institutional logics. Rather than adhering to an institutional logic
that is either fully efficiency-based or fully value-based, they actively work
to balance the two. How do they negotiate these competing logics? Do these
negotiations and their outcomes change depending on the life-cycle stage of an
organization or of the organizational fields in which a bookstore is embedded?
To answer these questions, I draw on multiple methods and data sources. First, I
conduct qualitative content analysis with issues of Feminist Bookstore News (the
trade journal published from 1976-2000) and materials from the Feminist
Bookstore News archives located at the San Francisco Public Library. These
historical data allows me to trace discourse regarding organizational identity
negotiation. Second, I use semi-structured interviews with feminist bookstore
owners, employees, and customers to investigate further the processes and
results of such negotiations. Finally, in order to provide detailed
illustrations of emerging patterns, I construct in-depth case studies of three
feminist bookstores (located in California, Michigan, and Georgia), using
archival materials, semi-structured interviews, observation, and customer
surveys. The broader impacts of this research include contributions to the field
of sociology by an illumination of mechanisms through which identity-hybrid
organizations negotiate competing logics, a focus on ongoing negotiations rather
than those that take place during organizational disruption, and an analysis of
how such strategies change depending on the organization's life-cycle stage. The
findings hold practical relevance for the many organizations that hold multiple
identities, including those feminist bookstores still in existence. As the first
longitudinal study of the organizational field of feminist bookstores, my
research also offers a comprehensive look at an organizational field dedicated
to women's issues, with particular emphasis on lesbians and women of color.