* 0402478
* Tracking Past Shifts of the Eastern Pacific ITCZ with Oxygen Isotopes and Magnesium Paleothermometry
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Peter DeMenocal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/2008
* USD 162,575.00

Abstract: Under this award the PIs will reconstruct the latitudinal migrations
of the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) in the Pacific Ocean. The location
and latitudinal range of the ITCZ in this basin is inseparably tied to ENSO
dynamics and to the strength of the equatorial upwelling, which affect global
climate through various mechanisms such as ENSO teleconnections. Moreover,
anomalous tropical rainfall patterns due to ITCZ shifts can impact the ocean's
thermohaline circulation through control of surface salinity, and alter moisture
and ecosystem balance over land triggering climate feedbacks via land-vegetation
and biogeochemical processes (e.g. methane emissions and carbon storage). The
proponents propose a study to investigate variability in this system in the
orbital frequency band, encompassing the interval 0-250,000 years BP, which
includes glacial stages 2, 6 and 8, and interglacial stages 1, 5 and 7. This is
sufficiently long to discern glacial-interglacial (G-I) (100 ky) variability in
addition to precession and obliquity forcing (19-23 ky, and 41 ky). The work
will focus on four deep sea cores in a N-S transect across the equator (7N-2S)
and will involve measurements of planktonic foraminiferal oxygen isotope (d18O)
and Mg/Ca ratios as proxies of surface ocean hydrology and temperature
respectively.