* 0402746
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Power of Place: Ethnic Urban Geographies and the Negotiation of Central American Immigrant Identities in Atlanta, Georgia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Steven Holloway, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2007
* USD 11,690.00

Conventional understandings of immigrant adjustment assume that newcomers
progressively lose their ethnic and/or national identifications over time as
they assimilate into a normatively white North American context. Although
assimilation research too often is overly simplistic and based on static
categorical notions of racial identity, recent research has stressed the fluid
and shifting nature of identities. This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement project will examine the importance of place, conceptualized as
socio-spatial context, in the process of negotiating ethnic/national identity by
Central American-born residents of Atlanta, Georgia. Not only must recent
Central American immigrants navigate the binary yet dynamic racial structure
they encounter in Atlanta, they must also negotiate their evolving personal
notions of ethnic identity with perceptions of others as to who they are and
where they belong. A mixture of quantitative and qualitative approaches will be
used to address the following research questions: (1) How are Central American
immigrants fitting in to Atlanta's racially structured yet dynamic settlement
geographies? (2) How and to what degree do the ethnic/national identities of
Atlanta's recent Central American immigrants shift in response to Atlanta's
racial hierarchy? (3) How do the socio-spatial contexts in which Central
American immigrants live and experience their daily lives (such as home and
places of work, recreation, worship, and shopping) affect the process of
identity negotiation? A key theme connecting the three questions concerns the
degree to which Central American immigrants in Atlanta embrace a pan-ethnic
"Latino" identity, and the degree to which the expression and meaning of ethnic
identity may, or may not, shift across the various socio-spatial contexts that
define everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will broaden the range
of research on the experiences of contemporary immigrants in the U.S., and it
will provide new insights that may be useful for those who deal with immigration
policy and/or the livelihoods and welfare of immigrants. In addition, this
research project will highlight the growing impact of immigration on non-
traditional destinations like Atlanta. Latino immigrant populations are rapidly
growing in the southern United States, a region marked historically by the
absence of immigration and a strong black/white racial hierarchy. Atlanta has
experienced rapid influxes of Latino immigrants, and newcomers from Central
America constitute an increasingly important component of Latino immigration
flows. The insight provided by the proposed research will guide future research
on Central American immigrants in Atlanta and other locations. By strengthening
the links between studies of place and identities and research on the adjustment
experiences of newly arriving immigrants, this project also will provide a model
for research on other groups in other contexts. The project should have general
public policy implications, as it will emphasize the need for immigrant
adjustment policies and initiatives that target specific groups in order to
understand the interplay between these groups and the places in which they
reside. Finally, as a Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award, the support will
facilitate the establishment of a solid independent research program for a
promising young scholar.&lt;br/&gt;