* 0402616
* Engineering Technology Competencies: Integrating Curriculum and Forging Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,02/28/2009
* James Boe, Bismarck Public School District #1
* Standard Grant
* Ning Fang
* 02/28/2009
* USD 374,440.00

This project is developing curricula and an implementation model that will
increase interest and the ability to pursue higher education in the field of
engineering. The curricula and model will result in K-12 students applying
critical math, science, and technology knowledge while they plan, design, test,
revise, and implement engineering activities. The K-12 units of study developed
create an articulated pathway for learners to successfully transition to a two-
year engineering technician program. The units of study are being assembled into
three separate sequences for the elementary, middle and high school levels with
a model implementation plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Components of the model
include K-12 instructor training, curriculum alignment, collaborative
interdisciplinary teams, and implementation of the curriculum with students, as
well as recruitment of students into post-secondary engineering programs. Valley
City State University faculty members facilitate the engineering courses for the
18 participating teachers. The instructional units are being pilot tested,
revised, and refined, then implemented in the form of model course curriculum at
the elementary, middle, and high school levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has intellectual merit in need, design, and the qualifications of the
team. The proposed activities address the challenge of preparing, motivating,
and retaining students in the pursuit of engineering related opportunities.
North Dakota has adopted the curricular framework recommended by the Center to
Advance the Teaching of Technology and Science (CATTS). This project results in
a model implementation of the CATTS framework by developing the units of
instruction necessary to transfer the framework into a product that can be
implemented in the classroom. A clear articulation pathway from elementary to
middle school to high school and then to postsecondary engineering programs is
identified and supported by the resulting implementation model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include: (1) an
instructor training process that provides content knowledge in technology and
engineering while helping teachers implement the content in ways that require
critical thinking and deep understanding on the part of students; (2) units of
instruction that are standards-based, interdisciplinary, authentic, and engaging
for dissemination via a web-based search engine; (3) an increase in the number
of students with the foundational knowledge, skills, and the interest to
continue into engineering- related postsecondary programs; (4) a support model
that connects K-12 students and teachers, postsecondary students and teachers,
and professionals in the areas of technology, engineering, science, and
math.&lt;br/&gt;