* 0402607
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Theory of Status Achievement
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Edgar Kiser, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 7,474.00

This dissertation studies how status affects peoples' investment in voluntary
associations. According to the proposed theory, the utility of status takes the
form of positive self evaluations that occur when people interact in groups with
shared focal activities. Therefore relative performance in the activity becomes
a source of incentives, and desire to control the level of performance should
affect investment. Rational actor and identity theories have neglected this
foundation for explaining investment, and therefore status achievement may solve
some long-standing anomalies in the explanation of costly participation.
Although status is expected to affect investment similarly across social
settings, comparisons will also be used to reveal the limits of the theory, and
show how status achievement processes may vary across institutional settings.
Three types of analyses are employed: (1) Agent based simulation is used to
model the micro level process and to develop conditional expectations for the
empirical analyses. (2) Longitudinal analyses test the individual level
implication that investment depends on status and change in status. (3) Cross
group comparisons reveal the scope limitations of the theory. Data are drawn
from recently published ethnographies on avocations, vocations, and social
movements. This project will assemble longitudinal datasets from a range of
online groups and study how status and change in status affects level of
investment. The broader impacts of this research will include substantive,
theoretical, and practical benefits. Substantively, this research helps explain
how social settings generate status incentives and alter patterns of investment.
Understanding this process should be valuable to leaders of groups (e. g.,
managers, teachers) who often need to motivate members to invest their time and
resources in the group. Theoretically, status achievement can explain why people
invest in high cost activities when alternative paradigms (rational actor
theory) predict they will not invest. The theory also describes a general micro-
foundation for explaining investment in groups, and therefore the development of
social capital. Finally, the study will generate several data sets of practical
use to scholars of voluntary associations and online discussion groups. These
data will be available from the International Consortium for Political and
Social Research after the primary analyses are completed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;