* 0402494
* Regional Center for Next Generation Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Lauren Kaufman, Connecticut's Community-Tech Colleges' College of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2010
* USD 3,314,159.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Connecticut Community College System through its College of
Technology (COT) is developing an ATE Regional Center for Next Generation
Manufacturing (RCNGM). The Center is the regional focal point for the education
of an agile manufacturing workforce skilled in the implementation of advances in
technology and capable of meeting the changing needs of the manufacturing
industry. It is critical that career &lt;br/&gt;opportunities in advanced
manufacturing and emerging technologies be well publicized and that students be
educated to meet the needs of modern manufacturing. The widespread perception of
manufacturing as dirty, noisy, mindless assembly lines, with no opportunities
for advancement, must be changed. High tech, high skill, high wage manufacturing
is critical to our nation's economic future, and this regional Center is
creating a model for advanced manufacturing education programs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The RCNGM is a partnership of the Community Colleges' College of
Technology with the Manufacturing Institute of the National Association of
Manufacturers, the Education Foundation of the Connecticut Business and Industry
Association (CBIA), the Connecticut Center for Advanced Technology, government
agencies, and secondary and higher education institutions. The RCNGM builds on
the successes of several ATE, CSEMS and CCLI grants received by the partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to a 2003 CBIA member survey, manufacturers
expect 69% of their workforce to retire in the next 10 years, creating an urgent
need for new career pathways and new educational programs. The RCNGM is:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Establishing a manufacturing learning infrastructure and
knowledge delivery system that includes web-based, blended instruction, and a
strengthened 2 + 2 + 2 seamless pathway; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Involving
industry to provide on-going guidance on skills needs, curriculum requirements,
career pathways, and access to industry best practices and facilities for use in
education;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing and adapting a solid, foundational
core curriculum, with technology and industry electives that will assure up-to-
date skills for employment and career
development;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marketing high tech manufacturing careers and
career pathways and recruiting students; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating
community college and secondary school faculty development opportunities in
industry and university settings, and student internships;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Facilitating a student- and worker-focused collaborative
infrastructure that sustains life- long learning, and encourages knowledge
sharing and on-going professional development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this program resides in the curriculum content, as well as
in the variety of curriculum delivery approaches utilized to prepare a technical
workforce in precision machining, photonics/laser applications, fuel cells/clean
energy and medical device instrumentation. The broader impact of this Center for
Next Generation Manufacturing is reflected in the partnership models it develops
for industry and higher education to work together to prepare a skilled and
diverse manufacturing workforce. It has national impact through the unique
partnership with NAM, and with other ATE national and regional Centers and
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;