* 0402625
* The National Center for Pulp and Paper Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Harry Cullinan, Alabama Southern Community College
* Continuing grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 12/31/2009
* USD 4,989,604.00

Alabama Southern Community College, Auburn University, and the Charter Member
Colleges are developing an ATE National Center of Excellence called the National
Center for Pulp and Paper Technology. The Charter Member Colleges include: (1)
Kennebec Valley Community College (Fairfield, Maine); (2) Mid-State Technical
College (Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin); and (3) Lower Columbia College (Longview,
Washington). The mission of the National Center, with the support of other two-
year colleges, universities, and a national array of pulp and paper companies
and mills and national organizations, is to establish and perpetuate a
technology program to give students around the nation exciting and effective
education and training opportunities and to provide the pulp and paper sector of
the United States forest products industry with a globally competitive,
technologically advanced workforce (TAW). In turn, the mission of the National
Center is being conducted through 8 goals and 36 objectives. The broad array of
services to be provided through the National Center has been identified as
critical for the pulp and paper workforce by a comprehensive consortium of
industry, trade and professional organizations, colleges, universities, and
governmental entities under the auspices of Agenda 2020.

The intellectual merit of the Center includes continuous contributions to
advancing knowledge in the areas of education and training for technicians and
operations in the pulp and paper industry through several elements that may be
applied to other disciplines and industries. These elements include: (1) a broad
collaborative model that serves as the prototypical schematic for industry-
education-government collaboration to show other industries and educational
organizations how to move toward the goal of having a TAW so they too can
successfully compete in global economy, (2) an education and training model that
through the National Pulp and Paper Technician and Operator Certification
Program incorporates skills standardization and verification based on
international standards, (3) an ongoing research based analysis that helps
colleges, universities, and the pulp and paper industry measure the
effectiveness of education and training programs through return on investment
model, and (4) education and training research that is reported through monthly
journals and an annual book series published in paper and e-book formats.

By providing an array of services, the broader impacts of the Center include:
standardized and certified programs, outcomes-based instruction, advanced
training and education methods and delivery, research and application of new
teaching methods, academic- industry-government partnerships, dual focus on
entry level and incumbent workers, quantitative measurement of effectiveness,
labor-management cooperation, community college-university linkages, and
outreach to K-12 teachers and students. Also, the developers are working to
ensure that the activities have provisions to recruit and help students enter
the workforce from groups that have been traditionally underrepresented in the
pulp and paper industry.