* 0402211
* Planning Grant for a National Resource Center for Materials Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Thomas Stoebe, Edmonds Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 03/31/2005
* USD 72,480.00

This planning project is creating the basis for a new National Resource Center
in Materials Technology Education. The program is based on the needs of industry
for qualified and trained technicians who understand the basics of materials
technology. This is especially important relative to new developments in
nanotechnology and composites technologies as well as in structural manufacture
and electronics processing and the future need for recycling of all materials
systems (ISO 14000). It builds on prior ATE projects in materials technology
education, and on current community college educational
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to develop a
curriculum clearinghouse for the broad range of materials as they apply to
manufacturing and engineering technology, and to provide the professional
development and support needed for instructors to adequately treat the subject
of materials technology in their courses. The focus of the program is on
enhanced education for manufacturing technicians who handle materials in
structural and electronics manufacturing. The expected outcomes of this project
include enhanced curricular modules aligned with industry-based core
competencies to provide student education aligned with industry needs, and model
programs on how to insert these modules into typical manufacturing and
engineering technology courses. Also expected are a set of well-trained
instructors at high school and community college levels in this area, and a
growing alliance of colleges, schools and industry working to further develop
these outcomes. The development of new roles for professional societies and
industry in delivering courses and providing mentorships are also included. The
planning group for this National Resource Center includes community colleges,
industry, professional societies, national laboratories, 4-year colleges and
universities, and school district partners nation-wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merit of this project is based on the development of curriculum
that will assist teachers in motivating their students using creative, student
centered teaching materials, followed by a quality program leading to technology
careers. Educational research and education are integrated in this program,
which provides for student participation, mentoring and dissemination of
effective models for student recruiting and retention in manufacturing
technology. The planning project build on the wide base of curricula collected
at Edmonds and elsewhere in materials technology as a result of past and current
programs, and on modular curricula developed by other ATE Centers and projects,
filling gaps related to materials technology. Strong institutional support
provides for sustainability of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader
Impact focuses on the current and future needs of manufacturing technicians as
related to the materials they use. It also includes the development of enhanced
industry-school partnerships through use of interactions with professional
societies, which will provide mentoring, internship and networking opportunities
for students, teachers and professionals. The Center's curricular programs have
a strong focus on addressing the needs of groups underrepresented in technology.
Broad dissemination of the products of the Center through professional societies
and educational organizations enhance student enrollment in manufacturing,
engineering and materials programs and the numbers of students available to
enter the workforce in this critical area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;