* 0402212
* Polymeric Metal Complexes as Multifunctional Molecular Probes and Responsive Drug Delivery Vectors
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Cassandra Fraser, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2008
* USD 485,000.00

0402212&lt;br/&gt;Fraser&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Polymeric metal complexes
(PMCs) are a new class of multifunctional biomaterials that combine detection,
protection, targeting, triggered release and degradation functions in imaging
agents and drug delivery vectors. Molecular weight and architectural control
(i.e. valency of bio-ligand presentation) are attainable by living
polymerization. Luminescent and stimuli responsive metal complexes with
bipyridine (bpy) and B-diketonate macroligands are investigated. Luminescent Ru
tris(bpy) PEG-PEI materials tagged with antibodies to prostate specific membrane
antigen are of interest as short interfering RNA delivery agents for knock out
of the androgen receptor (which is believed to be critical for disease
progression). LDV, RGD and other adhesion peptide bioconjugates of metal PLA-
PEGs are designed for use as molecular probes targeting leukocytes and as anti-
inflammatory drug delivery agents. Ru PLA-PAA systems are generated for imaging,
mucoadhesive drug delivery, and models for multifunctional photodynamic
therapeutics. These many uses for PMC biomaterials are also advanced by
fundamental studies of their optical, nanoscale self-assembly, and degradation
properties under both controlled and more complex biological conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The group and collaborative team members
range from undergraduates to faculty, and often include gender, racial, and
geographic minorities. Contributions of the interdisciplinary research to
science through publications and presentations are augmented by numerous
activities in the university and community. These include mentoring promising
young scientists, building infrastructure for interdisciplinary intellectual
exchange; and conveying the importance and excitement of scientific discovery to
non-scientists by hosting lab visits and speaking in public forums. Potential
technological benefits are in molecular imaging, drug delivery, sensing,
catalysis, and photonic materials.&lt;br/&gt;