* 0402490
* NEES Consortium Operation: FY 2005 - FY 2014
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Thalia Anagnos, NEES Consortium, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2010
* USD 97,581,084.00

NEES Consortium, Inc., through this cooperative agreement, will manage, operate,
and maintain the national George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES) infrastructure during FY 2005 - FY 2014. This
infrastructure consists of (1) Consortium headquarters led by an Executive
Director, (2) 15 shared use, state-of-the-art earthquake engineering
experimental research sites located across the U.S., and (3) an information
technology (IT)/NEESgrid cyberinfrastructure. The equipment sites and
cyberinfrastructure provide a user-friendly, collaborative, accessible, and
data-rich experimental and analytical infrastructure for research, education,
and technology transfer across the earthquake engineering field. The equipment
sites include single (outdoor), dual, and triple shake tables; geotechnical
centrifuges with in-flight biaxial shakers and robotic tools; a tsunami wave
basin; large laboratories for testing structures, soil-foundation-structure
interaction systems, and lifeline systems; mobile geotechnical and structural
testing field equipment; and two permanently instrumented field sites in
southern California. The NEESgrid cyberinfrastructure seamlessly integrates the
15 equipment sites and their telepresence capabilities, a national curated data
repository, web-based collaborative tools, access to leading edge compute
resources, and open-source computational tools such as OpenSees. This
cyberinfrastructure will enable hybrid testing methods (coupled computational
and physical simulations) as well as multi-site distributed experimentation.
Technical staff at Consortium headquarters, the equipment sites, and the NEES
cyberinfrastructure center will help potential and funded investigators discover
and use NEES resources. The Consortium will coordinate training courses on
equipment site and IT usage, visiting scholar programs, development of
curricular materials, research experiences for undergraduates (REUs) and
research experiences for teachers (RETs), seminars for practicing engineers, and
K-12 and public outreach. The capabilities provided by the NEES infrastructure
will enable researchers in the U.S., along with collaborators abroad, to address
the research problems outlined in Preventing Earthquake Disasters - The Grand
Challenge in Earthquake Engineering - A Research Agenda for the Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) [National Research Council, National
Academy Press, 2003] to advance fundamental knowledge and develop new
technologies to address a compelling national need - earthquake loss reduction.
Through separate awards, NSF will fund individual investigator, small group, and
grand challenge projects to conduct research using the NEES infrastructure.
Through the Consortium, the U.S. is well positioned to establish a strong world
leadership role in earthquake engineering. This award is for five years, and
will be reviewed annually, under a cooperative agreement between the National
Science Foundation and NEES Consortium, Inc. The award is renewable once,
without recompetition, for an additional five years, subject to satisfactory
review of performance and availability of funds. The maximum duration of the
award is for ten years. Towards the end of this final award period, NSF will
evaluate the needs of, and appropriate future investments in, the national
infrastructure for earthquake engineering. Information about Consortium
activities, including equipment site and NEESgrid cyberinfrastructure
capabilities, equipment site scheduling, and training opportunities, will be
posted at nees.org. This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP).