* 0402408
* Building a Cross-Institutional Collaboratory for 3D Visualization in Technical Education and Training
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Arnold Peskin, SUNY College of Technology Alfred
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 11/30/2006
* USD 600,624.00

&lt;br/&gt;The project is a collaboration with Brookhaven National Laboratory
(BNL), Alfred State College, Bergen Community College, Jamestown Community
College, Nassau Community College, Rochester Institute of Technology, and
Suffolk Community College to provide unique real-world scientific and
technological experiences to a diverse mix of science and technology
undergraduate students and teachers. Teams of three will participate from each
institution for two consecutive 10-week summer internships. Additionally, the
project will simultaneously build and disseminate exemplary pedagogical
strategies based on the experience gained from a previous ATE project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of their efforts will be to work with BNL staff
to create novel applications with its unique three dimensional (3D)
visualization technology as a teaching tool, and to export these new 3D
applications back to the community colleges. Problem selection will be driven by
the needs and expertise of the participating educational institutions in
consultation with the BNL staff. At the end of the project, a collection of
user-friendly techniques will be available that will allow college teachers to
easily use the new 3D visualization theaters to deliver lessons spanning
disciplines from architecture to protein chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;