* 0402271
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Geographically Targeted Enforcement of Ordinances Restricting Personal Mobility and Actions
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Anna Secor, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2005
* USD 9,739.00

Brought about through community pressures and policing initiatives, ordinances
against prostitution and drug use have become widespread in the United States.
Public health concerns have been used to justify the exclusion of certain people
from urban areas designated by city ordinances. For example, the Seattle City
Council established the Stay Out of Areas of Prostitution (SOAP) and the Stay
Out of Drug Areas (SODA) ordinances in 1989 and 1991 in response to neighborhood
complaints in order to "redline" areas ranging in size from one to several city
blocks. Both ordinances resulted in uneven geographic enforcement of public laws
in Seattle. The SOAP and SODA ordinances were effective in clearing out some
drug- and prostitution-related activities in designated areas, but while they
reduced illegal activities in one area, they often intensified them in others.
This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project will examine the socio-
spatial control of prostitutes and drug users and traffickers in urban public
space within Seattle's SOAP and SODA zones. This project initially will seek to
explain how neighborhood associations convinced the Seattle City Council to
establish the zones, focusing particularly on exclusionary discourses mobilized
in support of the ordinances. Second, this project will examine the
establishment and everyday enforcement of the ordinances by Seattle's police and
their effectiveness as realized by participant observation and analysis of crime
statistics within and outside the zones. Third, this project will compare
responses to the zones by two different types of organizations that function
within the zones: (1) social agencies that provide services to prostitutes and
drug users and traffickers and (2) neighborhood associations composed of
residents and business owners. This largely qualitative research project will be
based on data in the form of: City of Seattle public records; interviews with
stakeholder groups, public officials, and police; and participant observation
focused on the activities of police, social service agencies, and neighborhood
associations. These examinations will be supplemented by quantitative analyses
of crime and HIV-infection rates within and outside of the city's SOAP and SODA
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to extend knowledge on socio-
spatial control, namely exclusionary politics and their effects on access to
urban public space. This project will provide a comprehensive survey and
analysis regarding how discourses surrounding citizenship produce a public space
that is exclusionary to those who are not conceived as citizens by structures
intact within the city. This research will highlight the discursive construction
of criminality and the intense micro-politics of policing space that the
designation of criminality invokes. In producing a geographical analysis of
policing strategies and discourses, this research is expected to show how
federal, state, and municipal agencies influence policing strategies in urban
public space. It will examine how local politics in the form of public policy
have spatial repercussions on marginalized populations and their access to
public space. Results from this research will be shared with publicly and
privately funded organizations, including neighborhood associations and social
service agencies; City of Seattle policy makers; and the Seattle Police
Department. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;