* 0402792
* EU-US ECOHAB. EC-NSF Cooperative Activity in Environmental Research: In Situ Holographic Measurements of Particle Distributions and Small Scale Turbulence in Thin Layers
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2008
* USD 730,000.00

This project was submitted under the EU-US Cooperative Activity on the Ecology
and Oceanography of Harmful Algae. The U.S. PIs will join colleagues from
France, Ireland, Spain and UK to study the physics and biology of thin layers
with concentrated Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB). Serious problems in Europe are
caused by contamination of farmed shellfish with Diarrheic Shellfish Poisoning
(DSP) toxins produced by the dinoflagellate genus Dinophysis. The existence of
thin layers with high Dinophysis concentration has come to light recently, but
the information is sporadic because the layers can be present at any depth, and
due to sampling difficulties with standard instruments. In the case of
Dinophysis, the concentration does not depend solely on nutrition, but also on
interactions between physics, life cycle and behavior. This study will determine
the hydrodynamic (e.g. local flow structure, turbulence, stratification, small
gyres and pycnoclines), biological (e.g. growth, nutrition and mortality) and
chemical environment leading to the build up, maintenance and population
dynamics of Dinophysis in thin layers. The field tests will take place under a
variety of hydrodynamic regimes in the Rias of Galicia (NWSpain), the estuarine
plume zones of the Atlantic coast of France, and in the bays of southwestern
Ireland. All are shellfish production areas with history of harvest closures due
to contamination with DSP toxins. The Johns Hopkins group will focus on small-
scale biophysical and particle-particle interactions. By deploying a submersible
holocamera, augmented with a digital holographic cinematography, they will
observe and measure processes and interactions occurring at the critical scales
of 10 mm to 10 cm. Automated data analysis tools will enable the investigators
to process a large database under various conditions that will be used for
parameterizing the behavior of Dinophysis. The results will include: i. The
spatial and size distributions of different classes of particles. Particles
larger than 10 mm are detected, and shapes can be defined in particles larger
than 30 mm. ii. The nearest neighbor distance (NNS) within the same species, and
between species, including predators and prey; iii. The instantaneous 3-D
velocity distributions within the sample volume, which is used for calculating
the local velocity, strain rate, vorticity, dissipation rate and turbulence
intensity; iv. The swimming behavior (speed, trajectory, direction) of
Dinophysis in its local environment; v. Direct observations on behavior, feeding
and grazing of Dinophysis; vi. Conditional statistics of concentration, NNS and
behavior based on local physical and biological
parameters;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Progress in understanding
of population dynamics of different phytoplankton species, including Dinophysis,
requires detailed knowledge of their in-situ concentrations, behavior, and
biophysical interactions. This project will deploy a new but proven/developed
technology in the ocean in order to obtain detailed and unique insight on the
interaction of dinoflagellates with their local biophysical environments. The
results will illuminate processes affecting the formation and maintenance of
thin layers containing Dinophysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;Socio-Economic Issues: HAB adversely affect health, tourism,
fisheries and food production in the coastal ocean, causing closure of
fisheries, illness and even death. This project will obtain essential
information to develop such understanding of the importance of bio-physical
mechanisms in the formation of some HABs. &lt;br/&gt;Education of future
Scientists: Studies of biophysical interactions in the ocean require background
in biology, fluid mechanics, and instrumentation. This project will support one
such student in an interdisciplinary training program. &lt;br/&gt;