* 0402178
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Citizenship in Action: The Construction of Working-Class Political Identity in Three Spanish Cities, 1898-1923
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Jeffrey Goodwin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 7,500.00

In the quarter of a century framed by Spain's 1898 loss of its last overseas
colonial possessions and the 1923 coup initiating the Primo de Rivera
dictatorship, Spanish cities were sites of intense struggle over political
identity. On city streets, republicans, socialists, and anarchosyndicalists
competed for support, with different outcomes across cities. This project ia a
comparative study of the construction of working-class political identity in
Barcelona, Valencia, and Alicante that seeks to explain why cities within the
same national context had very different patterns of working-class political
affiliation during this era, and specifically why the radical anarchosyndicalist
movement was much more successful in some cities than in others. The
dissertation challenges existing theories concerning the determinants of
political identity, developing a new theoretical approach which emphasizes the
importance of forms of urban political practice in the construction of political
citizenship, and by extension in the construction and consolidation of national
states. Hypotheses will be tested through historical-comparative analysis of the
development of forms of political action in these three cities throughout the
25-year period. The primary data source will be periodicals, located in
specialized archives in each locality and at the International Institute of
Social History, Amsterdam; additional evidence will be obtained from local
administrative archives. This project's broader impacts include: The
dissertation contributes to theoretical development in the area of identity-
formation by drawing upon a neglected empirical case to produce an original
theoretical framework with broader implications for understanding both
historical processes and contemporary phenomena, including the relationship of
radical movements to urban protest in the Middle East and Latin America, and,
more broadly, the legitimization of the state versus alternative political
forms. The public presentation of evidence in the form of a photographic
exhibit, documenting the political participation of women and other
underrepresented groups, will contribute to the broader dissemination of
sociological research and theory.