* 0402576
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Employers' Compliance with Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action Legislation on Sex and Racial Workforce Composition
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Bruce Western, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2005
* USD 6,498.00

Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) and Affirmative Action (AA) are two of the
most controversial legislative initiatives since the abolition of slavery.
Employers have radically changed their personnel systems in reaction to these
laws, billions of dollars have been invested in "diversity management," federal
courts have endorsed selected strategies for responding to changes associated
with EEO and AA regulations and rulings, and federal agencies have defined
certain compliance measures as "best practices." But have employers' compliance
efforts been at all effective in changing gender and racial inequality? Were
they effective in the same way for workers from high-skill and low-skill jobs?
And how do these measures work in harsh economic conditions? We have
surprisingly little knowledge with which to answer such questions. This research
will examine the ways employers' EEO and AA compliance measures affected the
integration of women and African Americans in managerial and non-managerial jobs
within American work establishments across varying legal, economic and labor
market conditions from 1971 to 1999. The analysis will use a unique longitudinal
dataset composed of annual Federal EEO-1 reports of the demographic composition
of American work establishments, merged with survey data about the life
histories of a representative sample of more than 800 of these establishments
and supplemented with legal, labor market and economic archival data. Together,
these components comprise the best available dataset for analyzing changes in
employment inequality over time. This research will contribute to our research
and teaching about workplace inequality by: improving our understanding of the
impact of EEO/AA law across varying legal, labor market and economic conditions,
rather than assuming that one type is inherently better than another; refining
organizational theory by identifying mechanisms that produce or reduce sex and
racial inequality; and improving upon previous research by using pooled time-
series fixed-effects methods. The study's broader impact will be to provide
policy makers, civic organizations and organizational consultants with a
comprehensive empirical evaluation of the effectiveness of a wide range of
EEO/AA compliance measures. This knowledge is key for taking effective steps
towards the equal inclusion of women and minorities in American work
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;