* 0402362
* Development and Field Test of a Multimedia Simulation System for Training Aviation Maintenance Technicians via the Internet - Phase II
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2009
* Xueshu Song, Rock Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 05/31/2009
* USD 386,647.00

Engineering-Engineering Technology (58) A multimedia Aviation Maintenance
Training Online simulation system is being developed for asynchronous delivery
via the Internet for aviation maintenance instruction and related technologies.
Three interactive curricular modules are being developed as part of the
simulation system: Aircraft Weight and Balance, Aircraft Circuit Maintenance,
and Turbine Engine Maintenance. These curricular modules are designed to be
adaptive, accessible, time-and-cost effective, pedagogically efficient, and
environmentally friendly. Each curricular module emphasizes a trouble-shooting
approach and scenarios where functional and procedural mechanisms of aircraft
systems are simulated under normal and malfunction conditions, and labor costs
of simulated trouble shooting are monitored in real-time feedback scores
tracking the students' performance. Creative combinations of real video graphic
and schematic illustrations are portrayed in interactive, hands-on simulations.

The project is assessing the effectiveness of these instructional materials by
determining the impacts on decreasing the training time, increasing job
placement and performance, increasing the number of certified aviation workers
prepared for the workforce, and determining the effect the moduels have on
recruiting underrepresented groups into aviation maintenance technology.

The project is creating a network of faculty members from schools with avionics
programs, industry practitioners, and educational specialists, who have
expertise in aviation maintenance, engineering technology, instructional design
and curricular development, and asynchronous learning. Faculty members are
participating in workshops that train them how to use the curriculum,
demonstrate the transportability of the materials, and provide assessment
information to determine the effectiveness of student learning.

The project is focusing on recruiting and retaining women students in the
avionics program. A summer camp for high school students uses the curriculum to
engage the students in hand-on activities. The camp and faculty workshops are
being held concurrently in order to observe how students become engaged in
learning when using this curriculum.