* 0402726
* Late Holocene Sedimentary Archives of Tropical Cyclone Activity from the Northeastern Caribbean
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Howard J. Spero
* 05/31/2006
* USD 99,935.00

Storm-induced deposits resulting from storm surge and waves preserved within
coastal sedimentary environments can provide a record of severe storms. Previous
work has shown that intense hurricane strikes produce a distinctive sedimentary
signature that can be used to reconstruct long-term records of these events.
This proposal focuses on reconstructing sedimentary records of intense
hurricanes from the northeastern Caribbean. Extensive coastal ponds and lagoons
in eastern Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands are well situated to receive
allocthonous sediments during intense hurricane landfalls. These normally low-
energy environments are dominated by fine-grained organic sediments, with the
exception of episodic deposition of coarser-grained mineral sediments from the
beach and near-shore environment during extreme storms. Sediment obtained from a
series of cores from each site can be used to map and date storm-induced
deposits. Significant variability in the frequency of the coarse-grained layers
may indicate that changes in climate have modulated hurricane occurrence in the
northeastern Caribbean during the late Holocene. With the resulting records of
tropical cyclone activity, the links between the frequency of events and known
climate oscillations such as the Little Ice Age and Medieval Warm Period as well
as indices of climate variability such as ENSO and the North Atlantic
Oscillation will be explored.