* 0402513
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Eastern German Women's Organizations and Welfare State Transformation since German Unification
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Robin Stryker, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

This dissertation connects macro and micro perspectives on the welfare state by
exploring the mutually constitutive relationship between local women's
organizations and different levels government in two cities in post-unification
eastern Germany. The project considers how local environments influence women's
organizational efforts in response to changes in the welfare state in two cities
where women's organizing has been subject to different opportunities and
constraints. I will use comparative and narrative approaches to analyze
interview, observational, and archival data to understand how the divergent
histories of the women's movement in these two cities have been shaped by the
local, national, and international contexts from which they emerged. The project
examines the complex fields of action in which women's organizations in these
two cities have been operating since German unification in 1990. By considering
how local women's organizations navigate the state-and, in turn, how different
levels of the state respond to women's organizations-this dissertation also will
illuminate how changes in national and international (European Union) governance
may have differential effects across localized contexts. The broader impacts of
this research include the following: The project will contribute to multiple
areas of sociology, including discussions of gender and the welfare state,
social movements, and post-socialism. The dissertation will improve social
science understanding of how shifting gender relations interact with local
environments and identities to create new understandings of gender relations,
the state, and strategies for resistance and change. The project will also make
important contributions to scholarly, policy, and public debates about social
policy and gender inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;