* 0402738
* Aerosols-Climate Interactions: The Relationship between Desert Dust and Atmospheric Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Nilton Renno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 07/31/2007
* USD 484,582.00

This research project will examine how mineral dust from the surface of arid
land is injected into the atmosphere by strong convective plumes, especially
those whirling ones called "dust devils." The investigators suspect that dust
devils are a significant source of atmospheric dust and therefore affect climate
on regional and global scales. The objectives of this proposal are to measure
the surface flux of dust and its vertical transport and to use those
measurements to develop parameterized representations of this source of dust
from arid regions. Two hypotheses form the basis for this work: (i) coherent
convective plumes and dust devils play a significant role in the vertical
transport of dust; and (ii) the magnitude of that transport is increased when
the surface is disturbed by plowing and other agricultural practices, which also
cause an increase in the intensity of the convective motions. Measurements will
be made at a field site in Arizona using a lidar, a small instrumented aircraft,
and surface instruments. The research will also include testing of a new
instrument that can measure the surface flux of aerosols. A web-based
educational component will describe dust devils and related phenomena and will
contrast how they occur on Earth and on Mars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected
outcome of the research will be to test and refine a proposed new representation
of the amount and distribution of dust that enters the atmosphere through dust
devils and other coherent convective plumes. This parameterized representation
will then be available for inclusion in climate models and other transport
models, which in turn can provide improved estimates of the global distribution
of dust and its effect on the climate system.