* 0402165
* Doctoral Dissertation: Defining the Normal Pregnancy: Knowledge and Experience in Stratified Reproduction
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Troy Duster, New York University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 7,490.00

This project examines the ways that prospective parents construct an
understanding of normality during a pregnancy and the relationship between this
process and broader understandings of cultural reproduction. The
interdisciplinary literature on reproduction thoroughly documents a conception
of in vivo normality, and obstetricians employ the classification of "normal"
pregnancy in the medical management of prenatal care. However, we know little
about the ways prospective parents come to define an idea of normality, what
they grasp as its dimensions, or how they use it. This study will conduct in-
depth interviews with 50 pregnant women at several points during their
pregnancy, interview a strategically selected set of medical professionals who
work with pregnant women, and analyze the content of medical and self-help
pregnancy literature. This research will provide a detailed account of the
process by which pregnancies are defined and experienced by a diverse group of
women in light of the influence of the powerful normalizing discourse of
obstetric medicine and will explore the importance of people's economic status
and stage of pregnancy in the formation of understanding what is normal in a
pregnancy. I will seek to identify the key conditions and processes that
influence the ways by which people give meaning to the experiences, risks, and
decisions that characterize a pregnancy. The broader impacts of this research
include the following: The project will contribute to the interdisciplinary
literatures linking gender, reproduction, and medicine. Findings of this study
will enhance our knowledge of doctor-patient communication and decision-making
in prenatal care, particularly for otherwise underrepresented groups of women.
It will help us understand how the construction and communication of ideas about
a normal pregnancy can promote or obstruct the efforts of medical practitioners
to provide information and care to pregnant women and pregnant women's efforts
to seek care. Finally, through dissemination, this research has the potential to
improve obstetric practices and contribute to better outcomes for women and
their children.