* 0402191
* GEM: Development and Application of Magnetospheric Equilibrium Magnetic Field Models
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Frank Toffoletto, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 03/31/2009
* USD 180,000.00

This project will compute a set of three dimensional equilibrium solutions for
Earth's inner and middle magnetosphere using recently developed empirical models
of Earth's magnetospheric magnetic field and pressure distributions as inputs to
an MHD (magnetohydrodynamic) equilibrium solver. An essential part of the
proposed research project will be the modification of the equilibrium solver to
include the effects of anisotropic pressure and to investigate how this
modification affects the resulting equilibria. This work will create useful
inputs for a variety of modeling and data analysis efforts that are of interest
to the Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) program as well as to the wider space
physics communities. The computed equilibrium solutions, as well as relevant
software to interrogate and display the results, will be made available for use
by the scientific community at large. The equilibrium solutions will be binned
according to the same set of solar wind conditions as used in the empirical
models. The model results will be used to address several interesting and
significant scientific questions. The equilibrium solutions will allow for
consistency checks between the empirical plasma and magnetic-field models to
determine how close the independently calculated models are to equilibrium. In
addition, the equilibrium results will be used to investigate the pressure
balance inconsistency and to explore the plasma pressure and magnetic-field
gradients responsible for the generation of field-aligned currents. In the inner
magnetosphere the ring current pressure is known to be anisotropic. An open
question is, does plasma pressure anisotropy play an important role in the
configuration and electrodynamics of the inner magnetosphere? The use of these
new equilibrium models will make it possible to answer this and related
questions.