* 0402589
* U.S.-Mexico Dissertation Enhancement: Marine Population Connectivity Across the U.S./Mexican Border: A Genetic Approach to Dispersal Dynamics in Kelp Bass
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Steven Gaines, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/2007
* USD 26,172.00

0402589&lt;br/&gt;Gaines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U. S.-Mexico award will
support Ms. Kimberly Selkoe's dissertation research under the supervision of Dr.
Steven D. Gaines of the University of California, Santa Barbara. Ms. Selkoe
intends to work with Dr. Lydia Ladah, and her graduate students at the Centro de
Investigacion Cientifica y de Educacion Superior de Ensenada, (CICESE), Baja
California to collect kelp bass tissue samples at 7 sites and monitor and
collect recruits at 2 sites along the Pacific coast of Baja, Mexico. These
Mexican sites are crucial components of the range-wide sampling array Ms. Selkoe
is using to map the dispersal patterns of kelp bass. She will genotype the kelp
bass tissue samples with 7 microsatellite markers that she previously developed
and apply a genetic approach called genotype assignment (GA) to estimate
dispersal patterns in the kelp bass Paralabrax clathratus. By comparing the
dispersal patterns to detailed oceanographic data from the region, she will
address hypotheses on the role of flow in dispersal dynamics across several
spatial and temporal scales, with particular focus on connectivity across the
U.S./Mexico border.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As fisheries around the world continue
to crash, there is an urgent need to better understand the population dynamics
of marine species. Empirical knowledge of population dynamics in the sea is
basic at best, largely due to the challenge of studying the open sea larval
phases that provide the link between generations and across locations. The
question of the scale and variability of larval dispersal, and, consequently,
the degree of connectivity among populations, remains largely unanswered.
Successful fisheries management will depend on knowing accurate scales of
population connectivity and the effects of flow dynamics on these scales through
time and space. The Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of International
Science and Engineering are jointly funding this thesis dissertation research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;