* 0402122
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Artificial Photosynthesis: Manganese Complexes for the Oxidation of Water to Mimic Photosystem II
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Susan Schofer, Schofer                 Susan          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2006
* USD 111,800.00

0402122 Schofer

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month fellowship by Dr. Susan J. Schofer to
work with Professor Bjorn Akermark and Dr. Licheng Sun, Stockholm University
(Organic Chemistry, primary hosts); Professor Leif Hammarstrom, Uppsala
University (Physical Chemistry) and Professor Stenbjorn Styring, Lund University
(Biochemistry, collaborators in the Consortium for Artificial Photosynthesis
(CAP)).

This project is aimed at the development and study of novel manganese complexes
that use energy from sunlight to catalyze the production of dioxygen from water,
with the ultimate goal of coupling this process to a catalytic reaction that
produced dihydrogen from water for use as a fuel. The development of an
efficient and practical energy system from an environmentally friendly and
renewable source is critical to the survival and further progress of mankind.
Splitting water into dihydrogen and dioxygen in a reaction driven by light
represents a promising approach to addressing this energy need; utilizing
principles based on natural photosynthesis (the process by which plants convert
sunlight into chemical energy) to design an artificial system for manganese-
catalyzed production of dioxygen from water is a significant component of this
goal. We are developing a novel manganese trimer, which may be attached to a
light-harvesting molecule to combine these critical components and may be
capable of accomplishing the goal of catalytic dioxygen generation from water.
Current work involves the synthesis and characterization of the trimeric
manganese complex. Once this is accomplished, we will investigate the reactivity
of this compound for its ability to catalytically oxidize water to dioxygen. If
this is possible, we will couple this species to a light-harvesting complex that
can ultimately drive this process using energy from the sun. Through this
project, the PI will learn a variety of new techniques while pursuing a project
that will enhance current understanding of the role of manganese complexes in
the oxidation of water to dioxygen. Any results of research in this field should
be disseminated broadly to promote technological advances in the global search
for new energy sources.