* 0402088
* International Research Fellowship Program: The Molecular Evolution of Floral Regulatory and Environmental Stress-Induced Genes in an Andean Adaptive Radiation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Jason Rauscher, Rauscher Jason T
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2005
* USD 80,436.00

0401817 Rauscher

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Jason Rauscher
to work with Dr. Santiago Madrinan at the Universidad de Los Andes in Bogota,
Colombia.

Certain groups of closely related organisms, known as adaptive radiations, are
characterized by an exceptional degree of morphological and ecological
diversity. Unfortunately, little is understood as to the genetic variation that
is responsible for this diversity. Recent studies in plants have suggested that
rates of evolution in floral-regulatory genes (those responsible for the
development and organ identity of vegetative and reproductive structures) are
elevated in adaptive radiations when compared to similar genes in closely
related, low-diversity groups or compared to other non-regulatory genes. If this
pattern holds true in other plant adaptive radiations, it may help us begin to
understand better the genetic origins of biological diversity. The aim of this
project is to test rates of molecular evolution in these genes in another plant
adaptive radiation. The Espeletia complex of northern South America is an
exceptional example of adaptive radiation from the high Andes Mountains. These
species include everything from tiny herbaceous rosettes to giant rosettes to
tall trees, and have adapted to a diversity of ecological conditions, making
them an excellent group for such a study. Floral regulatory genes, including
APETALA1, APETALA2, AGAMOUS and PISTILLATA are being sequenced for several
species in the Espeletia complex, as well as in their closest relatives,
Ichthyothere and Smallanthus. In addition, a dehydrin-encoding gene thought to
be responsible for adaptation to environmental stresses such as drought and cold
resistance is being sequenced. By comparing rates of evolution and the number of
protein-altering genetic mutations between species, the hypothesis of
accelerated sequence evolution in regulatory and environmental stress genes is
being tested, while at the same time, patterns of genetic diversity are being
measured to test for evidence of the effect of natural selection. This research
is helping to realize a better understanding of the genetic factors involved in
plant adaptive radiations.