* 0402461
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Non-Governmental Organizational Conflicts over Amazonian Nature
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2004,08/31/2005
* Dianne Rocheleau, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2005
* USD 11,360.00

In recent decades, indigenous movements in the Amazon and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) from the U.S. and other nations have increasingly formed
alliances around environmental and human rights issues. These transnational
social movement networks were initially described as uniformly successful, but
growing numbers of studies have highlighted the problematic politics inherent to
this form of activism. These analyses, however, have focused only on the
relationships between the indigenous groups and the NGOs. Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement project will explore the relationships among the
environmental and human rights organizations that constitute indigenous people's
advocacy base in the U.S. and other developed nations. More specifically, the
project will investigate associations among member organizations of the Amazon
Alliance, an international coalition of environmental, human rights, and
indigenous organizations working to protect the rights of indigenous peoples and
their environment. By examining the involvement of the nine founding member
organizations of the Amazon Alliance from 1990 to 2002, this research will
determine what unites and divides the outwardly allied organizations in this
social movement network. Through document analysis, interviews with NGO staff
and indigenous representatives, surveys, and participant observation, this
project will determine why these NGOs initially cooperated to form the Amazon
Alliance and what points of divergence have developed over time. The research
will investigate changes in programming, alliances, and language to show that
differences exist among the NGOs in their understandings of certain concepts
central to this social movement network. Particular attention will be given to
examining how the meanings, visions, and priorities surrounding the defense of
indigenous "territories," the preservation of "biodiversity," and the promotion
of "sustainability" in the Amazon Basin vary radically between the member NGOs.

This project will contribute to social movement theory and current efforts in
the fields of political science, sociology, and geography to investigate the
interplay among discourse, meaning and social movement dynamics. It will explore
how differences in underlying meanings ascribed to a place, the Amazon
rainforest, can impact the micro-politics of NGO relations and whether these
differences may, in fact, destroy alliances. Study result will be useful to NGO
professionals and indigenous leaders in the Amazon basin by providing much-
needed information about the linkages so many indigenous movements have come to
depend on for political voice. The study may help determine whether an alliance
between environmentalists and human rights groups is an ephemeral phenomenon or
a more durable vehicle to pursue social justice. The results of this research
may strengthen coalition-building between members of the Amazon Alliance and
other networks of its kind. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.