* 0402685
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of Holocene Seasonality and Inter-annual Variability Along the California Current System
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Stephen Schellenberg, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/2008
* USD 99,240.00

Under this award the PIs will perform an integrated data-modeling study of
Holocene oceanographic changes along the NE Pacific margin to understand the
impact of Holocene climatic and oceanographic changes on marine and terrestrial
communities (including human populations) along the NE Pacific Margin. The
paleoenvironmental data will come from oxygen isotope, minor element, and 14C
analyses of dated mollusk shells from archaeological sites in central California
and British Columbia. Most of these shells have already been individually dated
via 14C analysis as part of a project supported by NSF Geology & Paleontology.
By coupling these three biogeochemical tracers, and examining both bulk samples
(which integrate several years of growth) and intraskeletal growth series (which
provide weekly-to-monthly temporal resolution), the PIs can reconstruct
millennial, inter-annual, and seasonal variability in ocean temperature,
upwelling intensity, and freshwater flux to the coastal zone. Through studies of
extant mollusks, the PIs will develop species-specific isotope and minor element
calibrations and assess the levels of variance inherent to nearshore species. To
place the data in broader context, the PIs will use globaland regional-scale
coupled atmosphere-ocean models to study the impact of changes in climate
forcing on ocean currents, surface temperature, upwelling, and precipitation on
a variety of time scales. Comparison of model results with proxy data will
permit model performance, and may reveal key gaps in the proxy record. In
addition to gaining insight into the factors driving climatic and oceanographic
change along the NE Pacific margin, the PIs will use our climate data to test
hypotheses for Holocene anthropological and paleoecological transitions.