* 0402163
* GEM: Impact of Coupling and Feedback Processes in Geospace on Ring Current Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2004,09/30/2007
* Janet Kozyra, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 09/30/2007
* USD 328,000.00

The dynamics of the ring current is the predominant source of the magnetic
variations that produce a magnetic storm. It is clear from observations over the
last solar cycle that ring current dynamics during magnetic storms couples
strongly to other regions of geospace. This project will combine models and
observations to uncover the linkages and feedbacks between the ring current and
these other regions. Two influential factors will be investigated as part of the
proposed effort:(1) inner magnetospheric ion precipitation zones and their
relation to stretched magnetic configurations, and (2) global sawtooth
oscillations and their impact on the ring current. A set of magnetic storms has
been selected for detailed comparative analysis during this research project.
For each focus topic, it is expected to achieve: (1) clarification of the nature
of the selected coupling and feedback mechanism; (2) advancement of our
knowledge of geospace as a complex natural system; and (3) improvement of our
ability to simulate the magnetospheric system on a global scale. The analysis
will employ two codes developed at the University of Michigan. The first is the
Ring Current Atmosphere Interaction Model (RAM), which now includes a self-
consistent electric field model. The second is the Comprehensive Space
Environment Model (CSEM), which now includes two-way coupling between the
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulation code and the kinetic Rice Convection Model
(RCM), improving the accuracy of the inner magnetospheric results. Data sets
used to constrain, validate, and/or drive the simulations include: particle
observations on the geosynchronous Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)
satellites; ion precipitation from National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration/Polar Operational Environmental Satellites (NOAA/POES); thermal
plasma observations and polar cap potential from the Defense Meteorological
Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites; Energetic Neutral Atom (ENA) images from
Imager for Magnetopause-to-Aurora Global Exploration/High Energy Neutral Atom
(IMAGE/HENA) and Medium-Energy Neutral Atom (MENA) instruments; plasmasphere
observations from IMAGE/EUV (Extreme Ultraviolet Imager); magnetic field
observations from Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES); and
ground-based magnetometer data. The study will be the basis for a graduate
student's Ph.D. dissertation. Study results will improve scientific
understanding of a number of unanswered magnetic storm questions and the results
will be made public through presentations and publications. The project will
benefit society by improving scientific understanding of some important physical
processes responsible for space weather effects, such as Global Positioning
System (GPS) errors and satellite anomalies.