* 0402215
* Florida Advanced Technological Education (FL-ATE) Regional Center for Manufacturing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Marilyn Barger, Hillsborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2010
* USD 2,741,971.00

The Florida Advanced Technology Education (FL-ATE) Regional Center for
Manufacturing is creating a state-wide educational resource for manufacturing-
related curriculum, content and activities. The Center includes a statewide
educational delivery system that contains curriculum, content, and technical
programs to support high performance manufacturing within the region. It is
doing so by adapting material already developed elsewhere, or by creating needed
region-specific manufacturing curriculum, content, activities and services that
do not currently exist. In addition, the Center is creating a Manufacturing
Education Awareness System (MEAS) that promotes manufacturing careers, honors
outstanding manufacturing education champions and educators, and fosters
industry supported academic scholarships in manufacturing education. The Center
supports a faculty development program that updates faculty technical and
educational skills to correspond to best practices for modern high performance
manufacturing in the State. The overall aim is to create an exciting
manufacturing and technology educational environment for the
region&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The Florida Advanced
Technology Educational Center serves as a curriculum content resource for high
performance manufacturing training and education for all community college,
manufacturing, and technology related educational programs and institutions
within the State. It facilitates adoption and adaptation of NSF-ATE's National
Center for Manufacturing Education's curriculum content. It is developing a
manufacturing educational community that meets the high performance needs of the
State's industry. It is developing a Linked Distance Learning curriculum system
that provides fundamental improvement to teaching and learning by use of state-
of-the-art instructional technology. It is encouraging best practices, projects,
and programs based on regional needs as determined by state or regional
financial support and clear articulation of the need by partners and
affiliates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;FL-ATE activities
impact technical education across the State of Florida. It is developing best
practice demonstration projects and centers with industry. It is developing a
unifying model for manufacturing education through out the State. It is
providing productive interaction models with Hispanic and African-American
communities. It is producing a unified manufacturing academic community that is
a timely, effective, and comprehensive technician training resource for the
region's manufacturing companies. It will, by year 3, include, as partners, all
of the community colleges, high schools and technical schools with manufacturing
and related technology programs within the State. It will impact, by year 4, at
least 2,000 technology- focused students per year.&lt;br/&gt;