* 0402313
* GEM: Effect of Multiple Substorms on the Buildup of the Ring Current
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Kristi Keller, SP Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/2007
* USD 80,793.00

This project will examine the conditions that lead to a buildup of the Earth's
ring current during magnetic storms. It will utilize the Community Coordinated
Modeling Center (CCMC) at Goddard Space Flight Center to simulate the
development of the ring current. The global magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
simulation models at the CCMC can be coupled to the ring current model developed
by M.-C. Fok. There are three main objectives to this project. The first is to
determine the relative importance of multiple substorms within a storm on the
ring current dynamics. The second objective is to examine how different solar
wind conditions can affect the buildup of the ring current. The third is to
simulate GEM campaign events and compare to satellite data to monitor the
performance of the simulation. The Fok Ring Current Model will be driven using
magnetic fields and ionospheric potentials from MHD simulations. The first two
objectives will be met using simulated solar wind data to drive the MHD
simulations so that effects of individual solar wind and preconditioning
properties can be better isolated. MHD simulations of dipolarization events will
be used to determine the relative importance of ionospheric potential and
inductive electric fields on ring current dynamics. The second part of the study
will vary the solar wind magnetic field and the solar wind density to determine
the relative importance of these factors on the buildup of the ring current. The
third part will use solar wind data from the ACE satellite to simulate actual
events and compare the results to Los Alamos geosynchronous satellite data. The
project will help provide a better understanding of the coupled nonlinear
dynamical system using computer simulations. This is a fundamental problem for
future space weather predictions and for geospace modeling. The study will test
the ring current and MHD models that may be used for space weather prediction.
Since the models are available to the scientific community through runs on
request by the Community Coordinated Modeling Center, any improvements to the
models resulting from this work will be available to the scientific community.