* 0402139
* Bio-Link ATE National Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Elaine Johnson, City College of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,227,487.00

Bio-Link -- the ATE Center for Biotechnology - is transitioning to an ATE
National Resource Center. This project focuses on (1) refining Bio-Link's best
national practices and (2) implementing a new approach to regional and local
work that builds upon Bio-Link's strengths. Together, these practices
consolidate and expand Bio-Link's position as a national resource for advancing
the education of biotechnology technicians at community and technical colleges
nationwide. Bio-Link's National Center, hosted by City College of San Francisco
(CCSF), provides leadership to a network of Regional Centers using a coordinated
national strategy with local implementation. The Regional Centers reside at two-
year colleges nationwide: Northeast (New Hampshire Community Technical College);
Southeast (Alamance Community College); North Central (Madison Area Technical
College); South Central (Austin Community College); Northwest (Shoreline
Community College); Northern California (CCSF); and Southwest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-Link's mission is to strengthen and expand
biotechnology technician education at two-year colleges throughout the nation in
order to (1) increase the number and diversity of well-trained technicians in
the workforce; (2) meet the needs of industry for appropriately trained
technicians; and (3) institutionalize community college educational practices
that make modern, high-quality education in the concepts, skills, and ethics of
biotechnology available to all students. Bio-Link supports its mission through:
(1) providing support for students and technicians; (2) improving instruction
and learning; (3) sharing information and resources; and (4) fostering
collaborations and partnerships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-Link is continuing
several national practices: the Web Site (with appropriate refinements and
continual updating); the online Curriculum and Instructional Materials
Clearinghouse; and the National Longitudinal Program Survey and online
directory. It is beginning three new endeavors: development of a national
equipment registry, creation of a student and faculty internship program, and
pursuit of cross-disciplinary partnerships with other ATE Centers and projects.
Bio-Link's new approach is both regional and local in nature. The Regional
Centers provide services and products that build on Bio-Link's proven strengths
but that are most effective when tailored to local needs: professional
development workshops; pedagogical training and use of industry instructors;
short courses; curriculum development; and articulation assistance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project resides in its
focus on biotechnology, a multidisciplinary industry that warrants significant
attention in today's climate, one in which threats against homeland security and
health loom large and in which medicine evolves with great speed. Moreover, the
industry provides technicians with opportunities to advance rapidly into high-
wage positions. With respect to broader impacts, Bio-Link, has influenced
science education in general through materials and techniques developed within
its network. With its partners, it has piqued industry's interest in hiring
community college graduates, and has opened doors for underrepresented
populations. Bio-Link is expanding its broad dissemination of cutting-edge
resources to improve teaching practice and educational access. &lt;br/&gt;