* 0402447
* Collaborative Learning for Secure Logistics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Noel Greis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 06/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This project is developing, implementing and evaluating an innovative web-
centric, Collaborative Learning Environment (CLE), and a set of instructional
tools that feature emerging technologies for secure logistics. This is leading
to 1) faster, more effective training in global logistics practices and
technologies; 2) support of critical training in "secure" logistics in the wake
of 9/11; and 3) providing targeted logistics education and training for global
industry. The CLE is being developed and tested jointly by the University of
North Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill and Lenoir Community College (LCC) in
Kinston, NC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized under the leadership
of the North Carolina Consortium for &lt;br/&gt;Logistics Education (NCCLE), a
consortium of educational institutions and industries in eastern North Carolina
led by LCC and UNC. The state-of-the-art logistics laboratory and distance
learning facilities at the Education and Training Center (ETC) of the North
Carolina Global TransPark (GTP) is assisting with broader
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This innovative new
educational platform, available completely&lt;br/&gt;online, is supporting both
existing and new programs including: 1) the new online A.A.S. Global Logistics
Technology (GLT) degree program offered by LCC; 2) diploma programs for
technician training at the community college level; 3) logistics certification
programs for professional organizations; and 4) customized training programs for
local, state and national industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed CLE
represents a fundamental change in how logistics is taught-moving&lt;br/&gt;from
traditional written curricula to online collaborative exercises that are
consistent with current trends in business and secure logistics. The focus of
this project is on training students to understand the use and impact of
emerging new technologies for real-time visibility and control of the logistics
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project is responding to a
pressing industry need for technicians who are trained to use new technologies
(such as RFID tags, scanners, intelligent software, etc.) and practices that are
being implemented to protect the country from disruptive events-from terrorist
attack to natural disaster. The CLE and supporting tools have been designed to
be accessible to nontraditional students from disadvantaged NC groups (at-risk
teens, Hispanics) and women, as well as individuals trapped in stagnant
industries who seek to transition to the logistics field. The program is
completely available online, and thus is available to students anywhere across
the country. North Carolina has approved a new tuition structure that will also
make it more affordable to disadvantaged and other out-of-state students.
&lt;br/&gt;