* 0402891
* NIRT: Nanostructured Functionally Graded Metalloceramic Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2010
* Jack Lemons, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 05/31/2010
* USD 1,350,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT: Nanoscale Structures, Novel Phenomena,
and Quantum Control. This award to University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) is
to study nanostructured metalloceramic materials that show a seamless transition
from a nanostructured bulk metal to a nanostructured ceramic surface. With this
award, Professor Vohra and his team consisting of physicists, biomaterial and
biomedical engineers, cell biologist and an industrial partner will develop
wear-resistant and cell friendly biomaterials coatings for use in orthopedic
implants, which would benefit from having a metallic core along with ultra-hard
and smooth nanostructured ceramic articulating surfaces. The fundamental
understanding of materials science, mechanical wear behavior and cell biology of
nanostructured metalloceramic biomaterials would be an outcome of this award,
and these studies may lead to better performance of these materials in the human
body. There will be three primary thrust areas with this award: 1) develop
processing science and technology for reducing friction and wear on the
articulating, load-bearing components of total hip and knee metallic implants by
depositing various ternary (Titanium-Boron Nitride and Boron-Carbon Nitride)
nanostructured functionally graded metalloceramic coatings with hardness greater
than 50 Giga Pascal; 2) demonstrate enhanced adhesion, wear resistance, and
surface hardness of these coatings over the current state-of-the-art materials;
and 3) perform in vitro studies to compare the adhesion and osteoblastic
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells on the nanostructured metalloceramic
surfaces with standard micron-scale hydroxyapatite and titanium. A leading
manufacturer of biomedical implants will evaluate the nanostructured
functionally graded metalloceramic materials developed by this award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will help to provide an innovative
nanotechnology workforce development program with core courses and workshops in
nanostructured biomaterials, interaction of cells with biomaterials surfaces and
commercialization of nanotechnology tools and materials. The graduate students
supported by this award will have a semester-long internship at industry. A
Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) program in nanoscale science and its
applications will be implemented with active participation of underrepresented
minority teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Directorate for
Engineering jointly fund this award.