* 0402061
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Diversification of Amazonian Tree Lineages
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Paul V. Fine, Fine                    Paul           V
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2006
* USD 28,420.00

0402061 Fine

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Paul Fine
to work with Dr. Asuncion Cano at the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos
in Lima, Peru. This project will receive support from a University of Michigan
Society of Fellows fellowship in addition to this award.

The project is entitled "The diversification of Amazonian tree lineages: the
role of environmental variation versus geographic distance." The goal of the
project is to examine evolutionary relationships between sister populations of
habitat endemic trees to reveal the ultimate causes of speciation in the genus
Protium (Burseraceae), a common group of Amazonian trees which includes numerous
edaphic (soil) specialists. Most evolutionary biologists believe that allopatric
speciation (species formation by means of spatial isolation) is the dominant
mechanism of diversification. The alternative hypothesis, that species diverge
by means of parapatric speciation (species formation due to local adaptation to
environmental variation in the absence of spatial isolation) is theoretically
sound, has been supported by recent empirical studies, but remains untested in
Amazonian trees.

This is the first direct evaluation of parapatric speciation in Amazonian
forests. First, the relative importance of edaphic heterogeneity and geographic
distance are being evaluated in the structuring of populations of four common
Amazonian tree species that have subspecific or varietal specialists on both
white sand and clay soils. Next, the traits required for edaphic specialization
are being measured, and the presence of gene flow between neighboring
populations of white sand and clay populations quantified to see whether these
species exhibit morphological divergence in the two soil types, even in the face
of gene flow between populations. Unraveling the genealogy of each of these
closely related taxa offers the opportunity to study the integration of micro
and macro-evolutionary processes - how populations within a species become
subdivided due to environmental variation and geographic distance, and the
ultimate causes of speciation in this group.

Director Cano is providing valuable experience in the National Herbarium, which
houses many important collections from the Neotropics. One of this project's
broader impacts is to pilot an extension of new databasing technology at the
National Herbarium in Peru. This project represents a unique opportunity to
build the foundation for future specimen-based research integrating phylogeny,
biogeography, and ecological studies of tropical plants in Peru for students and
faculty all over the world. In sum, this project contributes to a greater
understanding of the processes that lead to diversification in Amazonian trees
and is stimulating collaborations between scientists and students in Peru,
Brazil, and the United States.