* 0402623
* Houston Alliance for Minority Participation Project
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2009
* John Bear, University of Houston
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2009
* USD 5,085,500.00

HOUSTON LOUIS STOKES ALLIANCE FOR MINORITY PARTICIPATION.PHASE II &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Houston-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(H-LSAMP) consortium consisting of 6 &lt;br/&gt;universities, 2 community
colleges, and a school district, will build upon its Phase I foundation to
&lt;br/&gt;implement a realistic, comprehensive plan to: a) recruit well-
qualified minority students in STEM &lt;br/&gt;disciplines; b) enhance retention
rates by focusing on individual retention issues, and; c) ensure that
&lt;br/&gt;each student graduates with a clear career goal and the preparation
to achieve it. The H-LSAMP will &lt;br/&gt;maintain its management structure,
its recruitment and selection process, and will continue to provide
&lt;br/&gt;financial support in the form of stipends to its H-LSAMP scholars.
Scholars will earn their stipends by &lt;br/&gt;performing activities associated
with their training, such as working in research laboratories. The
H-&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP will maintain its successful Collaborative Learning Community
model in which scholars are &lt;br/&gt;required to attend rigorous excellence
workshops associated with core courses such as calculus and
&lt;br/&gt;chemistry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the H-LSAMP will
implement processes to educate the scholars about career opportunities
&lt;br/&gt;open to well-prepared graduates, and monitor and counsel them to
optimize the likelihood of on-time &lt;br/&gt;graduation. Strong emphasis will
be placed on encouraging students to pursue graduate degrees and
&lt;br/&gt;preparing them for entry to graduate school. To this end, the H-LSAMP
will plan and execute regularly &lt;br/&gt;scheduled workshops and forums about
STEM careers and graduate education, emphasizing the &lt;br/&gt;leadership
opportunities open to those with doctoral degrees in these fields. The H-LSAMP
will &lt;br/&gt;respond to the need for improved communication skills by
providing formal written communications &lt;br/&gt;skills training.
Concurrently, a protocol for routine monitoring and documenting student progress
that &lt;br/&gt;includes periodic individual assessment and follow-up meetings
with a staff member will be designed &lt;br/&gt;and employed. The H-LSAMP will
contribute to the growing body of knowledge about retention of
&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate minority STEM students by using accepted research
methods to determine the relative &lt;br/&gt;contributions of factors believed
to be important to retention in this population. Last, because
&lt;br/&gt;information management is important to the success of programs such
as the LSAMP, a state-of-the-art &lt;br/&gt;information management software
program developed specifically for the H-LSAMP will be made &lt;br/&gt;available
to other institutions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies primarily in the generation of important new knowledge about
&lt;br/&gt;factors that contribute to retention and success in the population of
underrepresented minorities, &lt;br/&gt;primarily Hispanics and African-
Americans pursuing STEM baccalaureate degrees in Texas. One can
&lt;br/&gt;reasonably expect much of this knowledge to be generalizable to
Hispanics and African-Americans in &lt;br/&gt;other geographic areas of the U.S.
Once the results of an innovative student-centered plan that combines
&lt;br/&gt;application of educational principles with a standardized counseling
and monitoring protocol are known, &lt;br/&gt;the educational community will
have a model for assessing and responding to needs of individual
&lt;br/&gt;minority STEM students as they progress through their college
careers. The commitment of the H-&lt;br/&gt;LSAMP leaders, faculty, and staff is
well-documented, and evidence of institutionalization of the &lt;br/&gt;program
includes the commitment of physical facilities and an institutional to NSF match
of &lt;br/&gt;approximately 1.5:1. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this project lies in its potential to greatly increase the numbers of well-
focused, &lt;br/&gt;minority graduates who graduate from our institutions
inspired and prepared to pursue career goals. The &lt;br/&gt;expectation is that
a high proportion will aspire to attend graduate school, swelling the ranks of
the next &lt;br/&gt;generation of scientific leaders and educators. Finally, the
H-LSAMP will have the potential to enhance &lt;br/&gt;the success and impact of
similar programs by making available proprietary software that facilitates the
&lt;br/&gt;data collection, retrieval, analysis, and reporting required for
effective, efficient operation. &lt;br/&gt;