* 0402068
* Harmonic analysis and Lie groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Gestur Olafsson, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Olafsson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with a
variety of problems in modern harmonic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;It combines ideas and
problems from abstract harmonic analysis&lt;br/&gt;and representation theory on
Lie groups related to&lt;br/&gt;symmetric spaces with tools and questions
well&lt;br/&gt;known from classical Euclidean harmonic analysis. Our list
of&lt;br/&gt;problems includes a detailed study of series of representations
occurring&lt;br/&gt;in the regular representation on Pseudo-Riemannian symmetric
spaces and, in&lt;br/&gt;particular, geometric realizations of those
representations using&lt;br/&gt;tools from complex analysis. Part of this study
is the interplay between&lt;br/&gt;special functions and the spherical character
of representations&lt;br/&gt;occurring discretely in the regular
representation.&lt;br/&gt;Our study also includes compactification&lt;br/&gt;of
symmetric spaces, application of representation theory to special
functions,&lt;br/&gt;in particular, Laguerre functions and
polynomials.&lt;br/&gt;On the other hand the proposal includes problems related
to wavelet theory,&lt;br/&gt;function spaces on cones and other symmetric
spaces, in particular,&lt;br/&gt;Besov spaces. The proposed work combines
methods and ideas from several areas&lt;br/&gt;of mathematics: Complex analysis,
group actions on manifolds and function&lt;br/&gt;spaces, in particular, Besov,
Fock, and Hardy spaces, and classical harmonic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;It even
borrows some ideas from applied mathematics. Parts of the proposed work will
be&lt;br/&gt;done in collaboration with our students as well as specialists in
USA and Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harmonic analysis has its origin
in the work of Fourier on the heat equation,&lt;br/&gt;which led him to consider
the expansion of a periodic functions into superposition&lt;br/&gt;of
trigonometric functions. This can be interpreted either as the
spectral&lt;br/&gt;decomposition of the differential operators with constant
coefficients, or&lt;br/&gt;as decomposition of regular representation into
irreducible representations.&lt;br/&gt;In short, the subject of harmonic
analysis is to study functions or&lt;br/&gt;function spaces by decomposing the
functions into simpler functions. In&lt;br/&gt;the theory of differential
equations this decomposition means to write&lt;br/&gt;an arbitrary functions as
a sum or integral of eigenfunctions. In several&lt;br/&gt;applications, as in
image processing, the wavelets shows up as the basic&lt;br/&gt;atoms used to
approximate or represent the signal. If we have a symmetry&lt;br/&gt;group
acting on the system, then we would like to write an
arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;function as a sum of functions that transforms in a simple
and controllable&lt;br/&gt;way under the symmetry group, leading to
representation theory of&lt;br/&gt;the symmetry group. Both aspects usually
involve the study of integral&lt;br/&gt;transforms and the corresponding kernel
function.&lt;br/&gt;