* 0402845
* Support for International Council for Science (ICSU) Environmental and Global Change Activities
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Thomas Rosswall, International Science Council
* Continuing Grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 02/28/2009
* USD 2,931,000.00

ICSU will bring together international scientific communities to address
pressing and intellectually challenging global topics, among which are the World
Climate Research Program (WCRP); the biological diversity program, DIVERSITS;
and the efforts of the Earth System Science Partnership (ESSP) to develop new
studies on comprehensive global issues of food, carbon, water and health are of
particular importance. ICSU facilitates intellectual cross-fertilization across
broad fields of environmental science and serves both a scientific and a
societal imperative by supporting international advancement of knowledge and of
understanding while improving future ability to respond to environmental
challenges in realistic ways. &lt;br/&gt;ICSU activities in environment and
global change will focus over the next year on natural and manmade hazards;
global observing systems; new environment science-related initiatives;
vulnerability and resilience to multiple climate/global change stresses;
planning for science associated with the Fourth International Polar Year (IPY);
and scenarios to assess the status of the environment at both global and
regional scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICSU will support activities of the WCRP
related to further development of the Global Energy and &lt;br/&gt;Water Cycle
Experiment (GEWEX), Stratospheric Processes and their Role in Climate (SPARC);
&lt;br/&gt;the Climate Variability and Predictability (CLIVAR) Study; the study
of Climate and Cryosphere &lt;br/&gt;(CliC); and the Global Earth Observing
System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICSU will support implementation of the DIVERSITAS
Science Plan that focuses on three core &lt;br/&gt;projects - BioDISCOVERY,
dedicated to taxonomy, monitoring and drivers of biodiversity change;
&lt;br/&gt;EcoSERVICES, dedicated to biodiversity, ecosystem functioning and
services; &lt;br/&gt;BioSUSTAINABILITY, dedicated to science at the basis of
conservation and sustainable &lt;br/&gt;development. Progress in these core
projects will be presented to and reviewed in the first &lt;br/&gt;DIVERSITAS
Open Science Conference in Oaxaca, Mexico, in November 2005. ICSU will also
&lt;br/&gt;support efforts of the ESSP to develop new studies on comprehensive
global issues of food, &lt;br/&gt;carbon, water and health that are of
particular importance. The latter cross-cutting programs &lt;br/&gt;will bring
together under the aegis of the ESSP scientists in many countries cooperating
through &lt;br/&gt;the WCRP, DIVERSITAS, the International Geosphere-Biosphere
Program (IGBP); and the&lt;br/&gt;International Human Dimensions (of Global
Environmental Change) Program (IHDP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;