* 0402150
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Investigation of the Ecology of Business Start-Up Survival
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Edward Feser, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 11,951.00

Business start-ups are widely recognized as important sources of innovation and
long-run regional growth. Most start-ups fail within the first few years of
existence, however, and failure rates vary considerably across industries. To
explain such variation, recent studies have identified barriers to start-up
survival, including an industry's minimum efficient scale of production and
uncertainty associated with emerging markets for new products. The purpose of
this Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project is to investigate
whether the local economic environment in which a new firm operates influences
the likelihood of its survival. Specifically, this study tests whether proximity
to three key sources of Marshallian spatial externalities (labor pools, input
suppliers, and knowledge spillovers) influences survival rates for start-up
establishments in several manufacturing and advanced producer services sectors.
Spatial externalities are likely sources of geographic variation in survival for
two main reasons. First, spatial externalities enable smaller firms to reap
external benefits of scale to offset internal scale disadvantages. Second, they
help ensure successful innovation through the beneficial effects of knowledge
spillovers. The study will use several complimentary analytical methods,
including exploratory spatial analytical techniques, life-table analysis, and
event-duration regression models. A new spatial modeling technique
(Geographically Weighted Regression) will be used to test whether the
relationship between externalities and survival is a spatially non-stationary
process, as suggested by studies of industrial districts emphasizing the
importance of the social and cultural context in strengthening localization
forces. Central to the project is a newly developed longitudinal dataset from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which will be used to identify start-up
establishments in the continental U.S. in the early 1990s and track their
performance over a decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marshallian economies are at the
heart of many core theories regarding urban spatial structure, regional growth,
and business competitiveness. Although the considerable body of theoretical work
on localization lends insight into the workings of the spatial economy, there is
still scant empirical research to validate or dispel competing theories. This
study will contribute to existing knowledge by testing for the existence of
Marshallian externalities using new data and alternative outcome measures. It
will be the first study of localization to explicitly test for spatial non-
stationarity, which may reveal possible omitted variables, measurement error, or
other types of misspecification bias. Finally, the study will address the
important policy question of what factors generate an advantageous environment
for new business success. Project results therefore should help inform policy
initiatives aimed at boosting the performance of new and small businesses. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;