* 0402248
* Doctoral Dissertation Research--Bringing Culture Back In: Cultural Assimilation and the Second Generation in the Global City
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Mary Waters, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 7,491.00

How are teenaged children of immigrants in the global cities of New York City
and London assimilating culturally, and what does cultural assimilation even
mean in the multiethnic neighborhoods of New York and London? Previous studies
of immigrant assimilation have focused on political, economic, and social
assimilation, as well as education and ethnic identity. However, no major study
has emphasized the process of cultural assimilation for immigrant second
generation youth, which is the focus of this dissertation. This dissertation has
three components, all related to cultural assimilation. First, it looks at which
aspects of the second generation's culture-consumption, attitudes toward
education, modes of behavior, and beliefs-are linked to ethnicity. This project
questions the common assumption that culture is always ethnicity-linked, by
empirically looking at teenagers' cultural choices and behaviors. Second, this
dissertation asks whether the local context matters significantly in shaping the
cultural assimilation process for second generation youth, or if the
globalization of youth culture has made youth in London and New York more
similar than different. In other words, which aspects of culture are more local,
more global, and more ethnicity-based? Finally, this dissertation research
examines the cultural repertoires from which youth draw and the meanings their
cultural expressions have for them. In order to answer these questions about
second generation immigrant youth culture, I will conduct ethnographic research
in two multiethnic secondary schools-one in London and one in New York City. I
will conduct 20 interviews each with second generation Afro-Caribbean, second
generation Indian, and native White students in each school. Finally, I will ask
100 students to complete surveys in each school. Thus I plan to obtain a total
of 120 in-depth interviews, 200 surveys, and two school ethnographies-half in
London and half in New York City. This project's broader impacts include the
following: The research has implications for developing models of schooling and
teacher training that can best serve children in multi-ethnic environments,
which are increasingly prevalent. The project will provide teachers, parents,
and policymakers greater understanding of youth culture and its relationship
with how children engage with school by providing insights into such questions
as: What is the relationship between a teenager's style and his/her attitudes
toward education? How should cultural styles be understood by schools and
teachers? What cultural scripts or behaviors, if any, might be causing certain
groups (Afro-Caribbeans in the UK, African Americans in the US, boys in both
countries) to underachieve, and to what extent do which cultural assumptions of
teachers and administrators contribute to that underachievement? What cultural
tools could be taught to underachieving groups to improve their academic
achievement, and what types of professional development will help teachers help
students? The individual school research sites will benefit from learning how
their students think about their cultural identities, especially their attitudes
toward education, feelings about success, and skills for achievement.