* 0402339
* A New Approach Toward Efficacy of HA Coatings for Bio-Medical Implants
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Jerome Cuomo, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2006
* USD 66,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a new generation of calcium
phosphate coatings for dental and orthopedic implants, in which film
characterization is optimized, for enhanced bioactivity, and adhesion to the
surrounding tissues for promotion of the coating lifetime and faster relief of
the patient. The approach is to process a functionally graded hydroxyapatite
(HA) coating with and without Yttrium doping.

Yttrium can cause an increase in initial absorption of calcium in the body
leading to select protein adsorption to enhance bone cell function. The graded
crystallinity nature of the coating can improve bonding strength between implant
and bone so that a patient who has received joint or dental replacement surgery
may quickly return to a normal lifestyle. It aims to increase the service-life
of an implant by creating materials that form a strong, long lasting, bond with
bone. This can decrease the need for implant replacement mainly for younger
patients with the potential of using an implant for longer period of time.
Undoubtedly, design criteria used in the proposed study to investigate new
coating techniques coupled with a new coating material can have great impact in
the development of the next generation of orthopedic and dental implants with an
improved ability to bind to juxtaposed bone and durability. The education plan
involves: interdisciplinary research that can benefit the students to work and
learn from both parties, PI will continue developing her new graduate course
including Biomaterials, undergraduate students will become involved through
undergraduate research elective course and the special attempts to recruit
underrepresented and/or female student.