* 0402439
* Develop analytical tools for high-speed laryngeal imaging in clinical applications
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Yuling Yan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 07/31/2006
* USD 321,475.00

0402439&lt;br/&gt;Yan&lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective of the proposed research
is to establish the mechanism underlying phonation in normal and pathological
voice conditions. An emerging theme in voice research correlates specific
properties of the vocal-fold vibration with voice quality. This correlation is
significant because it could provide the framework to understand the mechanism
of phonation and help establish new clinical protocols and diagnostic metrics
for voice assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will address this
challenging problem using an approach that integrates the high speed digital
imaging (HSDI) of the larynx to resolve actual vibrations of the vocal folds
with novel, quantitative image and signal analyses developed in the PI's
laboratory. These studies will be conducted in cooperation with physician-
collaborators who will supply HSDI recordings from a cohort of human subjects
with normal voice and specific voice disorders. Analyses will be used to
understand the mechanism of phonation. Through a systematic classification of
different properties of the vocal fold vibrations in normal and pathological
voices, a web-based diagnostic database will be
built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implementation of the proposed research will advance
understanding of the mechanism of phonation and provide new tools for the
prognosis of certain diseases such as laryngeal cancer and the diagnosis and
assessment of voice disorders resulting from neurological disease such as
Parkinson's, aging and surgery. The proposal creates opportunities for
translational research through establishing new clinical diagnostic protocols
for voice disorders and an online, comparative database for web-based voice
diagnosis and physician/specialist training. The proposed research will also
lead to the emergence of HSDI-based telemedicine device for remote, real-time
examination and diagnosis of patients. Approaches used in the research would be
incorporated into modeling and imaging courses for undergraduate and graduate
students and local students would be invited to participate in the research as
part of the outreach initiative of a newly proposed Biomedical Engineering
Program. &lt;br/&gt;