* 0402578
* Collaborative Research: Physics-Based Modeling and Simulation for Post-Mastectomy Breast Reconstructive Surgery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Krishnaswamy Ravi-Chandar, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2008
* USD 191,530.00

0402578&lt;br/&gt;Ravi-Chandar&lt;br/&gt;Breast cancer is the second most
frequent cancer diagnosis among American women today, after skin cancer. Post-
mastectomy breast reconstruction is the third most frequently performed
reconstructive procedure, superseded only by tumor removal and hand surgery. The
psychological distress that accompanies a lump found in the breast, and the
subsequent mastectomy is compounded by the limitations of contemporary
reconstructive procedures; without a trusted reconstruction procedure, the
specter of a disfiguring operation adds to the fear. Conventional procedures for
reconstructing breast, or other soft tissue defects requiring adipose tissue,
involve "robbing Peter to pay Paul". That is, tissue from a donor site on the
patient is used to reconstruct the receiving site. However, it is difficult to
predict exactly how the breast will be changed by a specific procedure in any
particular patient. What size of donor tissue will yield the desired breast
shape? How large a tension will be generated in the skin? Is there enough tissue
to recreate a breast that would meet the expectations of the patient? Currently,
there are no methods that would predict the outcome of the
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to develop a
predictive methodology to replace the trial and error method currently
practiced. The proposed method is based on the large deformation analysis of
mechanics; the skin covering the breast is modeled as a nonlinear elastic
membrane or shell whose mechanical properties must be determined. After the
shape, the size, and the mass of implant tissue and the skin on the breast are
known, a nonlinear analysis will be used to calculate the resulting end shape.
Conversely, if the end shape is prescribed, the analysis should yield the amount
of implant tissue, and the shape and size of the skin necessary. The specific
aims of this project were: 1) to develop an analytical model and numerical
simulations to predict the breast shape for known initial conditions using
generic data as well as physical and computational phantoms. This is based on
the mechanics of finitely deforming bodies, 2) to develop a parametric
deformable model that describes the shape of a female breast mathematically and
3) to experimentally verify these methods using phantoms and to demonstrate
their utility for breast reconstructive surgery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research has the potential
to improve the quality of life for individuals recovering from post-mastectomy
reconstruction operations. The predictive methodology will also lead to
reduction in surgical time. The models that will be developed will apply to
other organs and tissues as well and thus will increase understanding of soft
tissue modeling and surgical simulation.&lt;br/&gt;