* 0402137
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Ecology of the Long-Wattled Umbrellabird and Other Avian Frugivores in the Ecuadorian Choco
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Jordan Karubian, Karubian                Jordan
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/2007
* USD 97,655.00

040213 Karubian

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-one-month research fellowship by Dr. Jordan
Karubian to work with Dr. David Romo at Universidad San Francisco de Quito in
Quito, Ecuador. A portion of this project will be supported by the Biocomplexity
in the Environment (BE) program.

The Choco Biogeographical Region, which spans 100,000 km2 of humid forest in
western Colombia and northwestern Ecuador, is one of the least known and most
biologically diverse areas in the world. Surveys in the Choco have revealed
exceptional levels of endemism in plants, reptiles, amphibians, birds and
butterflies (Dodson and Gentry 1991, Dinnerstein 1995, Galeano et al. 1998,
Stattersfield 1998). However, little additional research has been done in the
zone, making it a clear global priority for scientific research. Adding to the
sense of urgency, Choco habitat is being lost at dizzying rates, with less than
four percent of Ecuador's forests remaining (Sierra 1999).

This project focuses on the ecology, behavior, and conservation of large, fruit-
eating birds in the Ecuadorian Choco, with a special emphasis on the long-
wattled umbrellabird (Cephalopterus penduliger). One aspect of the project
concerns the relationship between habitat quality, fruit production, and the
diversity and abundance of fruit-eating birds. To better understand this complex
relationship, habitat structure and quality is measured at over 200 separate
points, fruit production is quantified bi-weekly, and fruit-eating birds are
regularly sampled via standardized point counts. These data provide baseline
data community-level ecology for the Ecuadorian Choco, with important benefits
for basic biology and conservation efforts. The second component of the project
focuses on the long-wattled umbrellabird, an endangered and little-known species
of bird endemic to the Choco. Special attention is paid to the species' ecology,
social behavior, and conservation. Ecologically, radio telemetry is used to
assess the species' role as a disperser of large seeds from primary to secondary
forest and the role this dispersal plays in forest regeneration. Social
relationships and interactions are monitored to test hypotheses about evolution
of extreme secondary sexual characters and the adaptive significance of
cooperative behavior. These data are then combined with habitat requirements,
foraging behavior, and home range to assess principal threats and tractable
solutions for conservation of this and other endangered species.