* 0402226
* Rates, Products and Hygroscopicity of Hydroxyl Radical (OH)-Initiated Oxidation Reactions of Organic Aerosols and Films
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Geoffrey Smith, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2008
* USD 408,316.00

This project involves investigations designed to better understand the fate of
organic material present in tropospheric aerosols. This will be accomplished
through carefully designed laboratory studies that examine the processes
initiated by hydroxyl radical (OH) reactions which could transform condensed
phase organic compounds. Experiments will quantify the kinetics of the OH
reactions with organic films and organic aerosols of a range of sizes. The
kinetics of the reaction of nitric oxide (NO) with the oxidized surfaces will
also be determined. The products of these chemical reactions in the gas and
condensed phases will be identified. Finally, the uptake of water by the
oxidized surfaces will be measured. Aerosol Chemical Ionization Mass
Spectrometry (Aerosol CIMS) and Dual Quartz Crystal Microbalances (Dual-QCM)
will be the analytical techniques employed in these
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide new information on
multiphase chemical reactivity that can be incorporated into models of the
chemistry of troposphere. This will improve the representation of these
processes, and allow better assessment of human impact on the earth system.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in this research, both
through direct involvement and through activities incorporated into coursework
by the investigator.