* 0402104
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Suspended Sediment Transport at a Tidal River Bifurcation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Bernard Bauer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Understanding how water and sediment move through different parts of a deltaic
system is of fundamental importance to resource managers who are charged with
sustainable futures of critical marsh and wetland habitat. Channel bifurcations
(locations in a primary channel where the flow divides into two separate
downstream channels) are common natural features of fluvial deltas. Despite
their abundance, river bifurcations have not been studied extensively because it
is conventionally assumed that suspended sediment "goes with the flow" -- that
suspended sediment is partitioned between the downstream branches in proportion
to water discharge into each downstream branch. This assumption is contrary to
the well-known fact that suspended sediment is typically distributed unevenly
across channels because of secondary flows and because of varying source-sink
areas within a channel. The goal of this Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement project is to address these contrary notions by identifying the
hydrologic and morphologic parameters that influence the division of suspended
sediments through a bifurcation. High-resolution field data will be collected in
a tidally influenced river bifurcation on the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta
located in central California. Instrumentation will include a boat-mounted,
three-dimensional Acoustic Doppler Profiler, several Optical Backscatterance
Sensors, a Global Positioning System, and a range of other electronic sensors
and manual devices to measure water flow and the distribution of suspended
sediment throughout the bifurcation over a variety of hydrologic conditions.
Shear stress, turbulence intensity, momentum flux, and the suspended sediment
transport capacity of each branch of the bifurcation will be calculated and
related to the observed pattern of sediment concentrations. The field results
will be complemented by the use of a two-dimensional hydrodynamic model, which
allows extrapolation to longer time frames (months to years) and to alternative
sites in order to produce generalizations about cyclic and long-term evolution
of bifurcation morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A bifurcation in a river channel
represents a "decision point" in a channel network where suspended sediment is
preferentially directed towards one downstream branch over another. Scientists
have yet to decipher how this complex "decision" is made despite its critical
role in the development of river deltas and estuaries. Suspended sediment
provides the base on which tidal marsh habitat grows, and knowing why one
downstream branch receives more suspended sediment over another will guide
managers in selecting successful marsh restoration strategies. This is
particularly important when flow control structures such as floodgates,
barriers, and dams modify the natural dynamics of the system. The Sacramento-San
Joaquin Delta-Estuary system is under immense environmental stress and this
study contributes to a larger understanding of the processes that shape this
vital ecosystem. While the processes at a channel bifurcation are complex,
recent developments in field techniques and computer modeling allow researchers
to address this lapse in basic scientific understanding for the first time. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;