* 0402188
* Evolution of the Developing Myelin Sheath
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Robert Gould, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2005
* USD 128,189.00

9986132&lt;br/&gt;Gould&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The long-term goal of this
research project is to gain understanding of how oligodendrocytes (and Schwann
cells) myelinate axons. Realizing that none of the proteins involved in the
early recognition and assembly stages of myelination were unknown, a strategy
was developed to identify such proteins through isolation of complementary DNA
molecules that represent messenger RNAs located at sites where myelin sheaths
assemble. Studies of the developmental expression patterns of some of these
mRNAs (over 80 were identified) showed that they fell into two developmental
groups. One group was not strongly expressed until myelination was well under
way (postnatal day 10 in rat). A second group, nearly equal in number to the
first group, was expressed earlier and had higher expression in tissues with
smaller myelinated fibers. With techniques used to identify these mRNAs, studies
will be conducted to identify a third group of mRNAs, those expressed
preferentially at times that oligodendrocyte processes first contact the axons
they will myelinate. Once these mRNAs are identified, studies will be conducted
to locate the sites where mRNAs and proteins are expressed in the developing
nervous system to insure that the proteins are indeed important for early stages
of myelination. &lt;br/&gt; The myelinated nervous system evolved in a common
ancestor of all jawed vertebrates, including cartilaginous and teleost fishes,
amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals. This development required recruitment
of proteins that allowed myelination to take place in the common ancestor.
Comparative studies between rats and sharks are planned and will be used to help
us understand how the myelinated nervous system originated. &lt;br/&gt;