* 0402728
* Detecting Seasonal through Centennial Variability in Sea Surface Temperatures of the Subtropical North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Howard J. Spero
* 05/31/2007
* USD 332,433.00

Under this award the PIs will use large corals heads primarily of the species
Diploria labyrinthiformis to reconstruct multicentury long records of SST
variability in the western subtropical North Atlantic. This should enable
exploration of the ocean's role in climate change on decadal and longer time
scales, specifically the North Atlantic Oscillation. The available instrumental
record of SST extends back little more than a century. However, biases and
sparseness of data render the older part of the SST record unreliable and the
demonstrated association between NAO and mid-latitude SST anomalies is based
exclusively on data gathered since 1950. The PIs will extend the SST record for
the mid-latitude North Atlantic using long-lived brain corals collected on
Bermuda, a site well placed to index the subtropical gyre. Three independent
paleothermometers ( 18O, Sr/Ca and skeletal growth) will be applied to the
skeletons of two massive colonies to construct a 500 year-long multiproxy record
of SST variability at seasonal resolution. In addition the PIs will sample, date
and analyze four massive non-living colonies already identified as potentially
old enough to extend the 500 year-long proxy record back to 1000 AD. This
multicentury long record will enable key, unresolved issues in North Atlantic
climate to be addressed. In particular, estimates of the sensitivity of the mid-
latitude atmosphere to changes in surface boundary conditions requires
seasonally-resolved records of SST that span the significant climatic events of
the late Holocene. The PIs will examine possible secular changes in SST related
to global warming and the connection with the NAO anomaly of the past 30 years.
Other key questions relate to the sensitivity of SST to solar forcing and
volcanic eruptions, and the existence of decadal through centennial-scale
periodicity in surface ocean conditions.