* 0402498
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exurban Land-Use Change, Watershed Management, and Surface-Water Quality
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Paul Robbins, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2006
* USD 7,170.00

Rapid urban expansion is a form of urbanization common in the United States, yet
its environmental impacts have received limited attention. From a spatial
perspective, expansion begins in the exurban fringe, often by replacing
agricultural land, yet differences in surface-water quality between exurban and
agricultural environments are poorly understood. Numerous social institutions
influence expansion's environmental impacts, one being watershed management.
Significant resources are devoted to local watershed management, yet uncertainty
remains concerning its effectiveness. This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement project therefore aims to clarify surface-water quality differences
between exurban and agricultural environments and the degree to which
participatory and decentered watershed management, as opposed to state-centered
management, influences exurban and agricultural surface water quality. The study
will employ both quantitative biophysical and qualitative social data and
methods. An ordinary least-squares regression analysis for 82 small watersheds
in the Cleveland, Ohio, metropolitan area will be based on satellite imagery,
aquatic bioassessments, and other spatial data, thereby forming a basis for
quantifying relationships between aquatic biodiversity and land use. An
intensive, historically based comparative case study of four watersheds will
analyze the role watershed management plays in water quality. Data to be used in
the project include the regression findings, additional high-resolution spatial
data, a survey of Ohio watersheds groups, semi-structured interviews with key
watershed stakeholders, and rankings and factor analyses evaluating stakeholder
subjectivity. Working hypotheses are that (1) agricultural land use generally
fosters relatively greater aquatic biodiversity than exurban land use, although
notable variation results from particular local biophysical and social factors,
and (2) participatory and decentered watershed management fosters greater
aquatic biodiversity than more centralized management.

Many Americans want the best possible environmental quality, but they also
desire continued economic, population, and urban growth. Urban expansion, an
issue of national economic and environmental importance, exemplifies this
conundrum. Research findings are expected to help clarify the impacts of urban
expansion on surface-water quality, offering additional scientific evidence to
the ongoing debate concerning continued urban growth and environmental quality.
This study also will shed light on which particular factors affecting water
quality are most amenable to watershed management practices or other policy
initiatives, thereby helping to determine where best to allocate limited
watershed management resources. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
grant, this award will also provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.