* 0402696
* Environmental Control Technology Education for Advanced Building Operation and Management
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Roland Otto, Peralta Community College District Office
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2008
* USD 900,000.00

This project addresses the need for expanded and more robust education for
Building Science and Engineering Technicians within industry specializations
including Controls Technicians, HVAC Technicians, Building Operators, Building
Commissioning Technicians, and Refrigeration Technicians. Reflecting input from
over 40 professionals convened to inform the investigators, this project
utilizes the skills and capabilities of Laney College faculty, research
scientists at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, a consultant with
experience designing computer-based education simulations, and expert
practitioners in the field. This team is collaborating to:

- Revise and upgrade existing core curriculum at Laney College to include
advanced technical and specialized academic courses, with key emphasis on hands-
on learning. - Develop new program strands and corresponding certificates and
degrees; - Assemble and install (in the Laney Lab) an HVAC system replicating a
real-world commercial building configuration that can be used as an exemplar for
other colleges; - Create a building operators "flight simulator" and other cost-
effective and easily replicable instructional innovations to help develop
systems-level understanding; - Pilot an educational strategy to transform the
technician from one able to solve primarily component-level problems to one
capable of solving complex system problems, able to use scientific principles,
data and analytical techniques to solve problems, and able to maneuver through
tradeoffs among design intent, occupant comfort, air quality, and energy
efficiency, and able to assess performance data and make recommendations.