* 0403800
* NER:  Effect of Morphology of Pd &amp; NiFe Nanowires on Sensor Response
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Shekhar Bhansali, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 07/31/2006
* USD 95,000.00

The goal of this research is to experimentally understand the effect of change
in morphology and structure of one-dimensional nanowires of Pd and NiFe
electrodeposited under different conditions on their function. The focus will be
on correlating the effect of morphology, size and formation cycle of nanowires
to sensor performance, sensitivity and reversibility. The effect of changing the
following parameters will be studied a) effect of changing the plating
parameters and, b) effect of different templates (graphite, polycarbonate,
alumina and porous silicon). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of
this proposal are to quantify the role and importance of nanoparticle/wire
(Pd/NiFe) morphology in sensing/separation, by integrating and evaluating (a)
the Pd nanowires on flexural Plate Wave Acoustic Sensor (FPW) for near-real time
detection of gases, and, b) the magnetic properties of NiFe in cell
manipulation/separation experiments. Research outcomes of this proposal would
facilitate the fundamental understanding of using nanowires as
sensing/separating elements. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Successful accomplishment of
the research objectives will have far reaching implications in development of
field deployable real-time nanoparticle/wire based acoustic sensors for
gas/hydrocarbon detection and in integration of biology and nanotechnology in
the emerging field of nano bio-magnetics. The existing collaborations with
various groups in academia, industry and medical centers will greatly enhance
the success of the proposed research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The educational
plan consists of two major parts: Course development and Outreach: (a) Improve
the graduate-level interdisciplinary Chemical/Biological Sensors and
Microfabrication course currently taught at University of South Florida, through
incorporation of research results. This new interdisciplinary course has been
developed in-part for the IGERT program at USF and draws heavily from the PIs
ongoing research. (b) Current outreach extending to the College of Marine
Science and St. Petersburg College will be strengthened. In collaboration with
Director of Recruitment and Retention USF, St. Petersburg Junior College,
Hillsborough and Pinellas County Education System, PI will develop technology
information modules for immersive training experience for teachers in community
colleges. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Proposed research
integrates developments in different research areas (nanostructures, gas sensing
and bio-magnetics) in a novel approach that will advance the knowledge and
understanding in diverse fields, from understanding to sensing. The research
will provide a basis for quantitative diagnosis in diverse environments. This is
a major advance across fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
research will train students in emerging cross-disciplinary areas (Electrical,
Chemical Engineering and Physics). The research is based upon early work of
undergraduate student and will have continued participation of undergraduate
students and underrepresented groups (minority, women). The results of the
research will be widely disseminated through inclusion in courses and modules
developed by PI, demonstrations and outreach. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;