* 0403274
* FIBR Planning: Microbiological Networks - Hydrologic, Biogeochemical, and Microbial Interactions within Linked Terrestrial-Aquatic Biological Systems
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Christina Tague, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2006
* USD 49,998.00

Terrestrial-Aquatic Biological Systems (TABS) such as headwater catchments and
flood-plain rivers are integrated by hydrologic linkages between system
components. TABS can be viewed as dynamic and adaptive "microbiological
networks" that exchange genes, cells, nutrients, and electron donors/acceptors
along hydrologic flow paths. This planning project focuses on development of a
research plan to address the following questions: 1) How do microbial
assemblages within TABS interact with dynamic hydrologic processes to form
microbiological networks and how does the emergence of these networks influence
phylogenetic and functional diversity within microbial assemblages? and 2) How
do microbiological networks influence coarser-scale biological processes and
patterns within TABS (e.g., patterns in biogeochemistry and the distribution of
macroscopic organisms)? A workshop will be held to gather experts in
microbiology, biogeochemistry, landscape ecology, geosciences, simulation
modeling, and network theory to develop a synthesis paper describing the concept
of microbiological networks and craft a research proposal to study them.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The concept of microbiological networks provides
a framework for integrating microbiology with hydrologic and ecosystem science.
Specifically, the concept will yield improved understanding of: 1) geo-
hydrologic controls on microbial diversity, leading to better understanding of
biological responses to perturbations such as climate change, land use actions,
and hydrologic flow regulation; and 2) the mechanisms by which linked microbial
assemblages influence biogeochemical cycling within TABS, thereby creating a
formal framework for studying the importance of microbial diversity in
landscapes. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project focuses on the Baltimore
LTER site (Maryland) and Umatilla River Flood Plain (Oregon) and includes a
strategy to incorporate undergraduate education programs at Howard University
(serving African Americans near the Baltimore LTER site) and Blue Mountain
Community College (serving Native Americans on the Umatilla Indian Reservation).
Further, project activities provide substantive opportunities for early-career
scientists to take leadership roles and to interact with well established
scientists in the development of new scientific integration. &lt;br/&gt;