* 0403581
* Reactive Membrane Technology for Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Kimberly Gray, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 04/30/2009
* USD 404,249.00

0403581&lt;br/&gt;Lueptow&lt;br/&gt;In response to both legislative and health
related events, low-pressure membrane filtration (LPMF) is an emerging
technology that is showing accelerated growth in the drinking water industry.
There are a number of advantages to LPMF relative to conventional treatment such
as superior treated water quality, little need for chemical additives, low
energy requirements, and a compact, modular system. Yet, a major limitation
associated with LPMF is its ineffectiveness in altering organic quality or
quantity. Another problem common to all membrane systems, albeit in varying
degrees, is fouling related to particle, organic, and microbial deposition at
the membrane surface. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We propose to create a novel
reactive membrane system by coupling TiO2 photocatalysis and rotating ceramic
membrane filtration. The principle of this process is that robust water
treatment is achieved by integrating the physical separation of particles and
chemical oxidation of organic and microbial constituents in combination with
physical and chemical control of surface fouling. The proposed research is based
on the activation of TiO2 nanoparticles by UV light to produce HO. and other
reactive species (e.g., H2O2) at or near the rotating membrane surface. These
highly oxidizing radials are also highly reactive with dissolved organic
compounds and microorganisms so they will act to minimize biological and
chemical fouling. Furthermore, the centrifugal instabilities and high shear
created by the rotation of the cylindrical membrane significantly reduce
concentration polarization and particle deposition at the membrane surface and
also create optimal mass transfer conditions to promote high rates of
photocatalytic reaction. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project involves three
principal research tasks: 1) synthesis of reactive membranes and construction of
prototype reactive rotating membrane systems; 2) characterization and selection
of an optimum reactive membrane system for particle filtration, organic
degradation, micropollutant destruction, microbial disinfection, and fouling
control based on model water tests; and 3) testing reactive membrane performance
using real waters, with special attention to determining how disinfection
byproduct formation potential is modified by treatment. By rigorously comparing
the performance of the reactive membrane prototypes to reference systems
reflecting the individual action of either photocatalysis or rotating
filtration, we will determine under what conditions the coupling of
photocatalysis and membrane filtration causes a deterioration in intrinsic
properties. In this way, we will also determine the synergistic interactions
that result in high removals of particles and microorganisms, oxidative
transformation of organic compounds, and effective control of surface fouling.
Model water tests will be used to select a set of reactive membrane prototypes
for testing with real surface waters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will
have a profound impact on the growth of the low-pressure membrane industry and
promote an expansion in its application beyond drinking water treatment to water
reuse, advanced wastewater treatment, and industrial water processing. The
advantages of the reactive membrane system over conventional membranes are
reduced pre/post-treatment and cleaning requirements and greater production of
higher quality filtrate. These advantages should offset any additional costs
related to manufacturing and operating the system. The broader impact of this
research is that it provides a technologically reliable way to use water having
low organic and microbiological quality as a drinking water source, which is
critical in many parts of the world and the U.S. where fresh water quality is
seriously degraded. The research program integrates fluid mechanics,
environmental chemistry, material synthesis, and photochemistry to provide a
superb interdisciplinary research program for two doctoral candidates.
&lt;br/&gt;