* 0403673
* NIRT:  Fabrication of Functional Architectures through the Directed Assembly of Nanoscale Building Blocks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Leszek Malkinski, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,121,888.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. This
program will utilize nanolithographically-patterned arrays to direct the
assembly of nanoscale magnetic building blocks into specific architectures.
These ordered assemblies will be designed for applications in high frequency,
magnetotransport, and mechanical devices. Micromagnetics modeling of individual
and collective properties, along with feedback from property measurements, will
allow for an active refinement of architectural designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As scientists develop materials with smaller and smaller
sizes, there is a need to be able to integrate these tiny elements into devices
of technological significance. In this program, very small components (much
smaller than a human hair) will be assembled into ordered arrays by placing them
onto surfaces that have specific grooved patterns. The grooves will serve to
capture the components (e.g. small metal wires) in specific orientations. These
arrangements will then be of interest for potential applications in
communication or magnetic devices such as those important to cellular phones and
computer hard drives, respectively. Additionally, an outreach component will
involve both high school teachers and undergraduates from underrepresented
groups in a nanoscience summer research program.&lt;br/&gt;