* 0403876
* NIRT:  Novel Experiments and Models for the Nanomechanics of Polymeric and Biological Nanofibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Ioannis Chasiotis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 822,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT (Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research
Teams), with special emphasis on the research themes Nanoscale Structures and
Multiscale Modeling. The goal of the proposed research program is to develop
experimental, theoretical, and computational methodologies for the mechanical
characterization of polymeric and biological nanofibers. These nanomaterials are
of increasing importance as new and refined nanofabrication capabilities are in
place. The non-continuum behavior of sub-micron size structures requires
innovative experimental and analytical treatments that address the material
behavior at the nanometer scale where macromechanics concepts are inapplicable.
This challenge is undertaken by an interdisciplinary Consortium of research
groups with combined expertise in nanofiber fabrication, mechanical measurements
at the nanoscale, and analytical and computational description of molecular
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed interdisciplinary effort will be
aimed at the development of novel micro-instrumentation and numerical/analytical
multiscale models and their application in the investigation and bridging of
material structure and mechanical properties of polymeric and biological
nanofibers. This research will support our fundamental understanding of the
interrelations between material systems, scale and geometry, provide insight and
guidelines for nanoscale materials fabrication, and create a paradigm of
integrated experiments and models in multiscale nanomechanics. The results of
this work are expected to support nanoscale design and fabrication of
hierarchical and biomimetic nano-biomaterials and composites, tissue
biomechanics, and high-density nanoelectronics. The Principal Investigators
(PIs) will pursue the integration of research and educational activities in
nanoscience and nanotechnology via the close interaction between graduate and
undergraduate students and PIs at all nodes of this Consortium. The partnership
with industrial collaborators will promote the interdisciplinary training of
future scientists and engineers in the area of nanotechnology and assist the
timely transition of the products of nanotechnology to the general public.
Results from this research will be integrated in graduate courses on
nanotechnology and computer modeling and will be included in the on-going K-12
outreach activities of the PIs. &lt;br/&gt;