* 0403020
* NER:     Device and Circuit Modeling of Integrated Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Andreas Cangellaris, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,001.00

DATE: May 15, 2004&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0403020&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of
Ill Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Aluru ,
N&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER: Device and Circuit Modeling of Integrated Nano-
electromechanical Systems (NEMS)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to develop device modeling tools for NEMS, to
extract compact models and to develop multi-phenomena based circuit simulation
tools that can model NEMS along with other components of integrated nanosystems.
The device modeling research will focus on self-consistent analysis of three
mixed-energy domains - namely, electrostatics, mechanical and van der Waals
energy domains. Hierarchical physical theories for electrostatics will be
combined with van der Waals interactions and nanometer scale mechanical
theories. The final goal of the device modeling effort is to extract
parameterized reduced-order or compact models that can be used as input models
for circuit simulation of integrated nano electromechanical systems. The circuit
modeling research will focus on the enhancement of the SPICE-based simulation
framework with the capability to support multi-physics and multi-phenomena for
CAD-based conceptualization, design exploration and synthesis of nanosystems.
Specifically, the circuit modeling effort will focus on the circuit
representation of the non-electrical components of NEMS as well as on the
development of efficient time- and frequency-dependent simulation of
NEMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;