* 0403178
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: In Vitro and in Vivo Detection of Hepatitis C Virus Using Core Viral Antigens Specific Antibodies and Development of Novel Therapeutic Modalities
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Said Goueli, Promega Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2008
* USD 24,000.00

0403178&lt;br/&gt;Goueli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for support of a
cooperative project by Dr. Said A. Goueli, Team leader of Technology Development
at Promega Corporation, in Madison, Wisconsin, and Dr. Mostafa Kamel El Awady,
Chairman, Dept. of Human Genetics, and Director of the Medical Biotechnology
Program, at the National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt. The two
scientists plan to study the detection technologies of viral infection of
Hepatitis C and the means for the development of a reliable and low cost test
that will be affordable and suitable for developing countries. They also plan to
study the development of a model system to monitor the course of viral infection
and the efficacy of novel therapeutic modalities. This project will involve two
laboratories with complementary capabilities to conduct research in an important
field for both countries. The award will support a US-foreign collaboration in
an area of mutual benefit. The project was generated as a result of a workshop
on biotechnology organized by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the
Egyptian Government, and will build on results that the two scientists had
obtained in a previous collaborative project. NIH was involved in the evaluation
of the project and in recommending its support. This project is being supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, administered by the US Department of
State, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;