* 0403421
* SGER:  Reactive Halogen Detection in the Marine Boundary Layer Using Atmospheric Pressure Ionization/Chemical Ionization Mass Spectrometer (API/CIMS)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Eric Saltzman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2004
* USD 130,296.00

This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) project involves the
deployment of a newly developed instrument aboard a research cruise vessel (R/V
Wecoma) in the North Pacific Ocean region in the spring and early summer of
2004. This cruise of opportunity, from Guam to Oregon via Hawaii, is dedicated
to understanding the exchange of organic halogen compounds between the ocean and
the atmosphere. This project will involve first measurements of the dihalogen
gases, chlorine (Cl2), bromine (Br2), iodine (I2), bromochlorine (BrCl), and
iodochlorine (ICl), over the open ocean. The measurement method is based on
atmospheric pressure chemical ionization mass spectrometry (API/CIMS), variants
of which have been demonstrated by other researchers to be extremely sensitive
and selective for atmospheric trace components. These first measurements, if
successful, will provide valuable information on the role of these gases impact
on the chemistry of ozone, hydrocarbons and sulfur compounds in the marine
boundary layer, and could substantially revise our understanding of atmospheric
photochemistry in this region. A second, even more exploratory measurement
involves the quantification of the halogen oxides, ClO and BrO, using chemical
conversion to species (deuterated haloacetones) that can be measured by
API/CIMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include
providing field research experience for two graduate students and one post-
doctoral fellow. In addition, this research contributes to the goals of the
Surface Ocean Lower Atmosphere Study (SOLAS) program by helping to understand
the composition of the marine atmospheric boundary layer and provide constraints
on exchange of these gases with the ocean surface layer. In the longer view,
this research will improve understanding of the oxidation processes operative in
the marine boundary layer, and thus will better constrain the fate and lifetime
of gases important for the earth's climate.