* 0403495
* NER: Micromechanical Actuators Constructed from Polymer/Carbon Nanotube Composites
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* William Euler, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0403495&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of Rhode
Island&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Euler , William&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER:
Micromechanical Actuators Constructed from Polymer/Carbon Nanotube
Composites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Actuators are
devices that convert an input form of energy into mechanical motion. An common
example is muscle tissue, which converts chemical energy into biological
movement. In this research project, materials will be studied that convert
either electrical energy or light energy into a bending motion. Such devices may
have application in areas such as sensors or switches and can be adapted to the
micro- or nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrical actuators are made from
nafion sandwiched between layers of carbon nanotubes. The carbon nanotube layers
act as electrodes for electrical input. When current is supplied, the composite
bends towards the positive electrode or can be made to oscillate if an
alternating current is used. The research activities will be aimed at
understanding the mechanism of this behavior so that an optimal structure can be
devised and tested. In contrast, the light driven actuator is composed of only
two layers: nafion and carbon nanotubes. When light is shined on this bilayer,
the composite bends toward the nafion layer, independent of the orientation of
the light source. Such a mode of action is unprecedented. The research will be
designed to begin to understand the &lt;br/&gt;underlying source for this
physical behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;