* 0403428
* CISE RI: An Interdisciplinary Research Environment for Motion Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* Gang Qian, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,021,339.00

Over the past decade, human motion analysis has become an important research
area with critical applications. It is attracting significant research efforts
in a number of disciplines, such as computer vision (vision-based motion
capture, human computer interface, human identification), robotics (navigation),
dance and choreography (automatic dance documentation and dance instruction),
music (digital conducting) and bioengineering (rehabilitation and motor
behavior). Motion analysis is a complex problem due to the 3D nature of the
human body; the infinite possibilities of human movements; variability of
movement execution between different people; continuously adaptive learning
through feedback from and interactions with the environment; and the inherent
multiple levels of movement structure in terms of time, space and energy. This
makes it unrealistic for a single discipline to address all aspects. Therefore,
progress within each discipline moves at a slow pace. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Arizona State University has founded the Interdisciplinary Research
Environment for Motion Analysis (IREMA) initiative that integrates researchers
from ten disciplines to create a holistic model for motion analysis research and
education. Within IREMA, ground-breaking collaborations have been established
through networks of experts, infrastructures and important applications. Using
this multi-level, networked research model, the principal investigators (PIs)
are able to address many critical issues of real-time motion capture, analysis
and feedback. Promising results of social significance are being achieved in
areas such as: Rehabilitation Research to Restore Functional Walking Ability for
Spinal Cord Injured, Auditory Display Systems for Aiding Interjoint
Coordination, Modeling of Human and Robotic Heuristics for Projectile
Interception, Movement Based Interactive Arts Environments, Experiential
learning environments for children, Extraction and Recognition of Middle and Low
Level Features of Movements, Vision-based Motion Capture Using Domain Knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;Using the research infrastructure (RI) grant the PIs will create a
multimodal sensing and feedback environment for human motion analysis research
and movement-based interactive applications. They will increase their optical
motion capture system to 24 cameras, create a high-speed, high resolution 24
video camera array, complete the building of a pressure sensitive floor, acquire
a new EMG system and metabolic sensing equipment, acquire required hardware to
integrate optical motion capture data with EMG and 2D visual as well as
metabolic sensing, increasing processing and storage capacity, creating a mobile
motion capture setup, and deploying the necessary hardware and software for
interactive real-time feedback. The above sensing equipment would provide high-
speed, high quality, synchronous video capture of multiple views, high-precision
marker-based motion capture and pressure sensing in the floor as well as on the
treadmill, and audio signals. It will enable the PIs to capture human movement
in its full essence. The optical motion-capture data and the pressure sensing
data will be fused to provide holistic motion capture. The processed, combined
data of these systems will be used to train the video based system so that
robust and accurate vision-based motion-capture can be acquired using low-cost
video cameras. The physiological equipment will be used in the rehabilitation
projects. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: During this five-year project, the PIs hope
to achieve major advances in motion analysis and core computer science areas:
computer vision, human-computer interaction, information and data management,
geometric computation, knowledge systems and robotics. These advances will have
significant social impact by producing major progress in movement rehabilitation
and therapy, K-12 education, security applications (gait/face recognition), and
all areas involving movement training (dance, theatre, sports, firefighting,
military). Finally, IREMA can serve as a new model for research and
interdisciplinary collaboration, which can be adapted to other areas thereby
increasing their productivity. This RI grant will establish the necessary
infrastructure for paradigm shifts in motion analysis and will facilitate the
overall modeling of hybrid research. &lt;br/&gt;