* 0403742
* NER:  Nanofilament Directional Control within a Hybrid Microelectronic Actin-Myosin Motility Assay via Integrated Electric Field Addressing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Parviz Famouri, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 90,000.00

The objective of this research is to fundamentally understand the governing
mechanics of biological molecular transport mechanisms that can serve as a
foundation for their direct use in integrated biomolecular systems or the
development of nanoengineered systems that mimic these biological processes.
Actin-myosin and nanotubule-kinesin systems represent two protein-based systems
being explored as basic building blocks for realization of linear and rotary
biomolecular motors based on biological nanoscale transport phenomena. The
approach is fundamental exploration of the interaction of electric fields
localized on the micron scale with the nanoscale actin-myosin motility assay.
Electric fields established with integrated electrode structures under the
assayed surface will be used to experimentally characterize their effect on
nanoscale linear biomolecular motor filament alignment, direction of motion, and
assay ambient. Fluorescence techniques will be used to optically observe actin
motion in assay, with mass spectrometry and circular dichroism used to determine
field effects on the actin-myosin system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control of
biomolecular transport is essential to the advancement of nanokinematic systems
whether for molecular cargo delivery in sensing or assembly processes, or as a
means to interface micro-electro-mechanical systems with the nanoscale regime.
This exploratory effort will establish the underlying framework for the control
of nanoscale biomolecular motors from within a microelectronic environment. From
an educational perspective, the activities of this project offer opportunities
through research experiences and course module development for integrating
students' educational experience across diverse areas including
nano/microfabrication, electromagnetics, proteomics, microfluidics, and
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;