* 0403847
* NIRT: Building Capacity for Social and Ethical Research and Education in Agrifood Nanotechnology
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Lawrence Busch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,720,000.00

Nanotechnology - the development of devices constructed and operating at a
molecular level - promises to revolutionize methods of manufacture and
distribution throughout all phases of the economy. Agriculture - among the
oldest and most established sectors of the economy - will be no exception.
However, the recent attempt to introduce the revolutionary technical methods of
recombinant DNA (i.e. agricultural biotechnology) has been associated with a
number of critical ethical and social issues, including a prolonged and divisive
social conflict. What will nanotechnology mean for agriculture? And what can
agriculture teach nanotechnology? This project intertwines three broad
objectives: 1) Deriving lessons from the social conflict over agrifood
biotechnology that may be useful to the entire range of researchers engaged in
the new nanotechnology initiative; 2) Building a new multi-disciplinary
competence among a team of senior researchers with extensive experience in
social and ethical issues associated with agrifood technology, who have
collaborated to develop communication strategies in engineering applications,
and relatively junior researchers starting research programs in social and
economic dimensions of agrifood science; and 3) Identifying the most likely
applications of nanotechnology within the agrifood sector (including food
distribution and consumption), and developing a proactive strategy for
understanding and addressing social and ethical issues associated with them.
This third objective encompasses activities aimed at developing a conceptual and
research framework, developing visions for governance, and engaging stakeholders
as well as the general public. As part of this objective, the project will
develop materials for education on the social and ethical dimensions of agrifood
nanotechnology directed to nanotechnology scientists and engineers, agrifood
stakeholders, and the general public. This research will contribute to
understanding the societal dimensions of engineering, science and technology in
the disciplines of sociology, anthropology, economics and philosophy. Methods of
research involve interviews, content analysis, web fora, analytic deliberation
and philosophical analysis, each deployed by team members who have used these
methods in prior projects. Team meetings, conduct of symposia, and active
integration and management on the part of team leadership will be used to
strengthen these methods and integrate the findings from each. Key to this
process will be three workshops in which all team members and invited guests
will participate, to address the themes of a) lessons from agrifood
biotechnology, b) the emerging shape of agrifood nanotechnology and c) emerging
standards for food safety and product quality associated with agrifood
nanotechnology. The team will also collaborate with a European research team
presently starting a project on public participation in the management and
development of nanotechnology. The research activities will be augmented with
the development of an online course addressing social and ethical issues in
agrifood nanotech, outreach/extension activities directed to nanotechnology
scientists and engineers, agricultural producers, and the broader public, and
papers or symposia presented at professional meetings. The research is
applicable to non-agricultural domains of nanotechnology, as well as to other
forms of technology, and papers and presentations will be structured to reach
this wider audience. The emphasis on involving stakeholders and members of the
public in the conduct of this research promises to help create a more
participatory and democratic venue for decision-making regarding applications of
agricultural nanotechnology. This proposal addresses the "Societal and
Educational Implications of Scientific and Technological Advances on the
Nanoscale" theme of NSF's Nanoscale Science and Engineering program solicitation
(NSF 03-043). &lt;br/&gt;