* 0403004
* NSF-AFOSR Joint Workshop on Future Ultra-High Temperature Materials; Arlington, VA
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Gregory Hilmas, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/2005
* USD 31,340.00

A Workshop will be held at NSF January 13-14, 2004 on ultra-high temperature
materials (UHTMs); UHTMs are defined as materials that have use temperatures in
excess of 1800C. This includes carbides and borides of transition metals such as
ZrB2, HfC, and TaC. The strong covalent bonding in these materials provides
unusual combinations of strength, stability in oxidizing atmospheres, and
resistance to thermal shock, but this also makes them difficult to process. The
Workshop forum will provide for interactive in-depth exchange of information on
unmet needs of current users of UHTMs, experimental approaches and new materials
for improved UHTMs, and issues related to education and training of scientists
and engineers for careers that involve UHTMs. Participants will be from a broad
cross section including government, industry, and university research
laboratories from the U.S. and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;The major workshop outcomes
are to be documented in a report disseminated through a web page devoted to
ultra-high temperature ceramics at the University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR). When
finalized, the report will be available at technical meetings, submitted for
publication in synopsis form to technical publications such as the Bulletin of
the American Ceramic Society and the Materials Research Society Bulletin, and
promoted through a letter sent to colleagues in the UHTM community.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Discussions at the proposed workshop will include a
critical evaluation of experimental approaches that have potential to lead to
greater fundamental understanding, and to identify new materials with improved
performance. The combined input from industry, government, and universities will
allow a broad base of the UHTM research community to design and promote programs
that satisfy unmet needs and to tailor education programs for training of future
scientists and engineers in this field.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;