* 0403433
* An IT Infrastructure  for Responding to the Unexpected
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Ramesh Rao, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,801,590.00

Broader Impact: Timely and effective response to natural or man-made disasters
can reduce deaths and injuries, contain or prevent secondary disasters, and
reduce the resulting economic losses and social disruption. During a crisis,
responding organizations confront grave uncertainties in making critical
decisions. There is a strong correlation between the quality of these decisions
and the accuracy, timeliness, and reliability of the situational information
(e.g., state of the civil, transportation and information infrastructures) and
the availability of resources (e.g., medical facilities, rescue and law
enforcement units) to the decision-makers. Recently, at UCI and UCSD many
projects have been launched that address the technological challenges in with
the objective of radically transforming the ability of organizations to gather,
manage, use and disseminate information when responding to man-made and natural
catastrophes. Dramatic improvements in the speed and accuracy at which
information about the crisis flows through the disaster response networks has
the potential to revolutionize crisis response saving human lives and property.
. The purpose of this infrastructure proposal is to establish an campus-level
experimental Information Technology infrastructure, called Responsphere, to
serve as a platform for development, testing, and validation of our current
research efforts on responding to a crisis. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Challenges in bringing accurate, timely, and relevant information to decision-
makers during crisis response arises due to the scale and complexity of the
problem, the diversity of data and data sources, the state of the communication
and information infrastructures through which the information flows, and the
unique character and dynamic nature of the responding organizations. To address
these challenges, our research team is exploring a multidisciplinary approach
focusing on the following research elements in the context of crisis response:
(1) Enabling humans (rescue workers, observers) to become rich sources of vital
crisis-related information; (2) Seamlessly collecting data from heterogeneous
sources in highly dynamic disaster situations where the IT infrastructure may
have partially failed; (3) Translating low-level noisy data into meaningful
events useful for damage assessment and situation awareness; (4) Enabling
information sharing and collective decision-making across highly dynamic
emergent virtual organizations; (5) Rapidly disseminating information in the
form most useful to recipients while observing the fundamental limitations of
the underlying communication and information technologies. Validation platforms
and testbeds will be deployed in close partnership with first responders from
the City and County of LA, San Diego and Irvine Police departments as well as
the California Office of Emergency Services in live environments and will help
us evaluate the effectiveness of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The testbeds
created as a part of Responsphere will provide the team with an experimental
platform to field-test and refine research on information collection, analysis,
sharing, and dissemination in controlled yet realistic settings significantly
enhancing their research capability. Specific testbeds include:&lt;br/&gt;
Mobile Incidence Level Response (MILLR) Testbed &lt;br/&gt; Crisis Assessment,
Mitigation, and Analysis (CAMAS) Testbed&lt;br/&gt; Advanced Traffic Rerouting
for Unplanned Events (TRUE) Testbed&lt;br/&gt;At UC Irvine we will (1) expand
the campus 802.11b based wireless infrastructure to cover major outdoor regions,
(2) add instrumentation and management tools to the campus wireless environment,
(3) add compute, visualization and storage capabilities for crisis management
and response research, and (4) expand the available pool of mobile devices and
embellish them with specialized video capture and streaming capabilities
suitable for field response experiments. At UC San Diego we will (1) establish
RF propagation modeling capabilities using GIS and 3D data generation and
transformation tools, (2) build a wireless communications infrastructure in the
Gas Lamp Quarter downtown, (3) build a command and control prototyping
environment in a visualization facility, (4) create a vehicular based mobile
command and control platform, (5) design a location/tracking system and
prototype it along with other sensing and communications equipment in a custom
man worn implementation ("manpack"), and (6) participate in the upgrade of the
UCSD Police communication environment.. Specific research components tested in
Responsphere are (1) a system for accurate position location in uncertain
environments; (2) an integrated end-to-end quality aware distributed data
collection system; (3) an end-to-end data analysis system; and (4) system for
seamless multimodal interaction involving audio/video and image information.
Other research efforts at UCI and UCSD in the areas of mobile computing,
networking, middleware, security and ubiquitous computing will benefit from the
Responsphere infrastructure &lt;br/&gt;