* 0403710
* NER:  Immobilized Calixarenes as Nanomaterials for Selective Catalysis and Molecular Recognition
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Enrique Iglesia, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 07/31/2006
* USD 129,985.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscience and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NER. This research addresses the design and
synthesis of a new class of single-site materials for enantioselective
adsorption and catalysis, which can be tailored on the nanoscale with an
unprecedented level of detail. The materials consist of metallocalixarene
structures grafted on the surface of silica. These grafted species have been
recently shown to adsorb small organic molecules from vapor and liquid phases
and to act as highly active and selective epoxidation catalysts. These
properties include enantiospecific molecular recognition. The approach exploits
recent advances in calixarene chemistry for upper rim functionalization,
including the positioning of chiral functional groups to define an asymmetric
pocket. For catalysis, recent success in epoxidation reactions will be extended
by placing chiral groups in the immediate vicinity of and within dative bond
contact (0.24 nm) of catalytically active centers, such as those in titano-
calixarene structures. The materials synthesized in the course of the project
should find broad use in the synthesis and separation of chiral molecules and in
industrial applications within pharmaceutical, specialty monomer (for polymers
and liquid crystal displays), and agrochemical sectors.

These research activities broadly impact the training of scientists in emerging
nanotechnology areas, with specific emphasis on the synthesis and structural
characterization of materials with specific nanoscale connectivity and spatial
arrangements. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in the design
and synthesis of nanomaterials within a multi-disciplinary infrastructure, which
includes expertise in synthetic chemistry of calixarenes and materials, their
spectroscopic characterization, and the design of experimental apparatus for the
assessment of adsorption and catalytic functions of grafted metallocalixarene
materials. Research activities include an undergraduate laboratory component in
which participation by women and minorities is actively sought.