* 0403669
* NER:  Single-Molecule Wires and Electronic Devices Based on Dimetal Complexes Containing Metal-Metal bonds
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Jan Yarrison-Rice, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 99,997.00

The objectives of this research are to design, fabricate, and test molecular
wires, and singlemolecule&lt;br/&gt;electronic devices, in particular diodes,
light-activated switches and transistors, based&lt;br/&gt;on dimetal inorganic
complexes containing metal-metal bonds. These metal complexes
provide&lt;br/&gt;better control and tunability of electron transport properties
as compared to organic molecules&lt;br/&gt;used in molecular devices to date.
The approach is to incorporate these complexes into various&lt;br/&gt;two- or
three-terminal nano-junctions formed by nanolithography, and to measure their
electron&lt;br/&gt;transport characteristics, such as rectification and
amplification. The educational component&lt;br/&gt;includes a jointly developed
and co-taught course to train students in molecular electronics&lt;br/&gt;during
Spring 2005, as well as a one week summer workshop on instrumentation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The miniaturization of current silicon-based electronic
devices is approaching a limit set by&lt;br/&gt;physical and economical
constraints. Alternative technologies, such as molecular electronics,
are&lt;br/&gt;required to overcome this limit and increase computation speed.
Here, molecules are utilized as&lt;br/&gt;conventional electronic devices. The
research proposed herein explores the feasibility of using&lt;br/&gt;dimetal
inorganic complexes as components in molecular electronics. If successful, the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research will open new avenues for designing molecular
electronic devices and will provide&lt;br/&gt;insight into the electron
transport of molecules. The interdisciplinary nature of the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research will provide students with opportunities to
communicate with researchers from different&lt;br/&gt;fields. The nanoscale
characterization and fabrication proposed in the research will give
students&lt;br/&gt;hands-on experience in using state-of-the-art equipment
commonly used in nanoscience and&lt;br/&gt;technology. This will better prepare
them for careers in this exciting research area.