* 0403906
* Collaborative Research:  Watershed Carbon Distribution and Flux Across Environmental Gradients
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Daniel Welsch, Frostburg State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 100,937.00

0403906&lt;br/&gt;Welsch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central roles of carbon
dioxide (CO2) in climate change and the removal of base cations from soils has
&lt;br/&gt;been established. However, the spatial and temporal variation of CO2
production and efflux from catchment soils remains poorly understood. We are
just beginning to develop the methods to up-scale from point measurements such
as those made by flux towers or respiration chambers to larger spatial scales
such as plots or watersheds. How the primary CO2 forcing factors vary across
climatic, environmental, biogeochemical, and topographic gradients needs to be
addressed. In addition, complementary investigation of the topographic controls
on C accumulation and the mobilization of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) s
central to understanding the links between the landscape and the C cycle at the
watershed scale. Many investigations of C allocation and movement focus on
atmospheric exchange, neglecting the loss of C in stream water. Recent work has
given us insight into the processes controlling the timing and magnitude of
stream water C exports. We believe that understanding topographic controls and
stream-catchment connections are integral to understanding total C flux from
catchments. The concept of biogeochemical similarity, related to hydrological
similarity, has been identified as a powerful tool in understanding the spatial
patterns of biogeochemical processes. Our research will test the applicability
of this concept for soil respiration and DOC export and will identify the
critical set of measurements necessary to quantify the spatial and temporal
variability in the first-order controls on soil CO2 production and surface
efflux. This field-derived information will then inform and constrain our model
that simulates the variability of these parameters through space and time. These
spatially distributed data are central to simulation of the
&lt;br/&gt;production and transport of soil CO2. By combining extensive field
measurements and quantification of the factors influencing soil respiration such
as soil temperature, soil moisture, soil fertility, and climatic variables with
numerical modeling techniques, this work will provide a way forward for
measuring and modeling the extensive but poorly understood exchange of water, C,
and energy between soils and the atmosphere. The objectives of this research are
(1) to quantify CO2 efflux and to develop and apply a model of catchment
respiration, incorporating soil air pCO2, vertical soil water transport of
dissolved CO2, and surface CO2 efflux, (2) to explore the extent to which
&lt;br/&gt;topography can be used to explain the variability inherent in the
factors driving respiration, and (3) To quantify the topographic controls on the
distribution of soil C in the watershed and link C accumulation in the
landscape, DOC transport, and stream DOC export at the watershed scale.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity This work will provide
empirical information and the foundation for development and application of a
framework for understanding the spatial and temporal variably of soilrespiration
and resultant soil air CO2 concentration, atmospheric exchange, and streamwater
C export. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity The
inclusion of undergraduates and graduate students in all aspects of research is
a primary goal of this work. Frostburg State University is a predominantly
undergraduate institution, and as such, has limited opportunities for
undergraduates to obtain research experience. This research will provide
Frostburg students, both now and in the future with experience and opportunities
through collaborative linkages made between Frostburg State University, The
University of Virginia, and Montana State University (EPSCoR institution).
Students will be integral members of the research team and will be encouraged to
take ownership of their contributions through publication and presentation of
their findings at national meetings. This research will enhance teaching
activities &lt;br/&gt;(undergraduate and graduate) through inclusion of near
real-time data in class exercises and field-based learning. This work will also
strengthen the research infrastructure at Frostburg, helping to advance students
and faculty from undergraduate institutions that are underrepresented in the
fields of hydrology and biogeochemistry. If funded, the Big Sky Institute for
Science and Natural History has agreed to provide additional support for
participation of a graduate student in the BSI Graduate Fellows Program. Under
that program, the Fellow would receive training in effective communication of
their results to K-12 communities and the public. The fellows program provides
graduate students training and opportunities to communicate science, encourages
young scientists to understand their role in disseminating scientific findings
to the public, and helps fulfill BSI.s mission of combining current research
with inquiry-based learning for people of all ages and all walks of life. This
work will also produce a dataset of soil air CO2 concentrations, efflux, semi-
distributed field measurements and simulations of driving factors through time,
and links to streamwater C export. Our datasets will be made freely available on
the web to other researchers and can serve as a test data set for models of CO2
production, flux, and streamwater C export. To date, &lt;br/&gt;no such dataset
is available (to the authors. knowledge), yet this is critical to understanding
C accumulation and flux across environmental gradients by providing a testing
ground and comparison set. &lt;br/&gt;