* 0403884
* Hodge Theory, Dualities and Non-Commutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Tony Pantev, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 105,000.00

This is a research in the field of algebraic geometry - a
classical&lt;br/&gt;subject studying the solutions to systems of polynomial
equations. The&lt;br/&gt;current project addresses four problems providing
exciting interfaces&lt;br/&gt;between complex geometry and string theory and
quantum physics. The&lt;br/&gt;first problem aims to build a toolbox of Hodge
theoretic techniques for&lt;br/&gt;computing invariants of complex projective
varieties related to higher&lt;br/&gt;homotopy. The second explores the limits
of the classical Shafarevich&lt;br/&gt;uniformization conjecture in complex
geometry. The third problem&lt;br/&gt;proposes an explicit construction of
sheaves on a gerby Calabi-Yau&lt;br/&gt;manifold which is fibered by K3
surfaces, and studies its impact on the&lt;br/&gt;physical notion of non-
commutative deformation of fields. The fourth&lt;br/&gt;project probes the
relationship between the extremal transitions in&lt;br/&gt;degenerating families
of Calabi-Yau manifolds, the limiting behavior of&lt;br/&gt;integrable systems,
and non-commutative algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding
of these questions is essential for unifying various&lt;br/&gt;linearization
procedures in algebraic geometry, symplectic topology,&lt;br/&gt;theoretical and
mathematical physics. The project sets the stage for&lt;br/&gt;understanding the
basic structure of algebraic varieties in a way&lt;br/&gt;suitable for pragmatic
use in a broad spectrum of applications. The&lt;br/&gt;work proposed will be
immediately relevant to deep questions in&lt;br/&gt;category theory,
combinatorial group theory, the theory of integrable&lt;br/&gt;systems, string
theory, quantum gravity and cosmology. The project&lt;br/&gt;proposes concrete
interdisciplinary applications to matrix quantum&lt;br/&gt;mechanics, string
dualities and particle physics model building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;