* 0403997
* NIRT:  Complex Fluids Confined at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 1,273,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. This theoretical award is supported by
the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry Division.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluids under extreme confinement exhibit novel dynamical
properties which are not simple extensions of the bulk behavior. Intuitively,
extreme confinement sets in when the confining dimensions become comparable to
the length scales associated with the cooperative motion in the fluids which are
typically in the nanometer domain. Understanding the interplay between these
natural length scales and the external constraints is the goal of the research
outlined in this grant. Constraints can be imposed by the external geometry such
as in thin polymer films or liquids in porous media, but can also arise from
"crowding" due to other objects as occur naturally in the interior of cells or
in supercooled liquids near the glass transition. In all of these systems,
temporal evolution involves the motion of extended objects which have internal
degrees of freedom. Effective models at the scale of these objects will be
constructed; a scale intermediate between the microscopic one characteristic of
molecular dynamics simulations and the macroscopic scale of hydrodynamic
descriptions. Such a framework provides a useful interface between theory and
experiments which use real-space probes to study motion at the nanometer scale.
In conjunction with such experiments, a framework relating length scales and
time scales will be constructed and used to understand the effects of
constraints on the dynamics. Numerical simulations will be used as a stepping
stone in the construction of effective dynamical theories. The techniques will
be developed in the context of lattice models and then extended to continuum
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide modeling tools for a
range of problems in biology that includes rheology of cells, motion of
macromolecules in crowded cell environments, dynamics of the cytoskeleton, to
mention a few. On the technological side of things, much effort is currently
being expended on miniaturizing and integrating various biochemical techniques
for purifying, detecting, and sorting biological molecules, on a single chip.
These techniques put front and center one of the central questions addressed by
this research: How is the motion of macromolecules affected by extreme
confinement? Theoretical tools such as simple models and numerical simulations,
combined with experimentation on well controlled systems will contribute to the
rational design of these "lab on a chip" technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
crucial aspect of the activities is building a community of physicists, chemists
and biologists in the Boston area, united by their interest in dynamics of
constrained systems. The managing PI has initiated a biannual meeting that
brings together students, postdoctoral associates and faculty, in the Boston
area, interested in glassy phenomena, broadly construed. These have proven
invaluable for exchanging ideas between various groups and exposing students to
a range of ideas. The current program builds on this activity by (i) describing
a new summer research program aimed at undergraduates from the women's four-year
colleges in the Boston area and (ii) enlarging the scope of the biannual
meetings to include minicourses which will be a valuable addition to graduate
education in the interdisciplinary area of slow
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. This
theoretical award is supported by the Division of Materials Research and the
Chemistry Division. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluids under extreme confinement
exhibit novel dynamical properties which are not simple extensions of the bulk
behavior. Intuitively, extreme confinement sets in when the confining dimensions
become comparable to the length scales associated with the cooperative motion in
the fluids which are typically in the nanometer domain. Understanding the
interplay between these natural length scales and the external constraints is
the goal of the research outlined in this grant. Constraints can be imposed by
the external geometry such as in thin polymer films or liquids in porous media,
but can also arise from "crowding" due to other objects as occur naturally in
the interior of cells or in supercooled liquids near the glass transition. In
all of these systems, temporal evolution involves the motion of extended objects
which have internal degrees of freedom. Effective models at the scale of these
objects will be constructed; a scale intermediate between the microscopic one
characteristic of molecular dynamics simulations and the macroscopic scale of
hydrodynamic descriptions. Such a framework provides a useful interface between
theory and experiments which use real-space probes to study motion at the
nanometer scale. In conjunction with such experiments, a framework relating
length scales and time scales will be constructed and used to understand the
effects of constraints on the dynamics. Numerical simulations will be used as a
stepping stone in the construction of effective dynamical theories. The
techniques will be developed in the context of lattice models and then extended
to continuum models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide modeling
tools for a range of problems in biology that includes rheology of cells, motion
of macromolecules in crowded cell environments, dynamics of the cytoskeleton, to
mention a few. On the technological side of things, much effort is currently
being expended on miniaturizing and integrating various biochemical techniques
for purifying, detecting, and sorting biological molecules, on a single chip.
These techniques put front and center one of the central questions addressed by
this research: How is the motion of macromolecules affected by extreme
confinement? Theoretical tools such as simple models and numerical simulations,
combined with experimentation on well controlled systems will contribute to the
rational design of these "lab on a chip" technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
crucial aspect of the activities is building a community of physicists, chemists
and biologists in the Boston area, united by their interest in dynamics of
constrained systems. The managing PI has initiated a biannual meeting that
brings together students, postdoctoral associates and faculty, in the Boston
area, interested in glassy phenomena, broadly construed. These have proven
invaluable for exchanging ideas between various groups and exposing students to
a range of ideas. The current program builds on this activity by (i) describing
a new summer research program aimed at undergraduates from the women's four-year
colleges in the Boston area and (ii) enlarging the scope of the biannual
meetings to include minicourses which will be a valuable addition to graduate
education in the interdisciplinary area of slow
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;