* 0403732
* NIRT: Nanoparticle-Environment Interfaces: Interactions in Natural Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Rodney Ewing, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,499,748.00

0403732&lt;br/&gt;Becker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in surface
analysis, computer simulations using quantum mechanical and empirical methods,
and advanced techniques in electron microscopy now allow the accurate
characterization and modeling of interface properties between nanoparticles and
their immediate atomic-scale environment. These properties encompass the
structural relationships between both phases, the stability of nanomaterials in
their respective hosts, the chemistry in and near the interface, electron
transfer mechanisms across the interface, and magnetic ordering in the
nanoparticle, as well as in the near-interface region of the host matrix. These
interface properties have a critical influence on the reactivity and the
environmental behavior of nanoparticles. Therefore, their fate in the
environment cannot be understood if only size and structure are considered. We
propose to apply this combination of newly-developed experimental and
theoretical capabilities to a variety of research topics that collectively focus
on the important role of nanoparticle interfaces in natural systems, such as the
formation of metal particles on sulfide and oxide surfaces and their
incorporation into the bulk, transport of metal-bearing nanoparticles in
atmospheric particulates and groundwater colloids, and to biomineralization
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This new initiative at the
University of Michigan is also supported by the development of new graduate and
undergraduate courses to stimulate student interest in this field. We are in the
process of developing new courses in environmental geochemistry, environmental
mineralogy, mineral surface science, computational methods, nuclear materials,
and radioactive waste management. A number of undergraduate and graduate
students from different disciplines, such as mineralogy, geology, applied
physics, chemistry, nuclear engineering, materials science, and chemical
engineering are expected to be involved in the projects proposed. In addition,
we plan to develop a public exhibition on nanoparticles in the Museum of Natural
History at the University of Michigan. The exhibit will emphasize the broad
applicability of nanogeoscience to diverse areas of great public interest, such
as medicine (bone and tooth growth), development of geomimetic materials, new
methods for metal exploitation and mineral processing, and release and transport
of environmentally hazardous materials. The museum is regularly visited, not
only by university students, but also by students from the local middle and high
schools, and by the general public. &lt;br/&gt;