* 0403427
* UC Berkeley Wireless Research Infrastructure Program
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Borivoje Nikolic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 801,250.00

This award includes synergistic research in fundamental communications theory
and the development of novel communications technologies. To make these research
activities possible the principal investigators (PIs) will establish new and
enhance the existing research infrastructure for research programs associated
with the Center for Information Technology Research in the Interest of Society
(CITRIS) and two of its members: the Berkeley Wireless Research Center (BWRC)
and the Wireless Foundations Center (WFC). The purpose of this new
infrastructure is to build a research environment that enables investigation of
novel technologies for cognitive radios, high data rate transmission over
wireless local area networks (WLANs), and wireless sensor networks.
&lt;br/&gt;The wireless explosion that the researchers are witnessing today can
be largely attributed to the availability of unlicensed spectrum bands. New
unlicensed bands are being allocated, for example the 5GHz of spectrum available
worldwide at 60GHz. At the same time, a large majority of available spectrum is
locked in by its pre-allocated use in legacy systems. The PIs will investigate
methods of overlaying the legacy systems with new wireless systems, which allow
the use of ultra-wideband (UWB) radios to operate in the 3-10GHz band.
Simultaneously, the FCC is considering allowing unlicensed 'cognitive' radios to
overlay allocated bands, such as TV spectrum overlay.&lt;br/&gt;This award takes
a broad and thorough inter-disciplinary approach to developing the fundamental
understanding of the operation in new bands, such as 60GHz and UWB, spectrum
reuse and spectrum recycling by cognitive radios, together with reducing the
requirements of these systems to the basic hardware specifications of the
underlying technology.&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are developing a common
computational, test and measurement infrastructure that will allow a quantum
leap in wireless technology research and its applications. By building a common
computational infrastructure, consisting of compute servers, clusters of
workstations and FPGA-based emulation, the researchers will foster the
propagation of information from theory to prototypes. To fundamentally
understand the physical properties of new bands as well as new methods of
spectrum utilization and coexistence of various systems, the researchers will
make a major investment in test and measurement
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This common infrastructure will
support the research of over a hundred graduate students, tens of undergraduate
researchers and more than ten faculty. To maximize the impact, in addition to
the traditional means of publications, the research results will be disseminated
through participation in communications standardization processes, participation
in government and NSF-sponsored studies on wireless technology and policies, and
industry involvement. Research results will be used to form new graduate and
undergraduate courses that will be taught in Berkeley and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;