* 0403781
* NIRT-Integration of Photosynthetic Complexes into Novel Biomolecular Electronic Devices
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Barry Bruce, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2010
* USD 1,733,208.00

This proposal leading to this award was received in response to Nanoscale
Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. The award will
support the joint efforts of investigators at the University of Tennessee and
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who will explore the use of naturally
occurring photosynthetic complexes to produce an efficient photovoltaic device
(solar cell). Conventional silicon-based (inorganic) solar cells remain costly
and energy intensive to manufacture. This has limited the use of photovoltaic
devices to much less than 1% of the worldwide supply of energy. Preliminary work
by the investigators has shown that bacterial photosynthetic systems, whose
overall quantum is nearly 100%, can be joined to amorphous organic
semiconductors to produce a functioning device. Although this device has low
efficiency, work on stabilization of the membranous structures that hold the
photosystem components is expected to lead to devices whose power conversion
efficiency can match or exceed that of the best existing silicon-based
photovoltaic devices. If successful, this effort could eventually lead to the
production of inexpensive solar cells that are flexible and lightweight, and
that perform competitively with inorganic semiconductor cells. In addition to
these research efforts, the investigators will undertake a multi-tiered
education strategy that targets graduate and undergraduate students through
research involvement and a variety of graduate-level courses. Outreach efforts
aimed at middle school students and their teachers are also planned.&lt;br/&gt;