* 0403291
* FIBR Planning: Genome Dynamics and Evolutionary Processes in a Dioecious System
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Janis Antonovics, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher L. Greer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 49,680.00

Intellectual Merit - Genes on autosomes, on sex-chromosomes, in mitochondria and
chloroplasts, and those associated with transposable elements are inherited
through different pathways and with different rules. Yet the occurrence of these
elements within single individuals, whose phenotype they influence, creates
complex evolutionary processes that influence phenomena such as chromosome
evolution and genome restructuring. This planning grant has the goal of
developing the angiosperm genus Silene and its associated pathogen Microbotryum
as model systems for understanding the evolution and genetics of sexual
reproductive systems. The Silene - Microbotryum community has successfully
developed these species into model systems for the study of sex-determination
and host-pathogen systems. The objective of this FIBR planning project is to
organize this community around the development of a common set of genomic
resources, to integrate the current workers in the field, and to reduce the
duplication of effort in developing common resources. A research symposium will
be held to achieve this goal and will include not only the scientists working on
this system, but also a set of experts in genomics, molecular biology, and
theoretical biology who share conceptual interests but work with other
organisms. Subsequently, a workshop of the FIBR PIs will be held to develop the
proposal itself. This project is centered on the strengths of this system with
regard to answering questions that are not readily approachable in other model
systems. These strengths include a broad range of systems within closely related
taxa, intense knowledge of pathogen dynamics and its interaction with the
reproductive system, and a profound understanding of the ecological and
phylogeographic context of the evolutionary processes under
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - This planning activity will
draw together a diverse range of researchers representing a breadth of
institutional types and a geographically disperse set. The research symposium
emphasizes direct student and post-doctoral participation and builds on the
ongoing outreach efforts of the principal investigators. The symposium and
planning meetings will provide opportunities to develop further plans for
enhancing educational and outreach opportunities as part of the anticipated pre-
proposal. More generally, planning for the FIBR pre-proposal will include
mechanisms to promote the integration of population dynamic and molecular
approaches and help the career development of young scientists by crossing
disciplines and emphasizing a broad and comparative approach.&lt;br/&gt;