* 0403037
* ROLE: Story Listening Technologies for Emergent Writing Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Susan Goldman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2007
* USD 951,013.00

While multiple, and technological literacies have become the topic of
considerable research, reading and writing literacy remain the basis of
education, and the prerequisites to science, mathematics, and technology
fluency. Reading and writing do not start in school, however. Children prepare
themselves for later literacy long before first grade. And preparation for
literacy consists of more than becoming aware of text. Children learn to treat
language as an object (metalinguistic awareness), and to create and maintain
cohesive text (decontextualized language) first in oral language. Many of these
emergent literacy skills are acquired in language play and in storytelling among
peers. In general, however, very few technologies are available for supporting
children's storytelling and story writing in sociocultural context for later
literacy, despite its importance in children's cognitive, communicative, and
linguistic development as a whole. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project lays out
a program of research designed to address a specific need of young children --
to learn how to write -- based on one specific ability of young children -- the
ability to tell stories. Current views of the relationship between oral and
written literacy hold that the development of children's written literacy is
intertwined with the development of their oral literacy skills. We believe that
technology, and particularly tangible non-screen-and-keyboard based technology,
can play a unique role in supporting the emergence of writing literacy by
building on one particular aspect of oral literacy, children's story telling. We
propose that Story Listening Systems that actually listen to children's stories
and interact with them about the stories not only support the development of
emergent oral literacy skills but also foster writing skills and the transition
from oral to written literacy. The model behind the Story Listening System
embodies four essential traits that enable it to effectively scaffold written
literacy. The four traits are to (a) depend on children's oral storytelling
skills to bootstrap literacy, (b) introduce peers as playmates in the system or
with the system, (c) invite the kind of embodied play away from the desktop that
is most comfortable for young children, (d) allow children to construct their
own personally meaningful content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to evaluate
the effectiveness of these systems, children between the ages of 4 and 7 will
engage with Story Listening Systems and we will assess changes in three crucial
predictors of written literacy: (i) use of decontextualized language (language
removed from its original context, and reworked for a new audience), (ii)
metalinguistic awareness, (iii) collaboration with peers to make meaning. We
will also evaluate an additional implication of the SLS: that support for
emergent literacy can be made culture-inclusive and therefore can be used to
invite more children into emergent writing literacy because the language forms
with which they are familiar are embedded in the system. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the proposed work will be four-fold: (i) a suite of
story listening literacy technologies, (ii) a substantive body of data
evaluating the role of these technologies in children's writing, (iii) a fuller
understanding of the general mechanisms underlying children's development of
literacy skills, (iv) a generalized set of design principles that link features
of technology with features of children's written literacy acquisition. The
design principles will be for two audiences: the design community creating
children's digital technologies (e.g. everyone from mainstream toy industries
making physical artifacts to game designers to traditional educational/learning
software designers) and those actively studying and teaching written literacy
(e.g. developmental psychologists, educators). This work has implications, then,
for the communities of academics, educators, technologists, and policy
organizations concerned with placing technology in school contexts.