* 0403446
* NER:      Dip-Pen Nanolithographic Templates for Conjugated Polymer Photovoltaic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 06/30/2005
* USD 104,995.00

This NER proposal seeks to develop a new method for controlling the performance
thin-film polymer photovoltaic devices. This will be accomplished by using
nanopatterned surface templates to chemically induce phase separation in
semiconducting polymer blends on the 10-100 nm length scale and by showing that
such templates can be used to optimize photovoltaic device performance. This
project will advance the societal goal of developing renewable energy sources
while it advances the scientific goal of enhancing understanding of the
relationship between nanoscale phase separation and the optoelectronic
properties in conjugated polymer blends. To achieve these objectives, we will
use Dip-Pen Nanolithography (DPN) to generate monolayer-thick nanoscale patterns
on electrode surfaces onto which blends of conjugated polymers will be spin-
coated from solution. The proposal will determine the effects of the template
chemistry on phase-separation in the polymer blend films. After identifying
conditions that allow control over the morphology on the appropriate length
scale, we will correlate the performance and photophysical properties of the
blends with their morphology. The 10-100 nm length scale of interest is well-
matched to the resolution of DPN. This proposal will provide us with a new means
to systematically probe the relationship between nanoscale morphology and
optoelectronic properties in blends of organic semiconductors by using DPN as a
'rapid prototyping' tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Meeting
the energy needs of the world's growing population in an environmentally
sustainable fashion is a fundamental challenge facing society today. The surface
templates developed through this proposal could be adapted to high-throughput
contact printing procedures and could thereby lead to the development of low-
cost, high-efficiency photovoltaic cells using polymeric semiconductors.
Furthermore, this project will provide interdisciplinary research training to
graduate and undergraduate students and this proposal will support training in a
lab that is presently ~50% female, and 25% undergraduate. &lt;br/&gt;