* 0403871
* NIRT: Configurable Nano Patterned Polar Surfaces for Molecular Pattern Formation and Transfer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Robert Nemanich, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2010
* USD 1,560,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The proposal aims at studying a range of electronic devices that integrate
ordered arrays of functional molecules onto nanopatterned surfaces, which
present unique applications and truly underpin the development of
nanotechnology. Ferroelectric materials are characterized by a spontaneous,
reversible polarization. The presence of a large polarization implies that one
can achieve unique surfaces with a controllable combination of surface charge,
surface potential, and surface dipole, which can be exploited in patterning and
nanoassembly. The fact that the polarization is reversible implies that surface
patterns can be written with these features. Here, it is proposed to use scanned
probe techniques to create such patterns in ferroelectrics with nanoscale
resolution, and use these patterns as templates to drive a variety of self-
assembly processes. &lt;br/&gt;Central to our understanding of how patterned
surfaces can be used as supports and atomically precise templates is resolving
how surface properties dictate monolayer growth, crystallinity, and
functionality. The first steps towards creating functional nanoscale structures
involve grasping how to exploit chemical and physical interactions at the
molecular level and determine the degree of correlation between surface
properties and single molecule or aggregate interactions. These issues of
coherent organization or self-assembly of surface bound molecules impact a broad
range of physical phenomena from single molecule device design to heterogeneous
catalysis to functional opto-electronic materials. This NIRT will support four
interrelated tasks, which range from patterning and control of the ferroelectric
surface to exploring the fundamental science of molecular attachment and the
specifics of two novel molecular patterned surface structures including liquid
crystalline molecules and molecular &lt;br/&gt;rotators. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The program has an integrated educational and outreach program that
begins with the six graduate students, four undergraduate students, and one
post-doc working directly on the research projects. The research will impact
newly developed graduate courses, and we are proposing to initiate a new series
of interdisciplinary short courses. In addition, the PIs will develop and
integrate hands-on nanotechnology modules from the NIRT into UG chemistry and
physics courses through the SCALE-UP approach. This will also involve existing
REU site programs in Chemistry and Physics. An AFM will be purchased in support
of the undergraduate education initiatives. The program will link into another
innovative NSF-initiated program (Technology Entrepreneurship and Education) to
evaluate and develop commercialization activities based upon the research of
this NIRT.