* 0403217
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Efficient Test and Diagnosis Techniques for System-on-Chip
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 05/31/2008
* USD 35,100.00

0403217&lt;br/&gt;Chakrabarty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-
year collaborative research project between Professor Krishnendu Chakrabarty at
Duke University in North Carolina and Professor Seji Kajihara at Kyushu
University in Japan. They will be undertaking research on efficient test and
diagnosis techniques for system-on-chip (SOC). Recent advances in VLSI
technology have lead to a rapid increase in the density of integrated circuits
(ICs). The increased density and the need to test for new types of defects in
nanometer technologies result in a tremendous increase in test data volume. The
increase in test data volume not only leads to the increase of testing time, but
the high test data volume may also exceed the limited memory depth of automatic
test equipment (ATE). Multiple ATE reloads are time-consuming since data
transfer from a workstation to the ATE hard disk or from the ATE hard disk to
ATE channels is very slow. The researchers will investigate several new
approaches to reduce test data volume and testing for ICs. These techniques are
based on data compression methods, alternative scan architectures, and built-in
self-test (BIST). Compression techniques from the image-processing domain, such
as quad tree decomposition, will be explored. A scan design approach will be
developed in which a small number of ATE channels will be used to drive multiple
scan chains. Finally, new linear-feedback shift-register (LFSR) reseeding
architectures will be developed in which the seeds for the LFSR can be shifted
into the LFSR through a designated flip-flop, which can be selected from a set
of predetermined flip-flops of the LFSR.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;ICs are widely
used in today's electronic systems, with applications ranging from
microprocessors and consumer electronics to safety-critical systems such as
medical and aircraft control systems. In order to ensure the reliable operation
of these systems, high quality testing of ICs is essential. To reduce product
cost, it is also necessary to reduce the cost of testing without compromising
product quality in any way. This project is expected to lead to low-cost test
techniques for ICs, ranging from external testing using data compression to BIST
solutions. This research will eventually allow even higher levels of integration
in SOC designs, and help bridge the gap between design capability and
manufacturing capacity. The broad impact of this research will be seen in
reduced design time and enhanced reliability of a wide range of electronic
products.&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories
that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. Through the
exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. The project
includes the participation of a graduate student. Results of the research will
be disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;