* 0403304
* International Travel Grant for Participants in Process Systems; January 5-10, 2004; Kunming, China
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Gintaras Reklaitis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2004
* USD 25,844.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is for support for thirteen
US academic researchers and educators to participate in the 8th International
Symposium on Process Systems Engineering (PSE 2003), which will be held in
Kunming, China, January 5-10, 2004. The purpose of the triennial seires of
conferences is to bring together the worldwide community of researchers and
practitioners who are involved in the creation and application of computing and
information technologies (IT) to address problems associated with the design and
operation of process and products in the chemical and related industries. This
is the first time the conference is to be held in China, in recognition of the
growing body of research in this domain originating in that country. The special
focus of the meeting is on how PSE methodologies and IT-based tools can support
the high-level business decisions required in the global process industries. In
keeping with this focus, the conference organization, program and attendance
involves researchers and decision makers from a broad range of industries based
in Europe, the US, and Asia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the key thematic tracks of the conference is
on the integration of PSE research into the educational process. Topics that
will be addressed include developments in computer aided education tools as well
as curriculum innovations that will expose students to the impact of technical
decisions on broad societal and business issues. As in the IT and computer
science communities in general, women researchers are underrepresented in the
PSE domain. To help broaden the participation of women in the PSE domain, travel
support is to be provided for the junior woman faculty whose paper has been
accepted for conference presentation. This activity will enhance the
infrastructure for research and education by exposing the faculty of the US
delegation to their peers in Europe, Asia and the Americas and facilitate
networking and the establishment of collaborations in research and the
development of educational materials.&lt;br/&gt;