* 0403026
* Thermodynamic and Transport Studies of Strongly Interacting Electrons in Two-Dimensional Semiconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Sergey Kravchenko, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2008
* USD 405,891.00

This project will investigate the interplay between strong Coulomb interactions
and random electrostatic potentials, one of the central problems in condensed
matter physics. It is well known that in two-dimensional systems of non-
interacting or weakly interacting electrons, the ever-present random environment
leads to an insulating ground state. However, new evidence has emerged within
the past decade that indicates a transition from a an insulating to a metallic
phase in two-dimensional systems of strongly interacting electrons, with
anomalous magnetic properties reported near the transition. These results have
inspired numerous experimental and theoretical studies. The current project will
focus on measurements of the thermodynamic quantities of "just metallic" two-
dimensional electron and hole systems. Specifically, orbital and spin
magnetization of strongly interacting electrons (holes) will be studied using a
newly developed technique. The experiments will be carried out in ultra-clean
silicon MOSFETs, as well as in other low-disordered two-dimensional systems: p-
and n-type SiGe heterostructures. These experiments will be accompanied with
sensitive ultra-low temperature transport measurements, such as parallel
magnetoresistance and Shubnikov-de Haas measurements. It is expected that the
results will add significantly to our understanding of the metal-insulator
transition in two dimensions. Another impact will be on education, as this
project will provide students an excellent introduction to research in forefront
area physics. It will incorporate Northeastern's well-known "co-op" education
program for undergraduates.

The interplay between strong Coulomb interactions and random potentials has been
a long-standing problem in condensed matter physics. New evidence has emerged
within the past decade indicating that at ultra-low temperatures, strong
interactions between electrons may stabilize a metallic state in two-dimensional
systems. These results have attracted great attention in the scientific
community and have inspired significant experimental and theoretical activity.
The proposed research is a continuing experimental effort to understand this
important problem. The results anticipated from the proposed experiments will
advance basic knowledge, and may have impacts on the development of next
generation semiconductor devices for high-speed communications, signal
processing, imaging, and detection. For example, the new technological areas
such as semiconductor-based quantum computation and spintronics are known to
depend heavily on this kind of knowledge. Another impact will be on education,
as this project will provide an excellent introduction for students to carry out
research at the forefront of physics. The project will give graduate and
undergraduate students an excellent preparation for careers in academe,
industry, and government.