* 0403618
* NIRT:  Devices and Architectures for Neuromorphic Circuits with Nanoelectronic Components
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* James Lukens, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,300,000.00

Devices and Architectures for Neuromorphic Circuits with Nanoelectronic
Components&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in
response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 03-043, category
NIRT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary studies indicate that hybrid
semiconductor/molecular ("CMOL") circuits may serve as a basis for neuromorphic
networks ("CrossNets") capable of advanced mixed-signal information processing
with unprecedented density (beyond 1012 active devices per cm2) and performance
(up to 1020 elementary operations per second per cm2) at acceptable power
consumption (below 100 W/cm2). The project addresses two key issues of the CMOL
CrossNet development: (i) experimental study of single-molecule latching
switches self-assembled on prefabricated metallic nanowire structures, and
characterization of transport properties of these components, and (ii)
development of advanced architectures for digital and mixed-signal CMOL
circuits, including digital processors and mixed-signal neuromorphic networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exponential progress of silicon digital technology is
expected to run, some time during the next decade, into the "red brick wall" of
fundamental physical and technical limitations. The project will explore one
possible direction to extend the growth to nanoscale devices, by transferring
from purely semiconductor digital chips to hybrid semiconductor/molecular
integrated circuits. In such circuits the simplest and most numerous devices
would be chemically synthesized and then self-assemble, from solution, on
silicon chips with prefabricated nanowire fabrics. &lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses two key issues of this new exciting field: the synthesis and self-
assembly of molecular devices and the development of innovative, bio-inspired
architectures for future hybrid circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;