* 0403838
* Group actions and vector bundles in algebraic geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* William Graham, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 98,454.00

DMS-0403838&lt;br/&gt;William A. Graham&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
concerns research on some problems in algebraic geometry that arise in the
context of group actions and vector bundles. There are four parts to the
proposal. The first part of the proposal is to study lef vector bundles on
algebraic varieties. In particular the proposer plans to study a conjecture he
has made concerning such bundles, and also to extend to lef bundles some
positivity results proved by Fulton and Lazarsfeld for ample bundles. The second
part of the proposal concerns labeled directed graphs modeled on the moment
graphs defined for certain torus actions on algebraic varieties.
The&lt;br/&gt;``intersection homology'' Poincare polynomial of such a
generalized moment graph is defined, and the goal is to see if this polynomial
is palindromic and unimodal for more general graphs of this type, not
necessarily arising as moment graphs, but with (as far as can be determined) all
the graph-theoretic properties that moment graphs have. The third part of the
proposal is to prove a non-negativity theorem about the multiplication in the
torus-equivariant K-theory of the flag variety. The fourth part of the proposal
is to describe the Riemann-Roch map of a geometric quotient by an algebraic
group in terms of the equivariant Riemann-Roch
map.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry is a branch of mathematics that has
grown out of the study of solutions to polynomial equations. By linking algebra
and geometry, it sheds light on both, and has implications for many other
branches of mathematics, including number theory, cryptography, and group
theory. This project is largely devoted to studying some problems in algebraic
geometry that are related to algebraic groups. To say that a problem is related
to algebraic groups means that the problem has some symmetry which can make it
more accessible to investigation. Sometimes the symmetry can be used to extract
essential features of the problem and study them without considering all of the
geometric complexities; the moment graphs, which are part of this project, are
an example of this.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;