* 0403590
* NER: Exploring Possibilities for Carbon Nanotube as Circuits and Interconnects
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Yehea Ismail, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0403590&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Ismail , Yehea&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
NER: Exploring Possibilities for Carbon Nanotube as Circuits and&lt;br/&gt;Inter
connects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The scaling of CMOS
technologies is showing worrisome trends in terms of noise immunity, power
consumption, reliability issues, and performance bottle necks. Major challenges
are facing VLSI technologies in trying to maintain the current exponential
growth in speed and density of devices. These physical challenges are resulting
into an exponentially growing effort to maintain Moore's law. Hence, completely
different alternative ways may be soon required to keep the hundreds of billions
of dollars VLSI industry alive. Since their introduction, carbon nanotubes have
been envisioned as the next leap in electronic circuits due to many attractive
features such as their ability to act as both transistors and interconnect as
well as photo devices. This multifunctional behavior is very desirable in
building a single monolithic technology based only on carbon nanotubes that can
perform every function available with silicon and GaAs technologies. Also, the
speed and power consumption of these devices are expected to be immensely
superior to CMOS technologies. In addition, there may be noise and coupling
advantages when using metallic carbon nanotubes as interconnect relative to the
typical metals used presently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
focus on the design, simulation, and testing of SWNT circuits and interconnects
as well as extracting circuit and system level characteristics. The specific
topics that the PIs and their groups plan to conduct under this project are:
Accurate models and simulations of simple SWNT circuits using different logic
styles. Comparison of different logic styles used for SWNTs and consequently a
possible outcome of the best suitable style for SWNT circuits. Establishment of
testing and fabrication techniques that are cost-effective, simple, and
replicable. Modeling of metallic SWNT interconnects. Modeling of SWNT-metal
based hybrid interconnects.&lt;br/&gt;