* 0403646
* NER: Nanoparticle Stability by Quantum Design of Van der Waals Forces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Milton Cole, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 06/30/2006
* USD 130,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0403646&lt;br/&gt;D. Velegol, Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology promises huge advances
in materials, optical, electronics, and biomedical&lt;br/&gt;applications.
Current top-down techniques (e.g., atomic force microscopy, e-beam lithography)
for creating nanoscale products are slow and expensive, making them difficult to
use for bulk production of quantum dots, nanostructured catalysts, nanoparticle
lubricants, advanced nanoparticle drug vectors, and other nano products. A more
viable approach to consumer-scale production is "bottom up assembly", in which
smart particles self-assemble into structures. A critical bottleneck to
nanoparticle use is the dispersion and self-assembly of functional particles.
The challenge is that van der Waals (VDW) forces cause non-specific and
undesired aggregation of the particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current techniques
for stabilizing particles - especially the use of dispersants - limit the
ability to&lt;br/&gt;functionalize the particles. To achieve nanoparticle
dispersion, new methods must be identified for reducing VDW attractive forces.
These forces always exist between atoms and molecules, and they have been
studied in various contexts for 75 years. But the issues involved with
calculating VDW forces for nanoparticles open a new field of study, since
nanoparticle VDW forces are different from those for micron size particles or
atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The vision of this NSF NER is to
explore the design of nanoparticle systems that are inherently stable, using
quantum principles. Our preliminary calculations suggest new opportunities for
tuning VDW forces, perhaps even making them repulsive. Precise techniques for
tuning VDW forces are highly unlikely to emerge from experiments alone, due to
the huge parameter space involved. Quantum calculations are essential to the
success of this project. In this NER we will ... &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
develop the tool chest needed to model accurately the VDW forces for
nanoparticles, and&lt;br/&gt;program this into "BottomUp" software to make it
easily available to nanotechnologists;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. calculate VDW
forces for technologically-relevant systems, including core-shell
nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;and nanoparticles in various co-solvent
systems;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. assess the accuracy of the calculations using
turbidity stability experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This novel modeling will
enable us to explore the huge parameter space - particle material,
size,&lt;br/&gt;morphology, core-shell structure, co-solvent media, etc. - that
is not only unmeasurable currently, but also which requires design techniques to
navigate. Going beyond current paradigms for atomic or micron-size systems, we
will consider effects of crystal structures and discrete atoms, altered
polarizabilities of nanoparticles, and core-shell and co-solvent systems. Our
approach will use techniques well-known in the atomic VDW force literature, and
transform them for use on nanoparticle systems. In this NER we seek support for
early-stage calculations that will demonstrate the feasibility of the "design"
approach for nanoparticle system dispersion. The proposal addresses the modeling
and simulation at the nanoscale theme, as well as the manufacturing processes at
the nanoscale theme, since our goal is to enable the bulk production and
processing of nanoparticle systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This
research will have two broader impacts. The first is "BottomUp", the software
tool that will embody our calculations. The vision for this novel piece of
freeware infrastructure is that a nanotechnologist can enter systems parameters
(e.g., materials, particle sizes and volume fraction) and receive specific
suggestions for dispersing the nanoparticles based on the most powerful
calculations available for nanoparticle VDW forces and stability. In the longer
term, BottomUp will be a user-friendly tool that will be extended to other types
of forces, including electrostatic, depletion, and hydrophobic forces. The
second broader impact comes from leveraging existing strengths with "Action
Potential", a Penn State program that exposes 10 to 14 year olds to a
stimulating science experience. Collaborations with this organization will aim
to inspire students to learn and use modern physics for applied
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;