* 0403930
* NER:     Molecular Self-Assembly for Dye Sensitized Photonic Nanodevices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Arunan Nadarajah, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Dye sensitization is an important technique to increase the spectral
photoresponse in high bandgap semiconductors, which are more stable in photo-
electrochemical cells. However, these devices have low quantum efficiencies and
poor stability. One of the most serious problems is the concentration quenching
in which absorbed photon energy is dissipated as heat energy due to the
segregation of dye molecules. The only way to suppress concentration quenching
is to devise a method of dispersing dye molecules on the surface, minimizing the
formation of aggregates. Within this proposal, the investigators will develop
devices and material processing technologies necessary to prevent segregation of
dye molecules by the molecular self-assembly method. The preliminary
investigations in this project will demonstrate the feasibility of this
technology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will employ the self-
assembling techniques to insert dye molecules into a few monolayers of
nanoporous material grown on the semiconductor surface. Two types of prototype
devices will be investigated. First, a photodetector will be fabricated by
depositing a conductive and transparent metal oxide film on the surface and
second, a photo-electrochemical cell will be prepared by immersing the dye-
coated electrode in an electrochemical cell. The structure, surface properties,
photocurrent, quantum efficiency and optical properties of the devices will be
measured and simulated. It is anticipated that these types of self-assembly
methods can be widely used in many other applications, such as in molecular
devices, nanoscale biosystems, and nanoelectronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this project includes (i) undergraduate and graduate research,
(ii) participation in a high school outreach program by delivering a seminar,
and (iii) building the foundation for a nanotechnology course in the college.
Two undergraduate students and two full time graduate students will be involved
in carrying out the experimental work. Every effort will be made to involve
students from diverse background in nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;