* 0403491
* Study of Correlated Insulators and Metals in Two Dimensions
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Dragana Popovic, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2009
* USD 300,000.00

This project will address simultaneously two major problems of condensed matter
physics: The metal-insulator transition and glassy behavior. Recent studies have
indicated that the two are most likely intimately related. The focus of this
experimental project will be on the properties of two-dimensional systems in
semiconductor heterostructures. Specific topics to be addressed using a two-
dimensional electron system in Si include: (1) nonequilibrium glassy dynamics,
(2) the role of the range of Coulomb interactions on the metal-insulator
transition and glassy effects, and (3) the effect of local magnetic moments on
the metal-insulator transition and glassy behavior. In addition, the possibility
of glassy freezing in two-dimensional systems in other materials will be also
explored. These issues will be investigated using a combination of transport and
noise measurements. The results should provide information on crucial aspects of
the problem: disorder, electron-electron interactions, and the role of spin and
charge degrees of freedom. This will contribute significantly to our
understanding of disordered, strongly correlated systems. In pursuing these
objectives, undergraduate students, graduate students and postdocs will acquire
valuable technical and analytical skills for a wide range of careers in the
areas of science and technology in academic, industrial or government
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many of the novel materials with potentially
great technological importance, such as recently discovered high temperature
superconductors, the metallic state is created by chemically doping an otherwise
insulating material. Such materials, therefore, find themselves close to a so-
called "metal-insulator" transition. Understanding the nature of the metal-
insulator transition thus represents an important issue for the materials
science and technology. It also presents a fundamental problem in condensed
matter physics. Several recent studies have shown striking similarities in the
behavior of systems close to a metal-insulator transition and those of various
glassy materials, the understanding of which also presents one of the deepest
and most interesting problems in physics. This experimental condensed matter
physics project will address simultaneously both the problem of the metal-
insulator transition and that of glassy behavior by using a combination of
electrical transport and noise measurements. The results anticipated from these
experiments are expected to provide a fundamental insight into these problems.
Furthermore, since measurements will be carried out on semiconductor
heterostructures, the results may have an impact on the development of next
generation semiconductor devices to be used in new technological areas such as
quantum computation and spintronics, for example, where device noise may be one
of the main factors limiting its performance. The project will give postdoctoral
researchers, graduate and undergraduate students an excellent preparation for
careers in academia, industry, and government.&lt;br/&gt;