* 0403835
* NIRT: Nanofiber Manufacturing for Energy Conversion and Utilization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Gerald Young, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,330,000.00

Thermo-photo-voltaic devices (TPV) can make efficient use of energy resources,
now wasted, by generation of electrical energy from exhaust streams of engines,
power plants, incinerators, and chemical reactors. Recovery of 10% of the wasted
thermal energy from automobiles in the United States is equivalent to saving 30
billion gallons of fuel per year. In a TPV device rare earth ions, in ceramic
nanofibers heated by exhaust gases, emit photons efficiently in a relatively
intense band. The photons are converted to electrical power with commercial
photodiodes. TPV devices that are mechanically robust and have no deleterious
effects on the automobile or other system need to be designed and manufactured.
A nanofiber based device will meet these demands. The processes for making
nanofibers require sophisticated insights from the disciplines brought together
in this project, to control, scale up, and manufacture the nanofibers useful in
TPV devices. Our successful experience with the design and manufacture of
filters and wound dressings will be applied to this TPV project. Manufacture of
TPV devices based on nanofiber engineering crosses conventional materials,
scientific and technological boundaries. Metal containing polymers, electrospun
into nanofibers, pyrolized to ceramics, and mounted in a stream of hot gas, emit
photons that are converted into power in semiconducting
photodiodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is at the forefront of new,
emerging, nanoscale engineering. Graduate students will learn from their
interactions with Professors from several disciplines, researchers at the NASA
Glenn Research Center, and at the Technion, in Israel. Qualified high school
students from underrepresented groups will be recruited to work in our labs
through our interaction with the pre-engineering program (Project Lead the Way)
of the Akron Public School system. Working with The University of Akron's First
Year Experience program and our proposed NSF-STEP program, REU funds associated
with this project will be used to provide research opportunities for
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups identified by their
professors as interested and qualified. Hundreds of students in K-12 classes
will visit the nanofiber production laboratories. Electrospinning kits and
technical guidance will be supplied to high school classes, science projects,
and science fair projects. Undergraduate and community college students will be
introduced to laboratory research.&lt;br/&gt;