* 0403862
* Stability of the Ocean Clathrate Reservoir to Anthropogenic Climate Perturbation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* David Archer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2008
* USD 217,014.00

0403862&lt;br/&gt;Archer&lt;br/&gt;Large volumes of methane are sequestered in
marine sediments along deep continental margins by an icy solid known as methane
clathrate (or methane hydrate). Geologic data from the Paleocene document a
methane release at that time which is comparable to the size of the current
inventory of traditional fossil fuels (the Paleocene Eocene thermal maximum
event, or PETM). The timing of the methane release coincides with deep sea
warming which is not radically different from the long-term global warming
forecast. Thus the prospect of an eventual release of methane from clathrate in
response to anthropogenic climate change in the future warrants serious
consideration. &lt;br/&gt;The clathrate carbon reservoir contains more carbon
than the atmosphere, the biosphere, soils, and fossil fuels combined, but the
stability of this reservoir appears precarious. The physical stability of the
clathrates relies on the cold temperatures and high pressures of the deep sea.
Clathrate is buoyant in water, like regular water ice, and is held in the deep
sea by the weight of overlying sediment. The dissolved methane that the
clathrate equilibrates with is chemically unstable against oxygen and sulfate in
the modern ocean. In this proposal we show a preliminary model result that on
geologic time scales the size of the steady-state clathrate reservoir may be
extremely sensitive to the temperature and oxygenation of the deep ocean. This
model combines two previously existing components: (1) the Muds model for early
diagenesis of organic matter in sediments, and (2) the Davies and Buffett model
of the physics and chemistry of methane clathrate formation. The model
reproduces the present-day estimates of clathrate in the ocean, but predicts
almost no clathrates as the ocean temperature is raised by 6C, the condition
before the PETM. The model is able to store enough clathrate in the Paleocene
ocean to account for the PETM if we assume a cool and anoxic Arctic ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;This analysis however tells us nothing about the transition from one
steady state condition to another, a shortcoming we propose to address. We will
devote particular attention to the structural stability of the sediment column
under conditions of methane phase change, by incorporating pore pressure and
metastable clathrate behavior into the clathrate model. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: In summary, we propose to characterize the long- and short-term stability
of the clathrate reservoir in the ocean as a component of the climate and carbon
cycle of the earth. &lt;br/&gt;(1) What is the sensitivity of the steady-state
clathrate reservoir to temperature and oxygenation of the deep
ocean?&lt;br/&gt;(2) How quickly does the clathrate reservoir respond to changes
in forcing?&lt;br/&gt;(3) Under what conditions might we expect catastrophic
release of methane, as in the PETM?&lt;br/&gt;(4) Is there a positive feedback
between temperature and the clathrate reservoir? &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Implications: Global warming will undoubtedly destabilize clathrate in the
future, but the extent and consequences of any possible methane release are not
known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;