* 0403596
* Composition and Fluxes of Organic Carbon Species from the Yukon River Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Laodong Guo, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2006
* USD 397,285.00

Composition and flux of organic carbon species from the Yukon River
Basin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A scientist from the International Arctic Research
Center/University of Alaska Fairbanks seeks to understand the biogeochemical
processes governing the composition, reactivity, transformation and flux of
organic carbon species, including dissolved, colloidal and particulate organic
carbon from the Yukon River Basin. Being heavily influenced by ice, snow and
permafrost dynamics, the Yukon River Basin, a pristine river basin, is sensitive
to environmental and climate change. With up to 50% of the world's soil organic
carbon stored in the northern region, the role of arctic/subarctic rivers in the
remobilization of organic carbon and thus marine and global carbon cycles is far
more important than previously recognized. Due to the Yukon River's remoteness
and the extreme weather conditions, the composition and reactivity of organic
carbon species entering the ocean via the Yukon remain largely unknown and the
riverine carbon export flux is poorly quantified. &lt;br/&gt;Observations will
include phase partitioning of organic carbon between dissolved, colloidal and
particulate phases, and concentrations, optical properties, molecular and
isotopic (d13C, d15N and ?14C) composition and reactivity of size fractionated
organic carbon. Field and laboratory experiments will also be carried out to
examine the extent to which organic carbon fractionates during ice formation and
how the fractionation drives carbon partitioning and transformation. This
project will be among the first to combine both molecular-level and basin-scale
observations to understand temporal and spatial variations in composition and
flux of organic carbon species in a large but pristine and less
anthropogenically influenced river basin. The proposed research will provide
valuable data for comparative studies between drainage basins, and provide
inputs for and contribute effectively to the integrated carbon cycle program and
model development, and the understanding of the environmental impacts from a
changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;