* 0403510
* The Peruvian Fossil Forest Piedra Chamana: A Record of Continental Conditions during the Middle Eocene
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Deborah Woodcock, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 146,338.00

This award provides funds for a combination of field and laboratory studies to
reconstruct the environment and climate of a Middle Eocene low-latitude site,
using fossil wood (i.e., monocots and dicots) from the northern Peruvian Andes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific premise for the research is that while
continental and oceanic proxy records have established the existence of warm
climates at high latitudes during the Middle Eocene, conditions at tropical
latitudes during this period are not as well documented. It has, in addition,
been difficult for climate models to simulate the degree of high-latitude warmth
indicated for the Eocene and also the much lesser extent of warming in the lower
latitudes. The fossil forest is thereby an important record of tropical
conditions during a time of notable warmth worldwide and before the changes of
the latter part of the Eocene. The diversity of taxa at the Peru site is ideally
suited for paleoclimate reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
facilitate international exchange of ideas and analytical techniques between US
and Peruvian scientists, enhance the conservation of important scientific
specimens, and provide a unique learning experience for a US graduate student.
In addition, the project represents a strong and supportive collaboration
between the US National Science Foundation, Clark University, the US National
Park Service, and the National University San Marcos in Peru that will help the
research progress effectively.