* 0403641
* Atomic-Scale Structures and Properties of Hydrogen-Containing Defects in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Michael Stavola, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2009
* USD 299,956.00

Hydrogen is an important impurity in semiconductors because of its fascinating
fundamental properties and its impact on semiconductor technology. Hydrogen is
introduced easily into semiconductors, either intentionally or unintentionally,
where it interacts strongly with other impurities and defects. Hydrogen plays a
multifaceted role where it can passivate shallow impurities, eliminate
deleterious properties of deep-level defects, and, in some cases, act as an
unintentional dopant or even modify the bandgap of the host crystal. This
project focuses on new experiments aimed at providing structure-sensitive data
for interstitial H2 in Si, elucidating the interaction of H with native defects
in Si, and studying H in III-N-V alloys and in wide-band-gap semiconductors.
Vibrational spectroscopy of the light H atom has proved to be an excellent probe
of H-containing defects and is the principal method to be used to determine
microscopic properties. The experimental work on H in semiconductors conducted
in this program provides an excellent means to educate undergraduate and
graduate students in semiconductor physics. Students learn about the physics of
electronic materials, crystal defects, and the optical properties of materials,
providing a strong foundation for careers in education or industrial R&D.



Although hydrogen is the simplest atom, it is a complicated impurity in
semiconductors with properties that have fascinated defect specialists.
Furthermore, H is ubiquitous in the semiconductor growth and processing
environment and is introduced easily into semiconductors. Once present, H
modifies the electrical properties of semiconductor materials and the behavior
of electronic devices. Experimental studies of the atomic-scale structures of
hydrogen-containing defects in semiconductors are the focus of this research
program. The absorption of infrared light by the vibrational motion of the light
H atom is used to probe microscopic properties. The semiconductor materials of
interest include Si, which is important for integrated circuits and solar cells,
and compound semiconductors that are important for light-emitting devices. This
experimental program on H in semiconductors provides an excellent opportunity
for undergraduate and graduate students to learn about the semiconductor
materials that are important for electronic device technology. Highly qualified
undergraduates are recruited nationwide as part of Lehigh's Research Experiences
for Undergraduates program which exposes students, often from small colleges, to
university-level research.