* 0403755
* Workshop On Strong Motion Data Needs
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Robert Reitherman, Consortium of Universities for Res in Earthquake Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 06/30/2007
* USD 58,016.00

Abstract CMS-0403755, Wilfred D. Iwan, Consortium of Universities for Research
in Earthquake Engineering Title: "Workshop On Strong Motion Data Needs"

This action is to support a workshop to review the existing database of
earthquake strong motion records, identify gaps that may exist in this data,
determine and prioritize the needs for additional data, and make recommendations
regarding future needs in strong motion research.

This workshop builds on previous influential workshops in the field of strong
motion earthquake instrumentation, workshops that led to the successful
installation of strong motion arrays in the United States, Taiwan, India, China,
and Japan. These arrays have provided important data that have improved the
understanding of strong earthquake ground motion and the effects of this motion
on the built environment. Much has happened in the past few years, such as the
current formation of the George E. Brown Jr Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation. It is now time to take a fresh look at strong motion earthquake
instrument deployment in light of new instrument technologies and significant
new government monitoring and experimentation initiatives; to reassess the
status of strong motion instrumentation in the United States; and to develop a
new strategy to insure continued coordinated progress in this field.

In order to achieve this, the workshop will undertake the following tasks: 1)
determine the status of strong motion instrumentation programs in the US and
Mexico and the availability of data to the user community, 2) gather information
on the status of strong motion instrumentation programs outside the US, and the
extent to which critical data needed by US researchers and practitioners may be
obtained from foreign sources, 3) identify the highest priority strong motion
data needs for US programs, 4) develop possible strategies for obtaining needed
strong motion data for research and application, including consideration of
existing and planned strong motion programs of different Federal and State
agencies, seismo-tectonic and geo-political factors, mobile versus fixed
installations, and other issues, and 5) identify factors that need to be
considered in cost/benefit analysis for strong motion instrumentation
deployment. The primary focus of this Workshop will be on the engineering uses
of strong motion data.

The workshop will bring together leading experts on the subject of the
collection and use of ground motion data and develop new concepts on priorities
and needed developments.

Ground motion data have a pervasive influence. The programs that collect and
provide this data are a key research infrastructure in earthquake engineering.
Modernizing strong motion databases and instrumentation programs will provide
benefits that will accrue to many investigators in the field. Increasingly,
accessibility to ground motion data repositories is providing opportunities for
researchers and educators who are new to the earthquake engineering field.