* 0403783
* NIRT:  Nanotechnology and its Publics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Paul Wolpe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 199,887.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geiger&lt;br/&gt;0403783&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T
his NSF "pilot" project brings together researchers from Penn State, Cornell
University, and the University of Pennsylvania to build an integrated research
and education program addressing varied but interconnected topics on societal
implications of nanotechnology, around the common theme of nanotechnology and
its publics. More specifically, the aim of this pilot project is to establish a
foundation for comprehensive examination of nanotechnology and its publics,
encompassing public policy, economic, environmental, public opinion and the
media, and ethical issues. Five activities will be carried out with seed grant
funding. These are 1) conduct a case study to improve understanding of state
government nanotechnology policy initiatives; 2) conduct a case study to examine
patterns of commercialization of nanotechnology research; 3) conduct a national
public opinion survey to measure public perceptions about societal implications
of nanotechnology; 4)conduct secondary research to improve understanding of
environmental issues of nanotechnology; and 5) conduct research to improve
understanding of ethical and legal issues of nanotechnology. Exploratory
qualitative research on a single state, Pennsylvania, will gather preliminary
data for generating hypotheses about the impact and efficacy of state policies,
on one side, and the pathways of commercialization of laboratory research on the
other. Regarding patterns of commercialization of Nanotechnology Research ,
commercialization at the grass roots will be examined through at least three
lenses: Intellectual property; the prevalence and nature of start-up firms, and
the role they play in advancing technology toward commercial applications; and,
similarly with established corporations, what is their stake in nanotechnology
and what is their relationship to state-subsidized efforts for technology
creation. For the National Public Opinion Survey, Cornell University will
conduct a national opinion survey on public attitudes toward societal
implications of nanotechnology. The survey will involve telephone interviews
with a stratified random sample of 500 adults. The survey instrument will be
designed to measure public responses to media coverage of nanotechnology, as
well as public attitudes toward various public policies relating to
nanotechnology, nanotechnology commercialization and economic development,
environmental implications of nanotechnology, and ethical and legal implications
of nanotechnology. Regarding Environmental Issues, the project team will conduct
secondary research to explore environmental and ethical issues about
nanotechnology. This will involve examining nanotechnology research programs
with environmental thrusts sponsored by NSF and other agencies, and reviewing
scholarly literature and other sources to identify potential environmental
impacts of nanotechnology research programs addressing other thrust areas, such
as nanobiosystems, nanostructures, nanomanufacturing, nanodevices, and others.
Finally, regarding Ethical and Legal Issues, the project team will also explore
ethical and legal issues about nanotechnology through literature reviews by
discussions with panels of experts. A number of prominent scholars in ethics,
law, religious studies, and nanoscale science and engineering have been
identified as potential panel participants. Additional participants will be
identified through the other four thrusts comprising this seed project, and from
other sources. One set of discussions will take place as part of a workshop on
Nanotechnology and Its Publics to be held in 2004 in Philadelphia with
leadership from the University of Pennsylvania. A second set of discussions will
be held as part of a national conference on societal implications of
nanotechnology to be held in 2005 in partnership with the University of South
Carolina. The University of South Carolina, through its NIRT: From Laboratory to
Society: Developing an Informed Approach to Nanoscale Science and Technology, is
currently organizing semi-annual conferences on the societal implications of
nanotechnology. The Nanotechnology and Its Publics seed project team will
organize a discussion on ethical and legal issues through the established
University of South Carolina national conference series in 2005.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;