* 0403962
* Collaborative Research:  Assessing the Variability and Modification of Age, Character and Reactivity of Organic Carbon Delivered by Rivers and Estuaries to an Ocean Margin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Peter Raymond, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2008
* USD 298,031.00

Collaborative Research: Assessing the Variability and Modification of Age,
Character and Reactivity of Organic Carbon Delivered by Rivers and Estuaries to
an Ocean Margin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Riverine transport of
organic carbon (OC) is a significant flux in the global C budget, representing
major terms for both terrestrial losses and marine inputs. Rivers and estuaries
are also dynamic systems where terrestrial OC is transformed chemically and
isotopically prior to its export to the ocean margins. The global C budget
currently assumes that riverine flux represents the excess of terrestrial
ecosystem net primary production over decomposition. New data, however, show
that rivers discharging to the NW Atlantic margin exhibit a broad range in OC
ages, from modern to &gt;5,000 yrs B.P., with particulate OC (POC) often being
much older than dissolved OC (DOC). Therefore, part of the OC residing in
continental reservoirs on 103-108 year timescales is being remobilized, but the
extremely limited dataset precludes quantitative estimates of the transfer of
different-aged OC pools from land to the oceans. &lt;br/&gt;A major question to
be addressed in this proposal is "How much OC of young, old, and ancient ages is
mobilized in rivers, and is the processing of DOC and POC in specific rivers and
estuaries prior to discharge to the ocean dependent on OC ages and source
characteristics?" This will be addressed by examining a regional subset of
river/estuarine systems using isotopic (D14C, d13C), organic biomarker (kerogen,
microbial fatty acids, plant lignin, and hydrocarbons), and modeling approaches.
The systems chosen for study will cover a spectrum of land-use, lithology, size
and discharge in the northeastern U.S. Different stages of the rivers'
hydrographs will be sampled to assess the key roles of runoff and residence
times as controlling factors. Results from this project will be important for
understanding how land-derived OC fuels the intense net heterotrophy of rivers
and estuaries, for constraining the losses of soil OC via river/estuarine
transport, and for interpreting the chemical and isotopic signatures of OC in
ocean margins due to both OC sources and processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;