* 0403472
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Geology, Paleontology and Biogeography of the North African Early Miocene
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ellen Miller, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 3,600.00

0403472 Miller

Description: This award is to support a cooperative research between Dr. Ellen
Miller, Department of Anthropology, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North
Carolina and Dr. Ahmed Barkooky, Geology Department, Cairo University, Cairo,
Egypt. The goal is to enhance our understanding of North African mammalian and
primate evolution, by conducting geological and paleontological work at Wadi
Moghra and Siwa Oasis, early Miocene, Western Sahara, Egypt. Moghra is far
better known as the site preserves an array of extinct mammals, including an
early Old World monkey and an ape shortly after the divergence of the two
lineages. Much less is known about Siwa. While the occurrence of fossil mammals
at Moghra and Siwa has been documented, next to nothing is known about the
paleoenvironment of either Moghra or Siwa, and little is known about the
systematics and paleobiology of the Moghra or Siwa mammals themselves. The
location of Moghra and Siwa, in Africa but physically closer to Eurasia than
East Africa, provides a unique perspective from which to view the nature and
extent of contact between early Miocene Eurasian and African mammals. However,
data from North African localities has never been fully integrated into larger
interpretations of mammalian biogeography. The project has the potential to make
significant contributions to our understanding of higher primate origins and
Neogene mammalian dispersal patterns, from a time period and geographic region
that are critical for interpreting these events. The joint research expertise of
the PIs are suited to the combined task of deciphering the sedimentology and
stratigraphy of Moghra and Siwa (El-Barkooky), and using the biostratigraphy of
these localities to test hypotheses about mammalian and primate evolution
(Miller).

Scope and broad Impact: The collaboration will have significant impacts. First
is by the establishment of a professional working partnership between American
and Egyptian researchers. The structure of the teams secures a fully integrated,
multi-disciplinary expertise without redundancy. In addition, the project
provides training for three students (one American, two Egyptian). The training
of Egyptian vertebrate paleontologists is of particular importance because it is
critical that Egyptian citizens be able to sustain the development of this
branch of science in Egypt. Until now, Egyptian vertebrate paleontologists have
been very rare, in spite of the fact that Egypt contains some of the most
important fossil localities known anywhere in the world. Still further, work at
Moghra and Siwa holds particular relevance for those institutions attempting to
balance long term developmental and economic interests, such as oil and gas
exploration in the Western Desert, with the developmental gains that come from
identifying and preserving areas of particular scientific, cultural heritage and
touristic value. All results stemming from this project will be published
jointly by the PIs and contributing expedition members. This project is being
supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.