* 0403686
* Arithmetic on K3 surfaces and related problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Arthur Baragar, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2008
* USD 140,062.00

Abstract for award DMS-0403686 of Baragar &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
tenet of arithmetic geometry is the notion that one can
infer&lt;br/&gt;arithmetic properties of a variety from its geometry. The
investigator's&lt;br/&gt;research primarily deals with such a notion.
Specifically, the PI hopes to&lt;br/&gt;show that the number of rational points
with bounded Weil height in an orbit&lt;br/&gt;under the action of the group of
automorphisms of a K3 surface grows&lt;br/&gt;asymptotically like a power of the
bound. The exponent of growth should&lt;br/&gt;depend only on the geometry of
the surface. When the K3 surface contains&lt;br/&gt;no -2 curves, the exponent
is expected to be n-2, where n is the dimension&lt;br/&gt;of the Picard group.
The situation is particularly interesting when there&lt;br/&gt;are -2 curves. In
this case, the exponent of growth should be related to the&lt;br/&gt;Kahler cone
or nef cone. The Kahler cone lies in a Lorentz space of&lt;br/&gt;dimension n
(where the intersection product is the Lorentz product) and a&lt;br/&gt;cross
section of the cone lies in a hyperbolic space of dimension n-1.
When&lt;br/&gt;the K3 surface has a -2 curve, the boundary at infinity of this
cross&lt;br/&gt;section is a fractal on a sphere of dimension n-2. The PI
believes that the&lt;br/&gt;previously mentioned exponent of growth should be
the Hausdorff dimension of&lt;br/&gt;this cross section. When n=4, these
fractals are similar to the well known&lt;br/&gt;Apollonian
gasket.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is basic research aimed at improving our
understanding of K3 surfaces&lt;br/&gt;and related objects. Surfaces of type K3
can be thought of as higher&lt;br/&gt;dimensional analogs of elliptic curves,
for which analogous research was the&lt;br/&gt;subject of early 20th century
mathematics. Our basic understanding of&lt;br/&gt;elliptic curves eventually led
to the development of elliptic curve based public key codes,
fast&lt;br/&gt;factoring algorithms, and efficient error correcting codes. The
theory and&lt;br/&gt;existence of public key codes revolutionized cryptography
and with it, the&lt;br/&gt;internet as we know it. Without them, internet based
commerce would be far&lt;br/&gt;too vulnerable to allow the sorts of
transactions we currently take for granted. A K3 surface can&lt;br/&gt;also be
thought of as a two dimensional Calabi-Yau manifold. Three&lt;br/&gt;dimensional
Calabi-Yau manifolds are of interest to physicists studying&lt;br/&gt;string
theory and quantum field theory.&lt;br/&gt;