* 0403582
* NER: Electron Spin Resonance on a Single Carbon Nanotube
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Peter Burke, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0403582&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of Cal Irvine&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Burke , Peter&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER: Electron spin resonance on a
single carbon nanotube&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project integrates and develops technology in three related areas:
spin, nano, and quantum. The research project will attempt to measure the
quantum properties of the spin of an electron inside of a carbon nanotube. In
particular, the project will measure how long the spin maintains its coherence,
i.e. how long the spin maintains its quantum properties. If the spin-coherence
time of electrons in a nanotube is long enough, then the system could function
as an elementary quantum bit (qubit), the building block of quantum computers.
Furthermore, by measuring the quantum properties of electron spin in one-
dimensional systems, new concepts and technologies useful for spin based
classical data storage devices (such as magnetic hard drives) will be developed
and realized, especially important as the technology moves into the nanometer
domain. Thus, the research will both develop an important experimental technique
(electron spin resonance on a single nanotube) as well as performing a specific
measurement of a property directly related to the physical implementation of
quantum computing: the spin coherence time of electrons in a single
nanotube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed activity
is the development of a new technique to control the spin degree of freedom in
nano-electronic systems. This will be a crucial advance that leads to enormously
powerful information processing systems. The broader impact of the proposed
activity will be to involve educationally disadvantaged students from
neighborhoods with predominately ethnic-minority student populations in combo
hands-on and distance learning exercises in micro and nanofabrication, to
provide minority undergraduate role models for these students, to train these
undergraduates for careers in science, engineering, and teaching through direct
participation in both research and educational outreach, and to promote
partnerships between University of California researchers and local K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;