* 0403471
* Molecular Beam and Imaging Studies of Radical Reaction Pathways and Chemical Product Branching
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Laurie Butler, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 460,850.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Laurie J. Butler of the University of Chicago will
study the unimolecular decay of selected radical species as a function of energy
of the radical. Molecular beam and imaging techniques will be used to perform
two sets of experiments. 1) The first set will probe competing unimolecular
dissociation channels of isomerically-selected hydrocarbon radicals as function
of internal energy in the dissociating radical isomer on the ground state
potential surface. Two key C4H7 radical isomers will be investigated. 2) The
second part of the research deals with the dynamics of the carbene biradical
intermediates of the oxygen-triplet-P + alkyne reactions. In the oxygen +
acetylene system, the dynamics is claimed to proceed via intersystem crossing
from the triplet to singlet ketene. This work will probe the importance of
intersystem crossing in this class of bimolecular reactions and thereby provide
data to test theoretical models for this reaction. The work will also address
larger alkyne + oxygen reactions. The experiments of the first part will be
carried out at the Advanced Light Source of the Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, while those of the second part will be done in the laboratory of the
PI's home institution. This research will be done with student participants. The
students will acquire knowledge and skills in one of the forefront areas of
contemporary physical chemistry. They will thereby be prepared for advanced
studies or employment in academia, industry, or national laboratories.