* 0403829
* NER: Novel Aerosol Spectrometer for Size and Composition of Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Steven Buckley, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 07/31/2006
* USD 116,713.00

0403829 Buckley The objective of this research is the development of a novel
aerosol spectrometer that is able to quantitatively measure both size and
composition of suspended aerosol particles. Size selection will be performed by
a combination of fluidic separation and electronic mobility; particles will be
charged and separated in a flowing stream using a variable electric field
designed for point spectroscopy measurements. Composition determination will be
accomplished with two-tone ultraviolet (UV) micro Laser-Induced Breakdown
Spectroscopy (u-LIBS). The u-LIBS diagnostic head will selectively sample
spatially size-segregated aerosol. Light will be dispersed into a new echelle
spectrometer with a CCD camera, an optional relay lens intensifier and a high
framing rate. Submicron particles are important in many areas of science, from
the development of new materials with unusual properties, to pharmaceutical
applications, to environmentally important suspended aerosol particles that are
implicated in human morbidity and mortality. Real-time methods that can provide
both size and composition information are urgently needed in all of these areas,
and the availability of these methods would represent an enabling technology
that could catalyze further advances in our understanding of nanoscale particle
science. The particular example of atmospheric and combustion aerosol source-
apportionment outlined in the technical proposal highlights one of the areas in
which the proposed aerosol spectrometer could contribute to revolutionary
fundamental advances.&lt;br/&gt;There are three specific areas of innovation
that are expected provide improved performance for this new spectrometer design.
They are:&lt;br/&gt;1) The combination of fluidic and electrostatic size
classification of particles coupled for point spectroscopic measurement,
&lt;br/&gt;2) The use of UV u-LIBS to provide highly spatially-resolved (and
thus size-resolved)&lt;br/&gt;aerosol diagnostic with potentially improved
detection limits over typical LIBS arrangements, and &lt;br/&gt;3) The use of a
sensitive, high frame-rate echelle spectrometer to provide elemental composition
over a wide spectral range, allowing nearly total composition determination and
identification of elemental associations in the aerosol population. As detailed
in the proposal, both (2) and (3) and are particularly high-risk.&lt;br/&gt;UV
u-LIBS has never been attempted on aerosol particles, and it is not known if the
expected benefits will accrue. In addition, the high frame-rate echelle
spectrometer is a new product and its applicability and sensitivity for this
problem has yet to be determined. Previous approaches to point sizing and
composition of submicron aerosol particles have met with limited success,
particularly for sizes below 300 nm. The approaches outlined in the proposal
have strong justification and promise, but this is clearly exploratory research.
Lower risk options are in place to ensure meaningful results from the project
should the higher-risk technologies fail to perform as expected.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research would also have a substantial impact on the education and
training of students in the interdisciplinary intersection of spectroscopy and
nanoscale science. The resulting aerosol spectrometer would itself provide
significant improvement in the instrumentation available for simultaneous
particle composition and sizing analysis, which would open new avenues in both
education and research. In particular, the proposed instrument could have an
enormous impact on the identification and eventual mitigation of unhealthy
atmospheric nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;