* 0403313
* High Performance and Visualization Cluster for Research in Coupled Computational Steering and Visualization for Large Scale Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Joseph Ja'Ja', University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,114,750.00

Researchers at the University of Maryland plan to build a high-performance
computing and visualization cluster taking advantage of synergies afforded by
coupling central processing units (CPUs), graphics processing units (GPUs),
displays, and storage. The infrastructure will be used to support a broad
program of computing research that will revolve around understanding,
augmenting, and leveraging the power of heterogeneous vector computing enabled
by GPU co-processors. The driving force here is the availability of cheap,
powerful, and programmable graphics processing units (GPUs) through their
commercialization in interactive 3D graphics applications, including interactive
games. The CPU-GPU coupled cluster will enable the pursuit of several new
research directions in computing, as well as enable a better understanding and
fast solutions to several existing interdisciplinary problems through a
visualization-assisted computational steering environment. In addition, it will
foster research to cast several problems into a better spot on the price-
performance curve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Impact: The proposed
research that will use this cluster falls into several broad interdisciplinary
computing areas. The researchers plan to explore visualization of large datasets
and algorithms for parallel rendering. In high-performance scientific computing
we plan to develop and analyze efficient algorithms for use with complex systems
when uncertainty is included in models. The researchers plan to use the cluster
for several applications in computational biology, including computational
modeling and visualization of proteins, conformational steering in protein
structure prediction, folding, and drug design, large-scale phylogeny
visualization, and sequence alignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers also
plan to use the cluster for applications in real-time computer vision, real-time
3D virtual audio, and for efficient compilation of signal processing
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: An important aspect of this
research is to ensure a high impact of the cluster towards educational and
outreach goals. The investigators plan to enrich their current coursework with
research results obtained on the cluster. The coupled cluster with a large-area
high-resolution display screen will serve as a valuable resource to present,
interactively explore, evaluate, and validate the ongoing research in
visualization, vision, scientific computing, human-computer interfaces, and
computational biology with active participation of graduate as well as
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;