* 0403769
* NER:     Processing and Characterization of Functionalized Polymers for Micro/Nano Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Beth Pruitt, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 12/31/2006
* USD 116,000.00

The objective is to evaluate the processing of SU-8 photosensitive polymers with
functionalized, conductive nanoparticles and associated changes in material
behavior. Mechanical properties of the composite material can be enhanced by
reducing film stresses and creating an ability to grade mechanical properties
between two surfaces with large variation in compliance, e.g. silicon and
biological tissues. This program will provide initial data on the interaction of
SU-8 molecules and nanocrystals and the effects on "bulk" properties for
evaluation and refinement of multi-scale material
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SU-8 is mechanically stable, tough, transparent in
UV and visible light spectra, extremely inert chemically, and biocompatible;
however, the material shrinkage (7.5%) and film stress (16-19Mpa) upon curing
have been barriers to its adoption for the manufacture of polymer microdevices
freed from the wafer substrate. Nanocomposites of SU-8 have been demonstrated
recently, however the effect of process parameter variation and the resulting
material and mechanical properties are unknown. The goals include the evaluation
of relationships between uncured characteristics, process parameters, and cured
material behavior. This will be accomplished with designed experiments to
evaluate the functional relationships. Outcomes will be assessed by microscopy,
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), and mechanical and electrical
characterization. Evaluations will include mechanical beam bending and resonance
tests to evaluate stiffness and anelasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this work includes the development and advancement of
nanomanufacturing techniques for the creation of polymer based micro/nano-
systems. This program will facilitate the design, fabrication, and
characterization of new structures, new materials, and the development of new
sensing and actuating solutions without silicon and its extensive accompanying
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;This work will have broad impact in facilitating
interdisciplinary research by lowering the traditional barriers of cost, time,
and facilities often associated with incorporating microscale and nanoscale
devices for assay and manipulation in biological, chemical, and environmental
research. &lt;br/&gt;