* 0403366
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: String Field Theory and String Geometry
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Itzhak Bars, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 07/31/2007
* USD 56,700.00

OISE-0403366&lt;br/&gt;Bars&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-
year collaborative research project between Professor Itzhak Bars at the
University of Southern California in Los Angeles and Professor Hirosi Ooguri of
the California Institute of Technology and Professor Tohru Eguchi at the
University of Tokyo in Japan. They will be undertaking research on string field
theory and string geometry. String theory is the central focus of most current
effort in fundamental theoretical particle physics. The proposed activity
focuses on three essential aspects of string theory, i.e. string field theory
(SFT), geometrical and topological aspects of string theory, and the AdS/CFT
correspondence. Concerning string field theory, it is proposed to use the Moyal
Star Formulation of SFt to construct the supersymmetric theory and develop non-
perturbative computational techniques that would help to estimate the true
vacuum state and connect the string theory to low energy physics and cosmology.
The finding of the true vacuum state in string theory is one of the most
relevant open questions in this area of research. In addition, the connection of
string theory to low energy physics and cosmology is an essential point to test
the predictions of string theory. It is also proposed to continue the current
research on applications of topogical string theory to understand perturbative
and non-perturbative aspects of superstring compactifications on Calabi-Yau
manifolds as well as of supersymmetric Yang-Mills theories arising as limits of
these compactifications. These ideas have important implications, as the
computation of gravitational corrections to the superpotentials, which are
realized in the gauge theory in a novel fashion, leading to an interesting
Lorentz violating photon-graviton coupling, with possible astrophysical
consequences. In addition, there are very important applications in mathematics.
The third aspect of the research involves the AdS/CFT correspondence, which has
been one of the central issues of string theory in the last years. This activity
is very important to advancing knowledge and understanding in string/M theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together the efforts of three
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.
Results of the research will impact the areas of string theory, particle physics
and cosmology. The expected broader impact of the proposed activities would be
in mathematical areas of non-commutative geometry, group theory, and geometry.
Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base
of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. The
project includes the participation of a large number of postdocs and graduate
students. Results of the research will be disseminated at scientific meetings
and in scientific journals. &lt;br/&gt;