* 0403575
* Applications of Stochastic Analysis and Control in Finance and Economics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jaksa Cvitanic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 289,001.00

The research project will follow two main directions:&lt;br/&gt;(i). Principal-
agent theory in continuous-time models with&lt;br/&gt;applications to the
optimal compensation of company executives&lt;br/&gt;and fund managers. (ii).
Numerical methods for high-dimensional optimization problems,&lt;br/&gt;Backward
Stochastic Differential Equations (BSDEs) and degenerate&lt;br/&gt; Partial
Differential Equations (PDEs), with applications in&lt;br/&gt;Finance and
Economics. The planned research will&lt;br/&gt;make the theory of optimal
contracts more compatible with the&lt;br/&gt;modern, more complex continuous-
time models for financial markets by&lt;br/&gt;using several different methods
of stochastic control and optimization:&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations
approach, duality/martingale approach,&lt;br/&gt;and the Forward-Backward
Stochastic Differential Equation approach.&lt;br/&gt;It is also planned to
extend the theory to the following cases in which the&lt;br/&gt;time of the
payoff is not necessarily fixed in advance.&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the
project includes extending the work on finding&lt;br/&gt;efficient numerical
methods for solving high-dimensional stochastic&lt;br/&gt;optimization problems,
FBSDEs and degenerate PDEs, and to work on&lt;br/&gt; the existence/uniqueness
theory for FBSDEs. The standard numerical&lt;br/&gt;PDE methods do not work in
high-dimensions. Instead, these problems will&lt;br/&gt;be approached with a
combination of dynamic programming, Malliavin&lt;br/&gt; Calculus, nonparametric
regression methods, and existing numerical&lt;br/&gt;methods for FBSDEs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project is likely to have important
applications to the question&lt;br/&gt;of how to compensate company executives
and fund managers in an optimal&lt;br/&gt;way. The current practice for
executive compensation is to grant&lt;br/&gt;options as a part of the
compensation package, but there is a lot of&lt;br/&gt;recent discussion on
whether this contributes&lt;br/&gt;to the manipulation of the company's stock by
the executives, and also how&lt;br/&gt;these options should be accounted for in
terms of the company's expenses.&lt;br/&gt;The research will address these
issues and provide some answers in&lt;br/&gt;the framework of our mathematical
models. In particular, anaysis will be conducted&lt;br/&gt;on whether some other
forms of compensation, such as deferred&lt;br/&gt;options (as is about to be
implemented by several large U.S. companies),&lt;br/&gt; have advantages
relative to the existing forms of compensation.&lt;br/&gt;The second project is
related to perhaps the&lt;br/&gt;hardest practical problem in quantitative
finance: to solve&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional optimization problems. The most
famous example of&lt;br/&gt;these is pricing high-dimensional American
options.&lt;br/&gt;The techniques that are commonly used today are not
appropriate for more&lt;br/&gt;complex and realistic models of security prices
that are becoming a&lt;br/&gt;standard, due to the increased sophistication of
market practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;Thus, it is important to explore new analytical
and computational methods&lt;br/&gt;for this task.&lt;br/&gt;