* 0403671
* NIRT:  Electron Beam Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) - A New Tool for Manufacturing Nanomaterials and Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* W. Jack Lackey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,426,000.00

The goals of this Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) research
project are: 1) To develop a novel nanoscale manufacturing tool that utilizes
EB-CVD, electron beam surface enhancement, or etching; 2) To obtain a
fundamental understanding, via modeling and experimentation, of the physical,
chemical, and materials phenomena that control deposition, surface enhancement,
and etching; 3) To identify process-nanostructure-property relationships for a
key set of materials that will permit fabrication of advanced nanoscale
materials and devices, including integrating nanomaterials with microsystems.
Nanoscale materials and devices offer great promise for many important civilian
and military applications, but their fabrication often proves problematic.
Similarly, integrating nanostructures with microsystems or other nano structures
is one of the main roadblocks to transitioning from single structure fabrication
to true nanomanufacturing. This research focuses on a technology that has an
excellent potential for solving these problems -- Electron Beam Chemical Vapor
Deposition or simply EB-CVD. Specifically, two electron beam processes will be
developed. Both are capable of depositing metals and ceramics by EB-CVD and are
complimentary in nature. The first process uses a tightly focused electron beam,
i.e., beam diameters as small as 1 nm, to achieve high spatial resolution of the
fabricated structures. The second process uses a broad beam and relies on
constructive and destructive interference to permit patterning of large areas,
leading to high throughput manufacturing. The judicious combination of these two
processes offers a unique opportunity to manufacture very complex structures by
computer-controlled concurrent movement of the narrowly focused and broad beams
relative to the substrate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this
research will have significant broad impact. It will further the basic
understanding of electron beam CVD and provide specifics for the deposition,
surface enhancement, and etching of key materials permitting high volume
fabrication of advanced nanoscale materials and devices, including
microelectronics, photonics, sensors, nanocatalysts, and hybrid nano/micro
systems. The EB-CVD systems will be centers for campus-wide nanomanufacturing
research. Research methods and results will be transitioned to industry as well
as incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses. Effort will be made to
ensure that female and underrepresented minority, K-12, REU, and graduate
students are included.