* 0403692
* NER: Carbon Nanotube/Polymer Composites for High Flux/High Selectivity Gas Separation Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Eva Marand, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 05/31/2006
* USD 89,518.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NER: Carbon
Nanotube/Polymer Composties for High Flux/High Selectivity Gas Separation
Membranes &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CTS-0403692/0406855&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Eva Marand/David Sholl&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University/&lt;br/&gt; Carnegie Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 03-043, category NER. The
proposed research program will combine experimental and theoretical modeling
activities to fabricate and characterize high quality nanotube/polymer composite
membranes. Recent theoretical work by Sholl has predicted that carbon nanotubes,
if used as membranes, have the flux/selectivity properties that far exceed those
of any other known inorganic or organic material. Currently gas separation
membranes are fabricated from polymeric materials that are typically processed
as hollow fibers. However, despite the ability to produce robust, large-area
membranes at relatively low cost, a wider implementation of polymer membranes is
hindered by their intrinsic permeability and selectivity limitations. In this
exploratory research project the development of novel nano-composite membranes
could overcome such limitations. The PIs propose to fabricate and characterize
nano-composite membranes, consisting of open-ended carbon nanotubes incorporated
in specifically designed polymer matrices. Atomistic and multi-scale modeling of
the nano-composite system will provide a fundamental feedback towards
understanding and optimization of the transport properties of the nano-composite
systems. The assembled team combines research expertise in molecular modeling,
interfacial characterization and nano-composite processing, which will allow the
PIs to effectively carry out the activities outlined in the proposal. In terms
of the broader impacts, the research program may lead to the development of
robust, highly permeable membranes for selective gas separations, as well as to
the introduction of new chemistries and methods, which can be employed in the
fabrication of high performance composites, sensors and other chemical devices
incorporating carbon nanotubes. The research program has a strong educational
component aimed at both graduate and undergraduate students, including unique
interdisciplinary and inter-university research experience, inclusion of
research examples into the undergraduate curriculum and other educational
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;