* 0403864
* NIRT:  Multi-Scale Simulation of Nanoparticle Aggregation for Scale Up of High-Rate Synthesis Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Rodney Fox, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,004,984.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0403864&lt;br/&gt;R. Fox, Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NIRT: Multi-Scale Simulation of Nanoparticle
Aggregation for Scale Up of High-Rate Synthesis
Methods&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles are the basic building blocks for
many novel materials. In nearly all high-rate synthesis methods for
nanoparticles, chemical precursors are brought together by turbulent mixing to
form particle nuclei that grow rapidly due to surface addition and aggregation.
Next-generation applications of nanoparticles will require precise control of
product quality when synthesis methods are scaled up. Predicting nanoparticle
aggregation starting with detailed knowledge of particle surface chemistry and
the time-dependent shear rate in a turbulent flow is the key step for scale up
of high-rate synthesis methods. In this project, an international,
interdisciplinary team of scientists and engineers will develop and validate
multi-scale computational tools based on fundamental chemical and physical
models that can predict a priori the properties of nanoparticle clusters
produced after scale up of high-rate synthesis methods.&lt;br/&gt;The
computational approaches range from quantum calculations of particle surface
chemistry (atomic to molecular scale), to Brownian dynamic simulations of
nanoparticle aggregation with and without shear (nano to micron scale), to
direct-numerical and large-eddy simulations of the particle size distribution in
turbulent flow (micron to macro scale). The experimental validation approaches
range from direct measurements of the interparticle potentials using atomic
force microscopy, to measurements of the cluster size distribution in quiescent
systems using light scattering, to in situ measurements of cluster size and
fractal dimension in Taylor-Couette flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model system
to be investigated is monodisperse colloidal functionalized latex nanoparticles.
The nanoparticles will be synthesized in our lab with a view to carefully
modulate and understand aggregation mechanisms in this system. Three types of
functionalized nanoparticles will be investigated: (1) unmodified latex, (2)
sulfonated latex, and (3) carboxylated latex; and the extent of surface coverage
will be varied to probe the effect of surface chemistry on nanoparticle
aggregation mechanisms. The addition of these functionalities modifies the
hydrophobic surface of the latex particles, and enables interrogation of
aggregation mechanisms in mixtures of unmodified and modified nanoparticles. The
choice for the model system is also driven by our ability to perform detailed ab
initio quantum calculations of surface-surface, surface-molecular, and
molecular-molecular interactions between surface-modified latex
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;Using this detailed atomistic description of
nanoparticle surface chemistry, we will develop coarse-
grained&lt;br/&gt;interparticle potential models for use in Brownian dynamics
simulations to predict cluster size distribution and cluster morphology in shear
flow. From this information, aggregation kernels needed for the Smoluchowski
equation will be extracted and implemented in the general dynamic equation for
particle aggregation in turbulent flow. At each step of model development,
appropriate experimental validation tests will be carried out to ensure that the
multi-scale simulation tools agree with
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity: The
rational design and scale up of nanoscale synthesis and processing methods is a
crucial step towards the commercial viability of nanoparticles for widespread
technological applications. By developing and validating multi-scale, multi-
phenomena simulation tools, this project will demonstrate for the first time the
capability to predict the properties of nanoparticles produced by high-rate
synthesis methods after scale up starting from the fundamental chemical and
physical theoretical models. The interdisciplinary team assembled to attack this
problem is uniquely qualified to bridge the enormous range of length and time
scales, and the corresponding numerical and experimental challenges, that are
required to accomplish successfully this task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the proposed activity: This project will lead to the development of
new courses in Nanoscale science and technology at the participating
universities. Undergraduate education will be enhanced through an REU program in
computational chemistry, physics and mathematics at Iowa State; and outreach
programs (CoS, APEXES, MCSRO) at the University of Minnesota. Graduate education
will be enhanced by internship programs with industrial and international
partners, and the IGERT for nanoparticle science and engineering at Minnesota.
K-12 outreach and recruitment of minorities and women will be actively pursued
through participation in the LEAD, Science Bound, and PWSE programs at Iowa
State, and similar programs at Minnesota. Results from the project will be
disseminated broadly through the industrial and international partnerships,
dedicated sessions at professional meetings, annual&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale science
and engineering workshops, and archival publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and education themes addressed in this proposal:
(in order of significance)&lt;br/&gt;1. Manufacturing Processes at the
Nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;2. Multi-scale, Multi-phenomena Theory, Modeling and
Simulation at the Nanoscale&lt;br/&gt;3. Nanoscale Processes in the
Environment&lt;br/&gt;