* 0403342
* High-End Computing and Networking Research Testbed for Next Generation Data Driven, Interactive Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Ponnuswamy Sadayappan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,529,997.00

Over recent years, there have been two significant changes in the area of high-
end computing: 1) an increasing focus on interactive data driven applications
and 2) a shift from tightly coupled high-end computing systems to networked
clusters of machines within an organization and across geographically dispersed
organizations. A particular challenge in using networked clusters for an
interactive and data-intensive computing task is that processing of data may not
always be possible where data is resident. The principal investigators (PIs)
envision that a configuration comprising a networked collection of storage
cluster(s), compute cluster(s), memory cluster(s), wired/wireless clients, and
facilities for data visualization and collaboration, will be common and popular
in modern organizations. Moreover, people within an organization will interact
with existing compute and data resources over the Internet, as part of a grid
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project aims to
design and develop such systems and their components including communication,
networking, I/O, QoS, programming models, compilers, scheduling, middleware,
caching, and indexing. The system research will be closely integrated with
research in algorithms for visualization and data mining and end data-intensive
applications. The overall goal will be to enable collaborative, data-driven, and
interactive applications involving multi-terabyte datasets to benefit from end-
to-end QoS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research testbed will consist of a compute
cluster and a memory cluster connected to an existing mass storage cluster with
high-speed WAN links (20.0 Gbps and beyond). A wireless testbed with clients and
graphics resources (adapters, haptic devices, and headmount displays) will also
be connected to the compute cluster to study the end-to-end QoS and
interactivity issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project will
benefit 18 investigators, their students (including members of underrepresented
groups) and research staff in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering
(CSE) and Department of Biomedical Informatics (BMI) to carry out state-of-the
research in systems, networking, middleware, data mining and visualization;
disseminate the results through research forums; and disseminate the developed
software through open-source avenues. Several team members of this project
collaborate with faculty members and researchers inside and outside of the
campus in designing and developing end-applications in the areas of engineering,
science, and medicine. This project will facilitate developing state-of-the-art
solutions for these end-applications in an inter-disciplinary manner. A numbers
of initiatives are planned for integrating research and education: enhancing
several graduate courses in CSE with hands-on projects on networked cluster
environment, creating new courses on data mining and data and scientific
visualization in CSE, and creating a new interdisciplinary course sequence in
the area of application-driven grid computing (jointly to be done by the CSE and
BMI). The outreach plan includes participation in K-12 programs, participation
in summer training programs for underrepresented groups, and collaboration with
minority institutions.&lt;br/&gt;