* 0403005
* Large Distance Modification of Gravity and Beyond: Theory, Cosmology, Phenomenology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Gregory Gabadadze, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 75,000.00

Large Distance Modification of Gravity and Beyond: Theory, Cosmology,
Phenomenology

The research program of the present proposal is at the overlap of Particle
Physics, Cosmology, General Relativity and String Theory. The unifying concept
is the accelerated expansion of the Universe and the problem of the vacuum
energy in Particle Physics and Gravitation. The PI proposes detailed studies
within a new paradigm according to which the observed accelerated expansion of
the Universe is the first evidence of a new physical scale at which laws of
gravity and cosmology are modified. Models that enable one to modify gravity at
large cosmological distance scales present great intellectual challenges for
Field Theory as well as String Theory. Successful resolution of these challenges
is likely to lead, among many other exciting applications, to a solution of the
long-standing problem of the vacuum energy. The PI will develop and study models
that modify gravity at large distances while keeping all the successes of
General Relativity at shorter scales. General questions that will be addressed
by the PI fall under the following three categories: (1) Studies of the models
of large distance modification of gravity as consistent field theories; (2)
Cosmological and astrophysical consequences of these models; (3) Embeddings of
these models into String Theory.