* 0403494
* NER:     Nanowire Non-Volatile Memory
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Supriyo Bandyopadhyay, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

We propose to investigate and develop a new type of non-volatile electronic
memory based on a novel conduction bistability observed in regimented arrays of
self assembled semiconductor nanowires [Appl. Phys. Lett., 76, 460 (2000)]. The
wires have two stable conductance states that differ in conductance by four
orders of magnitude at room temperature. These two states can be used to encode
binary bits 0 and 1. When a sample is left in the high conductance state at room
temperature, it remains in that state for 1 year before reverting to the low
conductance state, and when it is left in the low conductance state, it persists
in that state for longer than the monitoring period of 1 year. The long
retention time may be partially a result of quantum confinement and the phonon
bottleneck effect. This system is a promising candidate for non-volatile random
access memory with excellent packing density. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apart from
the retention time, two important figures of merit for memory devices are the
access speed for reading/writing and the dynamic power dissipation during the
read/write operation. The measured writing time (the reading time is much
smaller) is ~ 2 msec, which we believe can be reduced significantly with
appropriate device design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The threshold voltage for
switching is a few tens of volt, which too can be reduced significantly using
the same design. However, the unavoidable penalty involved in reducing the
access time and power dissipation is a concomitant reduction of the retention
time. In order to develop a truly advanced memory, these contradictory
requirements must be met in an optimal manner which makes this research high
risk and exploratory. A secondary purpose of the NER is to identify
unequivocally the mechanism responsible for the bistability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Commonwealth University has an active outreach
program involving high school students (the RAPME program for minorities and the
QUESTERS program). Students from both programs will be involved in this research
(K-12 education). &lt;br/&gt;This research will be carried out in collaboration
with a group in Kurchatov Institute, Moscow, Russia. &lt;br/&gt;