* 0403514
* Internal Carbon Cycling in Tropical Deltaic Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Andrei Chistoserdov, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2009
* USD 247,326.00

0403514 Christoserdov

Continent-ocean margins are regions of intense biogeochemical cycling and play a
major role in global carbon cycle. Tropical mobile mud belts and delta topset
beds represent one class of continental margin environments where these various
potential properties simultaneously combine to an extreme, producing massive,
diagenetic reactors of global significance. Oxidation of organic matter in this
type of sediments involves coupling of the carbon and the Fe(Mn) cycles by
reactions of sulfur cycle and involves chemolithoautotrophic sulfide oxidizing
bacteria. As a consequence, two principal processes are responsible for the net
CO2 production by the topic mobile sediments: oxidation of carbon matter, which
produces CO2, and chemolithotrophic CO2 fixation, which consumes CO2. The
primary goal of the present proposed project is to establish the relative
importance of these two processes of the carbon cycle in tropical suboxic
deltaic and mobile mud environments, and to determine the role eubacteria play
in them. This proposal is designed around the specific hypothesis that
heterotrophic organic oxidation and chemolithotrophic carbon dioxide fixation
co-occur in mobile muds and contribute to overall CO2 production by these
sediments. We propose to examine deposits from a migrating mud wave in coastal
French Guiana, downdrift of the Amazon River delta. To test the primary project
hypothesis we propose to use a combination of radiotracer, microbiological and
molecular biological techniques to: (I) Identify reactions of the carbon cycle
and their rates in the field and laboratory experiments. Using radioactive
carbon tracers, we will determine the relative importance of heterotrophic
oxidation of organic substrates (acetate, algal biomass) and CO2 fixation and/or
production. To determine whether CO2 fixation is connected with autotrophic
activity the genes for RubisCO I and RubisCO II will be amplified and cataloged.
(II) To model possible role of chemolithotrophic and heterotrophic reactions in
the carbon cycle and ascertain responses of the system to outside disturbances,
we will use a combined approach of metabolic inhibitors in radiotracer
experiments and measurements of RubisCOI and RubisCOII gene expression. The
number of bacteria potentially able to carry out specific reactions of the cycle
will be estimated and compared with estimates of total sedimentary bacterial
production (using oligonucleotide probes and measurement of rRNA). The novelty
of the project include determination of the rate of CO2 fixation and organic
carbon oxidation in tropical mobile sediments, which allow us to answer the
question: Are they significant on a global scale?. The role of chemolithotrophic
carbon fixation in suboxic deltaic environments will also be elucidated. The
fact that CO2 might be fixed in massive deltaic environments would have
tremendous impact on the carbon cycle. Depending on the enzymes participating in
CO2 fixation in mobile mud belts (RubisCO I, RubisCO II or CO dehydrogenase),
13C of biomass may be affected. We will address the mechanism by which CO2 is
fixed and determine whether RubisCO I or RubisCO II or neither (ATP-dependent
citrate lyase or CO dehydrogenase) mediate this fixation. Microorganisms
involved in the above described biogeochemical processes will be identified and
how the inhibition of biological activity of these microorganisms affects the
overall carbon cycle will be ascertained. As a part of broader impacts of the
project, one graduate student will be trained. One K12 teacher or an
undergraduate student will be involved in our research every summer that the
project is funded. Results and progress on project will be publicly disseminated
through research meeting, publications and the Department of Biology Web site.
Usefulness for the society includes the understanding of how the diagenetic
processing is occurring in the dynamic mid wave and allowing to evaluate changes
in the processing due to present and anticipated changes in the environment as a
result of anthropogenic activity.