* 0403849
* Spin Polarized Current in Magnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Chia-Ling Chien, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2009
* USD 480,000.00

The developments in magnetic nanostructures and future magnetoelectronic devices
depend crucially on the substantial spin polarization (the difference in the
number of spin-up and spin-down electrons) of the ferromagnetic layer, the
ability to control the switching of the ferromagnetic component, as well as
effects due to spin-polarized conduction and spin-polarized current. This
proposal focuses on some of the key aspects of spin-polarized currents in
magnetic nanostructures. The spin diffusion lengths in metals, semiconductors,
and point-contact tunnel junctions will be measured using Point-Contact Spin
Spectroscopy. The temperature dependence of spin polarization in half-metallic
CrO2 and Fe3O4 will also be studied in detail. The second aspect of this
proposal is the investigation of the newly discovered spin-transfer torque
effects in conventional ferromagnets and half-metals. Single layers of
ferromagnetic materials and multilayers made up of non-magnetic, ferromagnetic
and superconducting thin films will be used for these studies. The principal
investigator and two female graduate students (one of whom is an African
American) will carry out the proposed research at Johns Hopkins University.

In addition to their electrical charge, the transport of which forms a current
in an electrical circuit, electrons can also behave as tiny magnets due to an
intrinsic property called spin. Traditional electronic devices, which have
propelled modern technology to the electronic age, utilize only the charge of
the electron. The new generation of magnetoelectronic (or spintronic) devices
manipulates both charge and spin of the electron. Instead of just electrical
current, magnetoelectronic devices manipulate spin-polarized current, in which
the spins of the current-carrying electrons are very much aligned. One well-
known magnetoelectronic device that has already perpetrated in all our
computers, is the read-heads in hard drives made using materials that have
enormous magnetoresistance. The development of future magnetoelectronic devices
depends crucially on how one can harness and control the spins of the electrons
as they are transported through devices. One major aspect of this proposal is
the development and characterization of materials that can generate copious
amounts of spin-polarized current. These materials hold promise as the basic
materials in magnetoelectronics in a manner similar to that of silicon in
traditional electronics. Because a spin-polarized current carries both
electrical current and spin current, new effects, which are absent in
traditional electronic devices are observed. During this proposal period, the
effects of a spin-polarized current as it propagates through magnetic
nanostructures will be studied. The principal investigator has been actively
recruiting women and other minority students. In particular, two female graduate
students, one of whom is an African American, will work with the principal
investigator in this project.