* 0403638
* Support for a Scientific Meeting on Eta Carinae and the Fate of the MOST Massive Stars;  May 23-28, 2004;  Jackson Lake Lodge , Grand Teton National Park, Wyoming
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Roberta Humphreys, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 03/31/2006
* USD 15,000.00

AST-0403638&lt;br/&gt;PI Humphreys, Roberta M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eta Carinae
is the most massive and most luminous star (5 million times brighter than the
Sun) in our region of the Milky Way, and it has received considerable attention
by astronomers in the past decade. The cause of its basic instability and its
great eruption in the 1840's are still a mystery. It is a very evolved, highly
unstable star with an initial mass nearly 150 times greater than the Sun and we
think it is nearing the end of its short life. Eta Carinae is also the site of a
spectacular bipolar nebula, has the highest continuous mass loss rate for
massive stars (about a thousandth of a solar mass each year), and a peculiar 5.5
year cycle of its spectral energy distribution. &lt;br/&gt;Furthermore recent
extensive surveys for supernovae have also produced a growing class of objects
that may not be true supernovae at all, but objects very much like Eta Carinae.
&lt;br/&gt; This meeting will explore the behavior and characteristics of Eta
Carinae and objects related to it, the origin of their instabilities, the final
stages of the most massive stars and their relation to large, though not
extreme, stellar explosions (hypernovae) and the mysterious Gamma-ray Bursters.
It will bring together people working on the most massive stars with those
studying their final stages as supernovae and Gamma-ray Bursters. &lt;br/&gt;***