* 0403897
* NIRT:    Biocatalytic Membrane Nanosystems (BMNs)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2010
* Carol Caperelli, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 06/30/2010
* USD 1,033,024.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. Recent advances in molecular engineering
of ordered nanoporous materials with tunable surface chemistries and their
integration into macroscopic architectures offer new, unprecedented
opportunities to design highly efficient biomimetic systems for biocatalytic
production of pharmaceuticals and other fine chemicals. This NIRT research will
design ordered nanoporous silica layers containing encapsulated enzymes as part
of Biocatalytic Membrane Nanosystems (BMNs). The fundamental scientific issues
underlying the design of highly efficient BMNs will be addressed for two well-
characterized and important enzymatic reactions: (1) cofactor-dependent
selective oxidation of non-activated carbons by cytochrome P450 BM-3 oxygenase
and (2) kinetic resolution of achiral molecules by Pseudomonas cepacia lipase.
The integration of various components into fully functioning prototype BMNs will
be conducted in parallel with the fundamental studies employing nanoporous
silica. This research will lead to improved understanding of nanoscale structure
and catalytic function of biomimetic systems and to the design of improved
biocatalysts from basic scientific principles.

The broader education impacts of this NIRT research are aimed at training of
undergraduate and graduate students in the area of molecularly engineered
materials for biocatalytic applications. This will be accomplished in part by
the outreach efforts directed towards improving higher education opportunities
for minority and women engineers by alerting them to the graduate research
opportunities at the University of Cincinnati (UC). These efforts will be
complemented by a new research effort on societal impacts of nanotechnology that
will bring together the UC Institute for Policy Research, leading UC researchers
and graduate students in social and physical sciences to develop a plan for
integrating the social and technological aspects of nanotechnology.