* 0403651
* NER:      Theoretical and Experimental Investigations of Catalyzed Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Daniel Resasco, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Single-walled carbon nanotubes possess special chemical and electronic
properties that make them extremely attractive for many applications in
nanotechnology, biology, and medicine. These interesting properties are strongly
dependent on the particular structure of the nanotubes. The goal of this
research is to finely tune the synthesis process to produce only single-wall
carbon nanotubes that have the desired diameter and chemical characteristics. A
refined synthesis process that meets these goals has been developed, based on
the flow of a carbon-containing gas over a dispersion of metal nanocatalysts.
Such small metal particles catalyze the gas decomposition, yielding carbon atoms
which are deposited over the catalyst surface and which then grow into the
desired carbon nanostructures. The key to this processing may be related to the
structure, shape, size, and chemical and electronic nature of the metal
nanocatalysts used to decompose the carbon-containing gas, along with other
factors such as pressure and temperature. Although some of these process
variables affecting the selective growth of single-walled carbon nanotubes have
been identified, many open questions still remain before a large-scale
commercial process could be developed. Atomistic simulations will be used to
elucidate aspects of the single-walled carbon nanotube growth process. The
theoretical simulations are fully integrated with experimental investigations.
Theoretical studies will analyze the various stages of deposition of carbon
atoms on metallic nanoclusters with respect to the chemistry, thermodynamics,
and kinetics of the growth process. These simulation studies will be carried out
based on input from experimental surface science analogs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project centers in the
application of a novel approach which is expected to contribute to the
elucidation of the single-wall carbon nanotubes growth mechanism and to the
control of the synthesis process. The proposed research includes an important
broader impact that focuses on the importance of bringing together two
frequently separated aspects of carbon nanotube research: theory and
experiments. A synchronized plan has been developed that includes aspects of
teaching, training, and learning between two US institutions, active involvement
of underrepresented minorities (such as female, Hispanic, and Native American
students), and partnerships with other academic and industrial centers of
excellence to integrate research beyond the traditional chemical engineering
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;