* 0403963
* NER: 3D nanostructures for acceleration of DNA hybridization by electrodeless di-electrophoresis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Chia-Fu Chou, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2007
* USD 139,874.00

Swami&lt;br/&gt;0403963&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensitivity of biomolecular
devices is significantly limited by the slow diffusion of target DNA molecules
towards capture probe DNA sensors, thereby slowing binding and hybridization
kinetics, especially at detection limits of nanomolar or less levels of target
analyte. 3D edge and constriction type nanostructures will be fabricated in this
work to selectively pre-concentrate target DNA or other biomolecules in close
proximity to capture probes using an electrodeless di-electrophoresis (EDEP)
configuration that consists of electrically floating metal edges and/or
constrictions in an AC field for local enhancement of field gradient, and the
absence of drive electrodes within the biomolecule preconcentration volume to
prevent biomolecule damage. Short DNA fragments (&lt; 500 bp) will be used in
the preconcentration study to quantitatively map out the efficiency and the
trapping force response versus frequency. Such designs may eventually be applied
for the acceleration of DNA binding and hybridization to capture probes, thereby
greatly improving detection sensitivity. Nanostructure fabrication will be
conducted at the University of Virginia (UVA) and biomolecule preconcentration
studies for eventual sensor integration will be carried out at Arizona State
University's (ASU) AZ Biodesign Institute. Innovations from this
interdisciplinary research work will be drawn upon as content for future courses
at the MRSEC and current courses in MEMS and Bioelectricity at UVA.&lt;br/&gt;