* 0403633
* NIRT: Surfactant Self-Assembly on Nano-Structured Surfaces: Multi-Scale Computational Prediction and Design
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Keith Gubbins, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,300,000.00

Gubbins, Keith E. / Glotzer, Sharon C. North Carolina State University /
University of Michigan

"NIRT: Surfactant Self-Assembly on Nano-Structured Surfaces: Multi-Scale
Computational Prediction and Design"

This proposal is for a collaborative research program on multi-scale
computational prediction and design of nano-structures formed by self-assembly
of surfactants from aqueous solution onto solid surfaces and nano-porous media.
Such processes are ubiquitous throughout nanoscale science, and the resulting
structures have potential applications in enhanced and selective separations, as
nanosensors, biosensors, bioelectronic materials, and as electronic devices.
Despite widespread interest in these structures, the underlying principles
governing their formation, structure and properties are poorly understood.
Theoretical treatments are lacking, because the pertinent length and time scales
span many orders of magnitude, from Angstroms to tens of microns, and
femtoseconds to hundreds of microseconds.

This project draws on the expertise of PIs and Co-PIs drawn from the fields of
Chemical Engineering (K.E. Gubbins, NC State University and S.C. Glotzer,
University of Michigan), Physics (J. Bernholc, NC State University), and
Materials Science and Engineering (D.W. Brenner, NC State University). In
addition, three additional investigators (whose research is fully funded by DFG
in Germany) will be involved from the Stranski Institute of Physical Chemistry,
Technical University of Berlin (TU-B); G.H. Findenegg, Professor of Physical
Chemistry and Director of the Institute; M. Schoen, Professor of Theoretical
Chemistry; and S. Klapp, Head of Junior Group. A multi-scale simulation scheme
will be developed involving electronic, atomistic and meso-scale simulation
methodologies. Methods for bridging these scales will be developed and tested,
and then applied to study non-ionic and ionic surfactants self-assembling on
non-porous carbons, carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, and mesoporous silicas. These
methods will be used to investigate the factors determining structure and the
relationship between structures and properties, including electrical and
electronic properties, sensor activity, selective adsorption from mixtures, the
mechanism for solvation of carbon nanotubes, and nanofluidics.

Among the broader aspects of the project will be a strong international
component through our collaboration with TU-B, which will include opportunities
for graduate students and postdoctoral workers to visit and work with our Berlin
collaborators; students will have the opportunity to develop expertise in
theoretical and simulation methodologies suited to a wide range of spatial and
temporal scales, with emphasis on applications to nanoscience and
nanotechnology. It is anticipated that the advanced computational methods
developed in this project will be useful in other applications within
nanotechnology. A graduate course on Computational Nanoscience of Soft Matter
will be developed jointly by UM, NCSU and TU-B, and will be available to
students via video-conference link; short courses on specialized topics in
simulation methodology will be available to students through the High
Performance Simulation Center at NCSU. Outreach activities will include
tutorials by project faculty for high school students, undergraduates,
industrial researchers, and senior citizens; an existing. nanotechnology
tutorial, developed at NCSU, will be expanded to include multimedia
presentations and video streamed seminars, and will be available to the general
public via the group's websites. Under-represented minorities will be recruited
through NCSU's close ties with Meredith College (a women's college) and St.
Augustine's University (a HBU), through NCSU's Women in Science and Engineering
program (first year undergraduates), and through UM's University research
Opportunities Program.

The primary research theme of this proposal is Multi-Scale Multi-Phenomena
Theory, Modeling and Simulation at the Nanoscale. A second theme is Nanoscale
Structures, Novel Phenomena, and Quantum Control.