* 0403722
* Collaborative Research:  Episodic, ENSO-Orchestrated Carbon Sequestration in Amazonian River Basins by Erosion-Sedimentation Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Rolf Aalto, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 239,042.00

0403722&lt;br/&gt;Montgomery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary group
proposal addresses a three-step process that could represent a major carbon sink
in Amazonian foreland basins. Stated as hypotheses, the proposal suggests: 1)
extensive&lt;br/&gt;Andean hillslope failure and channel migration during large
La Nina associated storms mobilizes vast quantities of fresh organic matter and
sediment with low organic carbon (OC) content ; 2) within the&lt;br/&gt;river,
mineral surfaces acquire normal OC loadings via sorption as they are rapidly
evacuated from the mountainous source basins to adjacent foreland depocenters;
and 3) deposited sediments preserve "fresh"&lt;br/&gt;carbon within organo-
mineral complexes and by deep burial in point bars and "crevasse-splay" deposits
that have little potential for exchange with the biosphere and atmosphere.
Calculations presented in the&lt;br/&gt;Project Description (C.1.2) suggest that
this process could sequester ~ 300 Mtonnes of carbon per event in the Amazonian
foreland. When extrapolated globally to other humid tropical regions, these
estimates are&lt;br/&gt;equivalent to 50-100% of the average annual "missing
carbon sink" or 50-100% of atmospheric CO2 anomalies typically observed during
La Nina.&lt;br/&gt;To explore these hypothesis, proposers will study 1) the
rates and mechanics of sediment mobilization, transport, and deposition of river
sediment during extreme events, 2) the associations of&lt;br/&gt;organic carbon
with sediments at erosional and depositional sites, and 3) the transfer of OC
from rapid (&lt;5 y) to slower (&gt;50 y) turnover pools, via sorption and deep
burial processes. We will employ a combination of GIS analysis of satellite
images to map changes associated with individual large
storms&lt;br/&gt;(hillslope failures and river migration); field surveys of
sediment transport processes; and laboratory analysis of archived and newly
collected samples to determine organic carbon concentrations, sources
and&lt;br/&gt;turnover times; sediment characteristics; and transport/deposition
timing and rates (geochronology). The proposed project is a collaborative,
multi-disciplinary, multi-national research effort that builds upon a record of
prior and current NSF-funded results of decadal-scale sediment fluxes and
organic&lt;br/&gt;carbon dynamics within river basins of the Amazon. In close
coordination with sediment-flux, geochronological, geochemical, and process-
mapping (GIS) studies conducted by scientists from Univ. of Washington,
scientists at Stroud Water Research Center and Univ. of California Davis will
investigate the&lt;br/&gt;quantities, sources, and sequestration of organic
carbon mobilized during by these geomorphological processes. In addition, this
project benefits from a close working collaboration with the French Institut
de&lt;br/&gt;Recherche pour le Developpement (IRD), with whom we will conduct
fieldwork in the Andes and foreland basins of Bolivia and Peru during both the
dry and wet seasons. Additional collaborations are&lt;br/&gt;with the Univ.
Nacional Agraria La Molina (UNALM) and the Univ. of California Santa Barabara.
These continuing international collaborations offer considerable scientific and
logistical advantages and cost&lt;br/&gt;savings for this current proposal to
study the carbon transported and deposited by extreme storm events. If this
research effort substantiates the primary hypothesis, such continental-scale,
climate-driven,&lt;br/&gt;erosion-sedimentation processes will be demonstrated
to represent substantial, previously unrecognized natural carbon sinks of global
significance. Furthermore, these processes could potentially result in
the&lt;br/&gt;sequestration of similar quantities of carbon by anthropogenically
accelerated erosion-sedimentation. Additionally, this research benefits anyone
interested in the geochemical processes of organic carbon&lt;br/&gt;preservation
in sediment and soils or the timing/rates/mechanics of landsliding, sediment
transport, channel-floodplain interaction, and sedimentary basin dynamics during
extreme, ENSO-orchestrated&lt;br/&gt;floods. The strong bridging between the
disciplines of geomorphology, biogeochemistry and organic geochemistry has
broader impacts on earth science as a whole, by offering new perspectives that
will facilitate the development of new geochemical and GIS techniques. Enhanced
collaboration with IRD&lt;br/&gt;supports a productive and visible
international, interdisciplinary scientific partnership. For example, our
previous collaborative research with IRD resulted in new understandings of
mercury contamination dynamics within riparian food sources to indigenous human
populations. The PIs have a record of public&lt;br/&gt;outreach, and this
project will generate data products useful to educators and researchers,
including our own teaching and public presentations to both scientists and
general audiences. Furthermore, this will provide valuable research experience
to many undergraduate and some graduate students in the USA and South America,
including funds for these students to publish and present results at
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;" VMATHIS PFRM1036 04/20/2004 14:26:40:33 1&lt;br/&gt;