* 0403674
* NIRT: Technologies, architectures and performance analysis for nanoelectronics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* John Savage, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,319,995.00

0403674 John E. Savage Brown University

The nanoarray, a crossbar consisting of two orthogonal sets of parallel
nanowires, is a promising technology for the realization of memories and logic
circuits at the nanotechnology level. Many design and manufacturing challenges
need to be addressed before the feasibility of nanoarrays can be determined. In
this project we will investigate and analyze new and existing nanowire types,
create and analyze models for self-assembly of crossbars, explore large-scale
nanoelectronics-based architectures for efficient memories and programmable
logic arrays, model and develop techniques to handle defects and faults, and
examine performance limitations associated with nanotechnologies. Project
results will be broadly disseminated.

Advances in chip density reflected in Moore's law are becoming increasingly
expensive to achieve. Early indications are that nanotechnology may provide an
attractive alternative to lithography, the current method of chip assembly. It
has the potential to increase logic density and memory storage capacity well
beyond the levels achievable with lithography at a reasonable price. The
nanoarray, a crossbar consisting of two overlapping orthogonal sets of parallel
nanowires, is a promising technology whose new design and manufacturing
challenges will be tackled by our team, consisting a chemist, an electrical
engineer and an analytical computer scientist.

