* 0403480
* FRG NIRT: Science and Technology of Self-Assembled Magnetic and Superconducting Nano Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,445,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. A multidisciplinary team of scientists
and students from North Carolina A &amp; T State (NCAT) University (an HBCU
institution), North Carolina State University (NCSU), University of Florida
(UF), Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), Indian Institute of Technology,
Kanpur (IITK) and IBM TJ Watson Center, participates in this project. The
proposed research is focused on the synthesis and characterization of self-
assembled ordered structures of (i) nanomagnetic particles in nonmagnetic thin-
film matrices and (ii) nanodimensional impurity defects in a high temperature
superconducting thin film matrix. The principle of strain fields to create
uniform arrays of islands is being used for the first time for self-organized
coherent growth of transition metal, transition metal alloys, and complex-oxide
nanoparticles having controlled shape, dimension, and separation in thin-film
matrices. The results from scanning transmission electron microscopy and
electron energy loss spectroscopy will be used in establishing an unambiguous
correlation between microstructure and physical properties. The final goal of
this project is the fabrication of self-assembled nanoparticulate based devices
with enhanced performance. The proposed educational and outreach activities
include: development of nanomaterials based research and education programs for
graduate, undergraduate, K-12 students and teachers, early recruitment of an
underrepresented population of undergraduate students, providing motivation for
more women and minority students to pursue advanced degrees, and generation of a
diversified skilled workforce and informed public in nanoscience and
nanotechnology issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in
response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 03-043, category
NIRT. The success of the project will lead to the creation of self-assembled
magnetic particles in thin-film media with smaller particle size, tighter size
distribution, optimized compositions, and specified particle orientation. These
capabilities are expected to lead to revolutionary progress in ultra-high
density magnetic recording and spintronics. Similarly, the proposed self-
assembly process will provide improved pinning sites for vortices in
superconducting thin films and will result in more efficient operation of
transmission cables, microwave, and tunneling electronic devices at higher
temperatures. With respect to long term benefits, the proposed NIRT activities
will lead to (i) strengthening nanomaterials based research at NCAT, (ii)
education, and training programs for undergraduates, graduates and post-doctoral
fellows from underrepresented groups, (iii) new learning opportunities for K-12
students and teachers, and (iv) motivating more women and minority students to
pursue advanced degrees. &lt;br/&gt;