* 0403444
* NER:    Nanoparticle Synthesis and Assembly Induced by Laser Light
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Anthony Pedraza, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 99,994.00

The object of this Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) project is to develop a
general method capable of synthesizing nanoparticles and assembling them into
extended regular, single and crossed, linear arrays, and to gain insight into
why the alignment phenomenon takes place. The approach is to combine two main
techniques: thin film deposition and laser irradiation, in a manner designed to
avoid the use of masks and minimize multi-step processing. As the atoms are
being deposited, laser light will force them to joint into nanoparticles in well
ordered lines. The spacing between lines can be changed by changing the angle of
incidence of the light.

The development of a processing method for generating and manipulating
nanostructures that is simple, very general, very fast and well suited for
building devices represents a significant advance. It could become an important
tool to enable the integration of nanoscale manufacturing with existing
technologies, for many applications. In foresight, the development of powerful
and versatile means for producing and assembling nanoparticles will encourage
the design and testing of devices. The integration of research and education
will be strongly implemented, in harmony with the mission of the University of
Tennessee. The specific educational planning includes the training of two
students, one graduate and one undergraduate, to conduct focused research on
materials in the forefront of engineering applications using state-of-the-art
equipment and appropriate scientific methodology. A web site will be developed
where the research performed will be described for instructional and information
purposes.