* 0403461
* Collaborative Research: Are Carbon Fluxes from Marine Sediments Enhanced by Submarine Ground Water Discharge?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2009
* USD 268,582.00

0403461.&lt;br/&gt;Jonathan B. Martin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flux of C from
coastal marine sediments is likely to be influenced by submarine ground water
discharge (SGD), which may enhance remineralization of buried C and transport it
to the water column. Previous studies reveal that SGD includes both meteoric
water from continental aquifers and surface water mixed into shallow sediment
through processes such as wave and tidal pumping, density driven flow, and
bioirrigation. Surface water is saturated with oxygen, and thus should
remineralize organic carbon that otherwise would be sequestered in the
sediments. The process of mixing and enhanced remineralization will be studied
in the Indian River Lagoon System (eastern Florida), where changes in water
column salinity and pore waters have been used previously, and will be used in
this study, to trace pumping of oxygenated surface water into the sediments. The
study will use time-series measurements and monitoring of conservative tracers
(conductivity, Cl- concentration, 222Rn activity, and temperature) to determine
the temporal and spatial scales of mixing, as well as variations through time
and space of discharge from the regional aquifers. Combining Cl- and
conductivity allows greater temporal and spatial resolution than either one
alone. Simultaneous measurements of Cl- concentration, conductivity, and 222Rn
activity provide unique information because of their distinct compositions in
end-member water sources. The hydrologic studies will be coupled with studies of
remineralization of C in the sediments using C concentrations and 13C and 14C as
tracers of the sources of C. Carbon in the mixed zone will be depleted in 14C
because detrital organic carbon will be up to several thousand years old
depending on depth of burial. Carbon in the meteoric water will be even more
depleted in 14C depending on the flow paths and rates. The d13C values will be
controlled by the source of C from carbonate or organic matter and provides a
powerful complement to the 14C measurements. Results of the study should provide
information on the efficiencies of C transformation, spatial and temporal
variations of hydrologic controls on those transformations and fluxes in coastal
sediments, and information on C cycling in marine sediments from hydrologic
processes, an important first step toward quantitative estimates of sources to
the global C cycle. The study will also develop new isotopic tracing techniques
to study these processes. The study has important management implications for
the local study site, which is in the National Estuaries Program, is one of the
most biologically diverse estuaries in the nation, and home to 21 endangered or
threatened species. The project impacts the educational missions of the
University of Florida (a Research I institution), Florida A&amp;M University (a
Historically Black and Minority Serving College/University), and Louisiana State
University (located in an EPSCoR state) through involvement of high school to
graduate students, both through course work that will be linked to the Florida
Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence (FCOSEE) web portal, and directly
in the project, which offers a broad range of learning opportunities (hydrology
and biogeochemistry).&lt;br/&gt;