* 0403903
* NIRT:     Nanomolecular Interactions of Novel Biological and  Synthetic Polyelectrolyte Brushes
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Alan Grodzinsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel De Kee
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,500,000.00

In this research proposal, an interdisciplinary research team has been assembled
that includes 4 PI's representing 5 different academic departments at 3
universities who have expertise in a broad complementary array of fields of
science and engineering. The overall goal of this research prrposal is to use
powerful new nanoscale experimental and theoretical tolls and methodologies to
deleop a foundation for the fundamental physics of novel technologically
important polyelectrolyte (PE) brush and brusk-like systems. One unique aspect
of this proposal is the merging of what have historically been largely isolated
fields, that of synthetic and biological PE's. The proposal includes 3 specific
aims including: 1) nanomechanical and nanostructural investigations of
connective tissue polyelectrolytes, II) synthesis and nanoscale interactions of
synthetic PE brush gradients and nanoscale objects, and III) a multiscale
theoretical approach that will enable bridging the gap of length scales from the
atomistic to macroscopic observable quantities using molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations both at the atomistic scale and using coarse grained models,
molecular theory, and nanoscale continuum Poisson-Boltzmann-based EDL
simulations. The model PE systems to be studied are cartilage glycosaminoglycans
(Biological) and polyacrylic acid (PAA), poly(dimethylaminoethyl metharylate)
(PDMAEMA), and poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAAm) (synthetic).
Polyelectrolytes are technologically important classes of polymers used in a
wide variety of applications including: colloidal dispersion stabilization and
rheology, environmentally sensitive and stimulus-responsive membranes, drug
delivery, and engineered surfaces for control of lubrication and wettability.
Despite more than 50 years of continuing interest, the unique properties of
charged polymers are still poorly understood, mostly due to the fact that up
until recently, experimental and theoretical methods needed to study such
systems directly at the nanoscale in near-physiological environmental conditions
did not exist. The proposed research using powerful new nanotechnological
techniques will enable the imaging, measurement, and prediction of nanoscale
interaction forces within and between model biological and synthetic
polyelectrolytes and combined with a novel multiscale theoretical approach will
provide fundamental understanding of such systems. The results will be important
for future understanding of cartilage, its strength, and its fundamental
mechanical and chemical properties. Educational and outreach activities include
coordination with K-12 teachers in developing demonstration modules, interaction
with K-12 students and teachers, and incorporation of undergraduate students as
researchers in the project.