* 0403912
* NIRT: Highly Integrated Optical Nanoparticle-Based Sensing Systems Based on Nanoparticle Synthesis, Assembly, and Integration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* April Brown, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samir El-Ghazaly
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,400,000.00

NIRT: Highly Integrated Optical Nanoparticle-Based Sensing Systems
&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NIRT focuses on
significant improvements in the performance and portability of sensor systems
through the exploitation of nanoscale materials. This comprehensive approach
relies on the team composed of chemists, electrical engineers, biomedical
engineers, materials scientists and chemical engineers from Duke University,
Wayne State University and the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The intellectual
merit of the proposed activity results from the scientific and engineering
exploration and discovery underlying the design and fabrication of a system-on-
a-chip sensing system exploiting nanostructured materials as both multi-spectral
emitters and robust targeted probes. Nanoparticles are increasingly important
for sensing and offer a range of optical modalities. Optical signals from
nanoparticles are often significantly enhanced over bulk materials allowing for
miniaturization of the entire sensing system. Nanoparticles will be used in
different functions: as light emitters to enable sensing and as molecular
beacons to enhance signals generated during sensing. The efficacy of this
integrated approach will be studied the use of these sensing\detection media to
recognize tagged molecular and endogenous fluorescence targets. The sensor
platform exploits new nanostructure sensing and emitting media, optical emitter
structures, new means of materials integration, and demonstrates the
improvements in performance gained from on-chip integration. The broader impacts
of this project derive from the diversity, both disciplinary and demographic, of
the team, and the inclusion of undergraduate students in the project through
linkages with diversity programs. Educational articles and curricular materials
will be generated such as articles in educational journals that use research
results and local expertise to communicate new concepts in sensing. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;