* 0403650
* FRG:  High Pressure Phase Transformations of Silicon, Germanium and Silicon Nitride
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Ronald Scattergood, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 740,028.00

The objective of the proposed research program is to establish an
interdisciplinary group of researchers from UN-Charlotte, NCSU and U TN with the
necessary range of expertise to characterize the role and influence of the high
pressure phase transformations of silicon, germanium, and silicon nitride during
manufacturing processing. It is envisaged that this material behavior may be
exploited to improve the manufacturing processes by increasing yields,
decreasing defects, and reducing the manufacturing costs of devices and products
manufactured from these materials. The research plan proposes to extend
significantly the understanding of the fundamental principles and mechanics of
the deformation and machining of these materials. The high-pressure phase
transformations that occur during machining of silicon, germanium, and silicon
nitride are a recently discovered manufacturing process mechanism. Existing
scientific and engineering models do not include this important effect. It has
been suggested that the knowledge of the existence of the high-pressure metallic
phase of silicon "has about it the unmistakable scent of a major advance: it is
likely to lead to a host of consequential researches". This knowledge is a major
breakthrough for the semiconductor and optical research and materials'
community. The use of the high-pressure phase transformations of these materials
to improve the manufacturing process is a strategic change in the basic
conception of the fundamental material process mechanisms. The necessary
conditions for exploiting the high-pressure phase transformation of
semiconductors and ceramics will be evaluated. This research will advance the
knowledge of the mechanics of these materials and permit manufacturers to hurdle
the present obstacles that confront them as they attempt to produce products of
higher precision and lower cost. The high pressure phase transformation work on
these materials promises to be applicable to other engineering ceramics, such as
silicon carbide, and to manufacturing processes such as slicing, grinding,
lapping and polishing. The high-pressure phase transformation represents a new
means for controlling materials, manufacturing processes, and equipment to
produce the desired end effect or product. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global
importance of semiconductors and ceramics has led to extensive research into the
nature of surface deformation as a consequence of materials processes such as
machining, grinding, lapping and polishing. With the exception of steels,
semiconductors and their various physical properties as the target for research
are unsurpassed in terms of human effort invested. In spite of this a detailed
knowledge of the physical processes involved in elastic and more so plastic
deformation is still at issue. Based on accumulated knowledge it is recognized
that the high-pressure phase transformations of silicon (Si), germanium (Ge),
and silicon nitride (Si3N4) are responsible for their ductile material behavior
during mechanical deformation-based material fabrication processes. The proposed
team-based project will provide the direction, focus and synergy needed to
successfully bring current knowledge of the influence of the high pressure phase
transformation to the forefront of research activities in such areas as
materials, tribology, and precision engineering. Through the proposed multi-
university small group effort our effectiveness is enhanced by providing for the
extension of the basic knowledge and potential relevance of the high pressure
phase of these materials to applications involving friction, wear and precision
machining. This small group of researchers will provide a coordinated and
integrated resource group to industry. The group will provide a reference source
for information and expertise on material processing of silicon, germanium and
silicon nitride.&lt;br/&gt;