* 0403029
* Combinatorial Models in Algebra, Geometry, and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Cristian Lenart, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 107,408.00

This research plan is divided into three projects in algebraic combinatorics and
its applications to other areas of mathematics. The first project is concerned
with several concrete aspects of Schubert calculus on generalized flag
varieties. Its goal is to find combinatorial formulas for expressing the product
of two Schubert classes (in cohomology) in the basis of Schubert classes; this
is equivalent to counting points in a suitable triple intersection of Schubert
varieties. The emphasis will be on the multiplication rule in the cohomology of
the variety of complete flags in complex space. Many different approaches have
been used in this area, but the only manifestly positive formulas that exist are
limited to some easier special cases. The second project is concerned with the
development of a simple combinatorial model (recently introduced by the
investigator in collaboration with A. Postnikov) for the representation theory
of complex semisimple Lie groups, as well as for the Chevalley-type
multiplication formula in the equivariant K-theory of the corresponding
generalized flag variety. The construction is based on combinatorics of
decompositions in the corresponding affine Weyl group and enumeration of
saturated chains in the Bruhat order on the (nonaffine) Weyl group. This model
has several advantages over other combinatorial structures in the area, such as
various specializations of the Littelmann path model. The new model will be
extended in several directions, such as: the representation theory of Kac-Moody
algebras, standard monomial theory, and the quantum K-theory of flag varieties.
The connections with other models and a deeper study of the combinatorics
involved will also be pursued. The third project is concerned with a
combinatorial study of certain formal group laws related to topology. The main
application is to certain immersion problems for lens spaces and projective
spaces.

A unifying theme of the projects outlined here is the emphasis on combinatorics
and computation. During the last decades, computation has gained an important
role in mathematical research. This stimulated the development of combinatorics,
as it became clear that combinatorial structures are particularly well suited
for encoding complex mathematical objects, while combinatorial methods are well
suited for related computations. This research plan is part of the ongoing
effort to perform concrete computations, based on combinatorial structures. One
of the main objects of study are generalized flag varieties. Although these are
classical varieties, they feature prominently in current mathematical research
due to their remarkable combinatorial complexity and the subtle interplay
between various areas related to them. Examples of such areas relevant to the
projects in this plan are: enumerative geometry (concerned with problems such as
counting the lines or planes satisfying a number of generic intersection
conditions, which are equivalent to performing certain cohomology calculations),
and the geometric construction of representations of Lie groups (and, more
generally, Kac-Moody groups). Flag varieties also provide a useful testbed for
the development of combinatorial models relevant to computations in various
cohomology theories of certain projective varieties.