* 0403703
* NER:  Elliptically-Polarized-Surface-Wave-Scattering-Based Diagnosis of  Self-Assembly and Nano-Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Mustafa Aslan, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop and test a novel diagnostic system
to characterize self-assembly of nano-size (5-10 nm in diameter) particles and
structures via elliptically-polarized surface-wave scattering. With this
approach, the formation of nano particles on a surface can be monitored while
the solution chemistry is altered for optimal particle dispersion. This is
achieved by measuring the angular profiles of scattered surface waves at
different polarization settings. By nature, the surface waves are more sensitive
to particles and objects near a thin metallic film; therefore, their scattering
patterns allow the detection of nano-size particles more accurately and beyond
what the traditional light scattering approaches can achieve.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed diagnostic tool is likely to be an important
and integral part of many nano-fabrication techniques, which are projected to
grow significantly over the next several decades. Applications of such a tool
will be numerous, and will include as diverse research areas as electronics,
bulk material fabrication, membrane synthesis, nano-mechanical systems, as well
as DNA screening. This technique will allow the construction of powerful on-line
diagnostic tools, which may be used for real time feedback control of self-
assembled nanostructures, and may provide a much less expensive alternative to
the traditional electron and atomic-force microscopy measurements. This research
project is likely to have a significant indirect impact on the society at large,
as it will be instrumental in reducing the costs and improving the reliability
of nanoparticle-based devices, tools and manufacturing applications.&lt;br/&gt;