* 0403964
* NER:  Superconductor-nanotube Entangler
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Nina Markovic, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2005
* USD 99,999.00

The objective of this research is to achieve and measure the quantum
entanglement of electrons which are far away from each other. The approach is to
take a Cooper pair (two naturally entangled electrons) from a superconducting
nanowire, and separate them spatially while keeping the entanglement intact.
This can be achieved by contacting the superconductor with two electrical leads
that exhibit Luttinger liquid properties, which are characteristic for one-
dimensional systems. Using carbon nanotubes, which are naturally one-
dimensional, will circumvent the difficulty of fabricating one-dimensional
leads. The two electrons that make up the Cooper pair can then be forced to
tunnel into two different leads, and transported some distance away. This novel
device has been shown to be theoretically sound, but it has not been realized
experimentally. If successful, this research would result in the first
demonstration of entanglement at a distance for electrons. This has already been
achieved with photons, but not with any massive particles. Using electrons in a
solid-state device would immensely simplify many technical requirements for
building functional, controllable and scalable devices for ultrafast transfer of
quantum information. Such devices would ultimately be able to perform
computational and cryptographic tasks that are currently impossible. As the
future of quantum communication crucially relies on entanglement, this research
would provide an extremely important proof of principle and it would represent a
giant step towards developing a viable solid-state technology.

