* 0403126
* Workshop on Models of Thought Processes:   Insights Toward Chemical Systems; June 20-23, 2005; Arlington, VA
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Irving Epstein, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 03/31/2006
* USD 99,620.00

This award by the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, the Division of Integrative Biology and Neuroscience in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, the
Division of Computer and Network Systems and the Division of Information and
Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems in the
Directorate for Engineering, supports a Workshop on "Models of Thought
Processes: Insights toward Chemical Systems" to be held at the National Science
Foundation in June 20-22, 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring
together scientists from several disciplines to explore how chemistry may offer
insights into and models for such key processes as learning, memory, motor
control, integration of sensors, signaling, computation and how knowledge gained
about these processes from other areas of science may open up new and exciting
areas for chemists. Invited participants from a range of fields, including
chemistry, biology, neuroscience, cognitive science, computer science,
mathematics, physics, and engineering will engage in half-day sessions devoted
to different aspects of learning and other processes and in a final session to
summarize and synthesize the questions and insights that have arisen.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Participants will be asked to prepare materials before
the workshop that will highlight key issues for cross-disciplinary attack. A
workshop summary and final report will be prepared that will survey particularly
promising directions and approaches. Specific areas to be addressed are: 1)
chemically and biologically based approaches to computation; 2) models of
learning in chemical systems; 3) transmission of information at the local
(synaptic) and global (network) levels; 4) synthesis and analysis of key
molecules and structural elements important in learning, memory, computation,
sensing and signaling. A professional science writer will be employed to assist
with preparing pre-workshop materials and the final report, and to craft
materials for press releases and other forms of public dissemination.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this workshop includes its
exploration of the diversity of scientific thought in this inherently
interdisciplinary area, with strong prospects for generating new collaborations
across fields. A small number of postdoctoral and/or advanced graduate students
will be invited to attend including individuals from underrepresented groups.
The results of the workshop will be made available on a publicly accessible
website. Other goals include the identification of areas in which a
multidisciplinary, multilevel approach is likely to yield significant new
insights, and initiation of interdisciplinary collaborations, which may be
relevant to several interdisciplinary NSF programs. &lt;br/&gt;