* 0403696
* NER: Vibrating Nanotube-based Nano Powder Production System
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Bor Jang, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 05/31/2006
* USD 130,000.00

0403696 Akhatov The proposed NER seeks to demonstrate the technical feasibility
of a novel approach to the production of nano-sized particles with a relatively
narrow size distribution and to evaluate its potential advantages and
limitations. This vibrating nanotube-based nano powder production approach
entails directing the flow of a stream of precursor vapor atoms into a
temperaturecontrolled zone in which carbon nanotubes serve as sites of
heterogeneous nucleation of nano particles. The vibration amplitude and
frequency of the nanotubes are variably controlled to limit the growth of the
droplets condensed on the vibrating nanotubes. The nano droplets grown to a
controllably specified size are continuously shaken off the nanotubes. The
shaken-off droplets are optionally directed to flow through a cooling or
passivating zone to further prevent agglomeration. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit: The technological goal of the proposed exploratory research is to develop
a method of using carbon nanotubes to produce nano particles of controllable
sizes with a relatively narrow size distribution. In powder sintering, mono-
dispersed particles are known to form a more uniform green microstructure, which
allows for a better control over the resulting microstructure during
densification. Size uniformity is also an important feature in many of
the&lt;br/&gt;realized or potential applications of nano particles, including a
more uniform and bettercontrolled drug-release rate, more reliable catalytic
effect, more reproducible membrane filtration result, and improved sensor
selectivity. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts: The present research will generate
interesting results, which will be incorporated in a SBIR/STTR proposal as a
further step toward commercialization of the proposed nano powder technology.
The proposed technology could potentially lead to the establishment of a high-
tech enterprise in the state of North Dakota. Materials science and
nanotechnology has been identified by NDSU as a priority research area targeted
for growth. The Provost of NDSU strongly supports a current effort to establish
a campus-wide interdisciplinary BS/MS/PhD program in materials science and
nanotechnology. The proposed research is in line with this mission and will have
a significant impact on the initiation and growth of this important educational
program.&lt;br/&gt;