* 0403882
* NER:  Structural Basis of Stability of Nanoengineered Polypeptide Thin Films and Microcapsules
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

The objective of this Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) interdisciplinary
research project is to launch the unlocking of nature's secrets pertaining to
self-assembly of large molecules called polypeptides onto an electrically
charged surface. The final self-assembled structures are thin films or
microcapsules, ranging from a few nanometers to hundreds of nanometers thick.
Polypeptides form one of the four major types of biological macromolecule.
Modern methods permit synthesis of an effectively unlimited variety of
polypeptide structures. The approach of this research encompasses polypeptide
synthesis and purification by chemical methods. The polypeptide designs will
test key aspects of their physical properties in the self-assembly process.
Following purification, polypeptides will be assembled into a thin film, one
molecular layer at a time, using a method known as layer-by-layer assembly. The
process involves repeated alternation of the net charge of the adsorbing
polypeptides, from positive to negative and back again. Film assembly will be
monitored, and the resulting films will be characterized using physical
techniques. Determining self-assembly properties of polypeptides and properties
of the resulting films thus will contribute to basic scientific
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research, however, also holds considerable
promise for the realization of tangible benefits to human life. Layer-by-layer
assembly is generally considered the method of thin film fabrication with the
greatest potential for commercialization. At present, though, very little is
known about how to optimize the use of polypeptides in this method. Polypeptide
thin films are likely to be useful for applications in biotechnology and
biomedicine (drug delivery systems), food technology (edible coatings), and
homeland defense (anti-microbial coatings).