* 0403462
* NER: Large Scale Synthesis and Assembly of Micro- and Nanoparticles with Dipolar Charge and Anisotropic Shape
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Orlin Velev, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 07/31/2007
* USD 114,372.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0403462&lt;br/&gt;O. Velev, North Carolina State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro- and nanometer sized polymer particles
possessing specific directional interactions can be assembled into advanced
"smart" materials and consumer products, however such particles are not readily
available to date. Two new techniques for large-scale synthesis of novel classes
of polymer particles with anisotropic charge or shape are extended here. The
first class of particles will have permanent dipolar and/or quadrupolar moments.
The synthesis technique is based on polymerization (or solidification) of
emulsions and microemulsions in the presence of constant or alternating electric
field. These particles will exhibit dipole-dipole interactions that will make
them directionally self-assemble into structures with long-range orientation.
The second new class of particles that will be fabricated are cylindrical
polymer microrods. The PI has discovered a scalable process for making such
cylindrical particles by shearing and "drying" of emulsified droplets from
polymer solution. Fabrication of colloid rods of different aspect ratios will
allow controlling their orientational, entropic and induced dipolar
interactions. These anisotropic particles will be used for the assembly of a
variety of advanced materials such as ion- and pH sensitive gels, colloidal
liquid crystals, photonic crystals of uncommon symmetry and electrorheological
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity. Two
original concepts for fabrication of new classes of particles with fundamentally
novel properties and interactions are extended. The orientation dependent non-
DLVO surface forces between electrically anisotropic particles in water could be
of interest to a wide community of academic and industrial researchers. Access
to these particles could lead to new fundamental insights into non-DLVO forces.
The rod-like particles make possible fundamental research in new phenomena of
entropic self-organization. New types of micro- and nanostructures will be
formed by engineered assembly of these particles. These structures include
"colloidal" liquid crystals from particles instead of molecules, photonic
crystals with novel symmetries, strongly interacting water-based
electrorheological fluids and materials where the particles assemble or
disassemble in response to changes in their
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity. This project will for the first time allow the large-scale, efficient
and inexpensive fabrication of colloidal particles with anisotropic shape and/or
directional interactions. Undergraduate student research projects, an outreach
course for industrial scientists, and national and international collaborations
are also planned. Potential beneficiaries of the resulting novel materials and
technologies include the chemical, pharmaceutical and biomedical industries, and
companies making displays, photonics and optoelectronic devices. Some possible
applications are in multi-million dollar industries, such as replacing the
molecular liquid crystals in displays with colloidal liquid crystals, and
developing new polymer "latex" paints with higher viscosity and better optical
properties. Photonic crystals and water-based electrorheological fluids could
find application in emerging high technologies. Novel "smart" ion-sensitive or
biomolecule-sensitive gels for medical applications could also be fabricated.
This will lead to scalable and efficient manufacturing processes at the
nanoscale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;