* 0403261
* Mechanisms of Cyclic Plastic Deformation in Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Michael Kassner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2004
* USD 75,200.00

This grant examines cyclic deformation, or fatigue, at a fundamental level.
Metal fatigue is poorly understood, partly because the dislocation dynamics and
internal stress-states during reversed deformation have not been characterized.
The details of dislocation motion and interaction and the internal stress-state
are critical to this process. In this research a detailed description of cyclic
deformation, including the Bauschinger effect, the substantial reversible
strains with reversal of the direction of deformation, and the eventual
saturation of the flow stress, will be accomplished, using advanced experimental
techniques. Conventional dark- field (DF) transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
will be used on Cu single crystals to assess dislocation dipole spacings and
distributions, which will allow a determination of the local stress-state during
cyclic plasticity. Experiments will include convergent beam electron diffraction
(CBED) in the TEM that can probe small (20-nm diameter beam) areas to assess
changes in the lattice parameter in unloaded foils as well as in-situ, or under
load. This will allow direct assessment of the local internal stress with
relatively high accuracy. The dislocation dynamics will be studied by in-situ
deformation in the high voltage transmission electron microscope (HVEM). The
role of screw dislocations will be investigated, including the existence of
pile-ups and cross-slip. The details of dislocations associated with
anelasticity on unloading will also be studied. Specially oriented foils will
complement earlier reversed deformation experiments in the HVEM to especially
determine the nature of screw dislocation dynamics during fatigue.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;In the past there has been only limited success with
direct observation of dislocations during cyclic deformation, such as with in-
situ cyclic or reversed plastic deformation tests such as in the transmission
electron microscope. Also the internal stress-state has not been adequately
determined. Internal stresses are widely suggested to exist in the vicinity of
dislocation heterogeneities in cyclically (as well as monotonically) deformed
microstructures. The heterogeneities include edge dislocation dipole bundles
(veins) and the edge dipole walls of persistent slip bands (PSBs). The
understanding developed from this project will aid in the design of thin film
devices that undergo cyclic
stresses.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;