* 0403457
* NER:      Atomic-Scale Magnetoresistive Sensors and Nanoscience Education
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Douglas Natelson, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 12/31/2005
* USD 91,565.00

We propose to exploit recently developed fabrication techniques to make
electronic devices with atomic-scale active regions for sensing magnetic fields.
We shall examine the physics of such devices, with an eye toward optimizing them
for applications under "real world" conditions (e.g. stable at room temperature
in an ambient environment). The device configuration will be atomic-scale
junctions between soft ferromagnetic electrodes, fabricated by electrochemical
growth from lithographically defined starting electrodes. Similar junctions
exhibit ballistic magnetoresistance, a large (~1000%) magnetoresistive effect
with an unknown underlying detailed physical mechanism. We will examine the
temperature and orientation dependence of the junction magnetoresistance in a
well-controlled domain geometry to better understand the physics of these
devices. This proposal is ambitious and high-risk, at the frontiers of
fabrication capabilities, but with a high potential payoff magnetic sensors with
an atomic-scale active region, and a detailed understanding of their underlying
physics.

This research program and related educational efforts will have significant
impact beyond the research goals described above. Stable atomic-scale sensors
with large magnetoresistive effects have the potential to be a disruptive
technology for the magnetic data storage industry, much as giant
magnetoresistance devices were ten years ago. Detection of local magnetic fields
with sensitivity greater than existing GMR technology will enable the ongoing
development of terabit/in2 storage devices. Furthermore, the PI, already active
in nanoscience educational efforts, will leverage the content of this research
and existing outreach programs at Rice University for lasting impact on
undergraduate, graduate, and K-12 education. This NER proposal addresses the
Nanoscale Devices and System Architecture theme discussed in the program
announcement.