* 0403139
* Quantitating In Vitro Selection
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Steven Benner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

Professor Benner will lead a project that combines organic synthesis, biological
chemistry, in vitro evolution (lVE) and univariate statistical analysis that
will develop the physical organic chemical tools needed to quantitate the impact
of adding chemical functionality (amino, thiol, imidazole, peptides, and metal
chelating groups) via covalent attachment to catalytic DNA molecules. This work
will first address the paradox that arises from the observation that endowing
DNA and RNA libraries with additional functionality evidently improves the
catalytic potential of nucleic acids by only a factor of two to ten, not by the
orders of magnitude expected from standard Structure Theory in Organic
Chemistry. A set of five hypotheses that account for the orders-of-magnitude
discrepancy between expectation and observation will be tested, including models
that hold (a) that our view of the role of functionality in catalysis is naive,
(b) that the functional endowment of natural DNA (phosphates and hydrogen bond
donating and accepting groups) are sufficient for catalysis in general, (c) that
the functionality recruited non-covalently by nucleic acids from solution (in
particular, divalent cations such as Mg++) overwhelms the contribution of
covalently linked functionality, (d) that lVE experiments lose the best
catalysts, and (e) that more than one type of functional group is needed before
the expected large benefit from functionality is seen. This will require careful
assessment of the kinetic order of the reaction being effected by the selected
DNA molecules (first order, unimolecular, with the catalytic step rate
determining?).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this Award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program (OMC) and the Molecular Biochemistry Program in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) will support the
research of Professor Steven A. Benner of the University of Florida. Professor
Benner's work is expected to have broad impact. From a practical perspective, we
may learn how to truly get "catalysis on demand" from IVE experiments, useful
for everything from biomedicine to environmental remediation. From a scientific
perspective, we will understand in greater depth the possibilities of single
biopolymer systems playing a role in the origin of life. From a methodological
perspective, he will develop tools that permit IVE to explore the distribution
of chemical properties in "structure space" defined by a DNA sequence. And, from
a theoretical perspective, the work may end up altering, perhaps dramatically,
our global view of the relationship between functionality and reactivity in
nucleic acids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;