* 0404001
* NER: Interplay Between Mechanical Deformation and Electronic Properties in Carbon Nanotube Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Min-Feng Yu, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2005
* USD 105,500.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0404001&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of Cincinnati&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Qian , Dong&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER: Interplay between Mechanical
Deformation and Electronic Properties in Carbon Nanotube
Structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This research project
explores the coupling mechanism between mechanical deformation and electronic
properties in carbon nanotube (CNT) structures. The proposed goal is to be
accomplished with an integrated theoretical and experimental approach. First of
all, a multiscale method is proposed to extend the length scale limit of the
quantum-mechanical method in order to realistically predict the electro-
mechanical coupling in CNT structures. The simulation results will be verified
by the proposed experiments. The advanced experimental approach is featured by
the integrated electronic and mechanical characterization of CNT structures
through flexible handling of nanosized materials and high resolution
visualization of the measurement. The proposed efforts will aim to understand
the fundamental electro-mechanical coupling in CNTs having realistic dimensions
for application and provide valuable parameters related to the functionality and
reliability of such CNT electromechanical devices.&lt;br/&gt;The research goals
will be fully integrated with the strong educational efforts. An educational
plan that centers on modeling and characterization of nanomaterials will be
developed. A new curriculum will be designed for both undergraduate and graduate
students. Two Ph.D. students will receive training with the support of this
grant. New tools will be used to enhance the teaching and research efforts. By
promoting interests and providing knowledge that is suitable for both starters
and professionals, the efforts are directed towards a broad
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;