* 0404507
* Physics of Viral Structure and Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Joseph Rudnick, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biology jointly funds this award. This award supports theoretical condensed
matter physics at the interface with biology. The PI seeks to develop a
comprehensive statistical mechanical framework to describe the physical
properties of viruses and of viral self-assembly. New experiments are raising
basic questions relating to structural stability, symmetry, and pressure
generation of viruses. The PI aims to address these questions with two
objectives. The first objective is to provide a physical basis for viral
structure and symmetry, which is currently justified in terms of the principles
of quasi-equivalence and of genetic parsimony. Self-assembly experiments suggest
that these concepts must be based on free energy minimization. The PI will
employ a combination of methods with an aim to develop a meaningful free energy.
The PI will utilize a statistical mechanical model for viral self-assembly that
has been shown to reproduce both the main series of icosahedral capsids,
exceptional non-icosahedral capsids and also cylindrical capsids. Numerical
simulations of this model will be carried out to determine the full structure
spectrum. Using these results together with modern statistical mechanical
methods of self-assembling systems the PI will determine a general phase diagram
for the assembly of both sphere-like and rod-like viruses. The work will be
complemented by the use of Landau Theory to analyze the competition between
icosahedral symmetry and non-icosahedral structures. The second objective is to
develop a physical description of RNA encapsidation. A mechanical description of
DNA encapsidation of phage viruses, which is powered by a molecular motor, is
already available but the self-assembly of single-stranded RNA viruses is quite
mysterious: viral RNA is spontaneously compressed during assembly without any
external work being done. Self-assembly of linear polymers will be examined by
classical analytical methods borrowed from polymer physics. In order to account
for the secondary and tertiary RNA structure, we will apply the Isambert and
Siggia description of RNA as a thermally fluctuating gel. Continuum elasticity
theory will be used to model the encapsidation process and obtain the conditions
for spontaneous assembly. The Isamber-Siggia statistical mechanical analysis
will be used to demonstrate that the gel has negative Poisson Ratio, as
apparently required by the continuum description. The research aims to extend
modern methods of soft condensed matter theory, in areas such as self-assembly,
polymer physics, entropic elasticity to emerging problems in the physics of
viruses. While the synthesis of artificial protein cages is a rapidly developing
area of materials science, the design criteria for self-assembled shells that
can reproduce the remarkable properties of viral capsids are only beginning to
be understood. Just as the theory of self-assembly now is used on a routine
basis for the self-assembly of nanocages and quantum dots, a basic understanding
of the physics of viral self-assembly should be a useful guide for the design of
synthetic protein cages. A broader impact of this work is that it contributes to
this basic understanding. It also provides graduate and postgraduate level
educational experiences for the next generation of condensed matter theorists.
%%% The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biology jointly funds this award. This award supports theoretical
condensed matter physics at the interface with biology. The PI seeks to develop
a comprehensive statistical mechanical framework to describe the physical
properties of viruses and of viral self-assembly. Viruses lend themselves to the
application of physics to microbiology. This is in part because of the extreme
austerity of viral structure as compared with living organisms and because they
do not carry out any autonomous metabolic processes. The combination of micro-
mechanical manipulation methods and modern microscopy with molecular biology is
now producing a new generation of physical studies of viruses. These experiments
are raising basic questions relating to structural stability, symmetry, and
pressure generation of viruses that the PI will address. The research aims to
extend modern methods of soft condensed matter theory, in areas such as self-
assembly, polymer physics, entropic elasticity to emerging problems in the
physics of viruses. While the synthesis of artificial protein cages is a rapidly
developing area of materials science, the design criteria for self-assembled
shells that can reproduce the remarkable properties of viral capsids are only
beginning to be understood. Just as the theory of self-assembly now is used on a
routine basis for the self-assembly of nanocages and quantum dots, a basic
understanding of the physics of viral self-assembly should be a useful guide for
the design of synthetic protein cages. A broader impact of this work is that it
contributes to this basic understanding. It also provides graduate and
postgraduate level educational experiences for the next generation of condensed
matter theorists. ***

