* 0404505
* Studies of Alkali Metal and High-Tc Oxide Superconductors and Molecular Materials under Extreme Hydrostatic Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* James Schilling, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2007
* USD 360,000.00

Alkali metals are canonical free-electron systems which, according to
conventional wisdom, should become even more free-electron-like under pressure.
It is, therefore, remarkable that recent theoretical work predicts that under
strong compression the nearly free electrons in Li and Na should become markedly
less free and begin to couple strongly with the lattice. Thereby leading to
possible transformations to lower symmetry crystal structures and/or the
appearance of superconductivity. Building on the recent discovery of type-I
superconductivity in Li and multiple phase transitions in the pressure range to
70 GPa, this project will study the superconducting phase diagram, Tc(P), and
critical magnetic field behavior, Tc(H), of Li and selected Li alloys to
ultrahigh pressures. In addition, there will be a search for pressure-induced
superconductivity in Na and other low-z elements, alloys, and compounds, as well
as in the heavier alkali metals K and Rb. The systematics derived from this
study should shed some light on the properties of hydrogen under pressure which
has been predicted to become a metal at multi-Mbar pressures with possible
superconductivity near room temperature. The proposed experiments give
undergraduate and graduate students an excellent opportunity to both learn and
develop important laboratory techniques; these students will also benefit from
collaborations with groups both in the US and abroad.

All metals are not created equal: some are complex and some are simple. The
alkali metals Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs are widely accepted as being the simplest metals
of all since each contains valence electrons which are free to roam about the
lattice of well separated ion cores. The alkali metals are extremely
compressible. Under very high pressures the ion cores come close together. Since
the valence electrons must avoid the ion cores, they are forced to follow
tortuous catacomb-like paths around the ion cores. For this reason they are no
longer free but couple strongly with the lattice. This generates potential
changes in crystal structure and/or the appearance of an unusual superconducting
state. Exactly this is observed in the alkali metal Li under strong compression:
multiple phase transitions occur and superconductivity at relatively high
temperatures (15 K or -258 C) suddenly appears for pressures above 200,000
atmospheres. In this project the anomalous superconducting state of Li and
selected Li alloys will be studied in depth both under varying pressure and
magnetic field. A search will also be conducted for pressure-induced
superconductivity in the alkali metals Na, K, and Rb. These experiments should
provide insight into a possible superconducting state near room temperature in
metallic hydrogen under millions of atmospheres of pressure. The proposed
experiments give undergraduate and graduate students the opportunity to learn
and develop a multitude of essential experimental techniques; these students
will also benefit from collaborations with groups both in the US and abroad.