* 0404962
* Magnetic Phenomena in Ultra-thin Films and at Thin-film Interfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Arthur Hebard, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2007
* USD 359,583.00

This condensed matter physics project utilizes two recently developed
techniques, which are separate but complementary, to study and characterize
magnetism in ultra thin films and at thin-film inter-faces. The first employs a
specialized vacuum deposition capability for in situ characterization of
magnetotransport in freshly deposited thin films without exposure to air. The
second utilizes the deposition of high quality pinhole-free dielectrics to
fabricate capacitors with dielectric spacing thin enough (<50 A) to assure that
the contribution from magnetically aligned spins in the conducting magnetic
electrodes will dominate the measured capacitance. These techniques, which are
uniquely sensitive to the presence of magnetism within a few angstroms of the
surface, will be used to study both elemental (e.g., Mn, Fe, Cr) and novel
(e.g., dilute magnetic semiconductors, manganites, ruthenates) materials. If
successful, this project will solidify the prospects of adding in situ thin-film
studies and magnetocapacitance as new tools not only to in-crease our
understanding of magnetism at interfaces and surfaces but also to facilitate the
engineering of interfaces for magneotelectronic and nanoscience applications. In
pursuing these objectives, undergraduate students, graduate students and
postdocs will acquire valuable technical and analytical skills for careers in
academic, industrial or government settings. This training will be enhanced by
the publication and dissemination of research results in scholarly journals,
par-ticipation in scientific conferences, and participation in interdisciplinary
collaborations.

Magnetism in thin-film nanostructures is strongly dominated by surfaces and
interfaces. As the thickness of a thin film decreases, the influence of the
interfaces at the film's two surfaces begins to dominate, and magnetic phenomena
become intimately affected. This individual investigator award utilizes two
recently developed techniques, which are separate but complementary, to study
and characterize magnetism in ultra thin films and at thin-film interfaces. The
first of these techniques employs a specialized vacuum deposition capability for
in situ characterization of the magnetic properties of freshly deposited thin
films without exposure to air. The second utilizes the deposition of high
quality dielectrics to fabricate capacitors that are sensitive to the presence
of magnetically aligned spins at the surface of conducting magnetic electrodes.
Novel materials such as ferromagnetic semiconductors will be studied. If
successful, this project will solidify the prospects of adding in situ thin-film
studies and magnetocapacitance as new tools not only to in-crease our
understanding of magnetism at interfaces and surfaces but also to facilitate the
engineering of interfaces for magneotelectronic and nanoscience applications. In
pursuing these objectives, undergraduate students, graduate students and
postdocs will acquire valuable technical and analytical skills for careers in
academic, industrial or government settings. This training will be enhanced by
participation in interdisciplinary collaborations.