* 0404770
* Atomic Hydrogen As A Probe Of Molecular Cloud Structure And Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Paul Goldsmith, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2008
* USD 281,524.00

Dr. Paul Goldsmith will use this award to pursue a novel probe of molecular
cloud structure for the study of HI narrow line self absorption, or HINSA. While
there have been many advances in our understanding of the dense, cold regions
where new stars form, there remain many important questions. These include (1)
the structure of molecular clouds including heating and cooling processes which
determine their temperature and ionization state; (2) the lifetime of molecular
clouds, in particular related to the time scale for star formation; and (3) the
role of the magnetic field. The observations of the 21cm line will yield vital
information, complementary to that obtained from higher frequency observations
of molecules and dust. This research project will enhance our understanding of
molecular clouds and how new stars are formed by providing important information
on key processes in dense regions, including the grain surface H2 formation and
the cosmic ray heating rate, by giving important information on the lifetime of
molecular clouds; in particular the time delay between the onset of atomic to
molecular conversion and the formation of new stars, by developing a new
technique for measuring the magnetic field in dense regions, with much enhanced
sensitivity, and by offering the capability of producing maps of line of sight
magnetic field strength in a reasonable time.

Molecular hydrogen is the most abundant molecule in dense, well shielded regions
of the interstellar medium, but is extremely difficult to trace directly. It now
appears possible, that by careful measurements of the atomic hydrogen associated
with dense molecular cloud cores, we can learn much about the transition from
atomic to molecular form and thus of the evolution of dense regions, starting
from being nearly atomic and ending up as largely molecular. The HI/H2 ratio can
serve as a chronometer for the evolution of interstellar clouds and measure
their evolution towards the phase in which they are the sites of star formation.
The magnetic field and its interaction with matter are critical for a number of
processes that occur in the interstellar medium, including star and planet
formation. This importance has motivated many researchers, but there is very
little information about the initial conditions in terms of magnetic field
strength, for core evolution and collapse. It is plausible that the present work
will prove so effective a method of Zeeman determination of the magnetic field,
that there will for the first time be maps of the magnitude of the (line of
sight) value of the magnetic field in dense clouds. These data will be a strong
motivation for continued theoretical studies on a range of magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) topics, including studies of MHD turbulence and its decay in dense clouds
and the relationship of the magnetic field to disks, jets, and molecular
outflows. The new results will address questions closely tied to many important
issues in astronomy including the initial mass function and the chemical
evolution of galaxies.

The topic of star formation is clearly of wide interest Groups of senior
citizens, university retirees, and students at purely undergraduate institutions
all see molecular clouds and star formation as topics to which they can relate.
It is anticipated that in the course of this research program, Dr. Goldsmith.
will continue to give talks to these groups. By connecting the issue of the
chemistry in molecular clouds to that in the primitive solar system, and by
linking the magnetic field we are studying to that in protostellar disks such as
that from which our solar system formed, this work will have an impact on a
broad audience. ***