* 0404766
* Cycles, characters and global geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* H. Blaine Lawson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 450,420.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0404766&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: H. Blaine Lawson, Jr.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
concerned with the study of cycles, residues,&lt;br/&gt;boundaries and
differential characters. The proposal has several&lt;br/&gt;interrelated parts.
The first concerns the groups of algebraic&lt;br/&gt;cycles and cocycles on a
projective variety $X$. The aim is to&lt;br/&gt;relate these groups to the
global structure of $X$. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator has, with others,
established a theory of homology&lt;br/&gt;type for algebraic varieties based on
the homotopy groups of&lt;br/&gt;cycles spaces. This theory will be used to
study concrete&lt;br/&gt;questions about algebraic spaces. Implications for
real&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry will be explored. Striking onnections
to&lt;br/&gt;universal constructions in topology which emerged in
prior&lt;br/&gt;research will also be investigated. A second part of the
proposal&lt;br/&gt;concerns cycles which bound complex subvarieties in a
projective&lt;br/&gt;manifold. Several new conjectures relate these cycles
to&lt;br/&gt;approximation theory, pluripotential theory, and the
projective&lt;br/&gt;spectrum of Banach graded algebras. A third area of the
proposal&lt;br/&gt;concerns the study of singularities and
characteristic&lt;br/&gt;forms. This subject includes a generalization of Chern-
Weil&lt;br/&gt;theory which gives canonical homologies between singularities
of&lt;br/&gt;bundle maps and characteristic forms. It includes a
useful&lt;br/&gt;analytic tool -- geometric atomicity -- which will be
studied,&lt;br/&gt;and it yields a new approach to Morse Theory.
Applications&lt;br/&gt;relating singularities to global geometry remain to
be&lt;br/&gt;investigated. The forth part of the proposal concerns sparks
and&lt;br/&gt;spark complexes. This recently developed framework for the
study&lt;br/&gt;of differential characters has yielded
interesting&lt;br/&gt;generalizations which extend Deligne cohomology and
arithmetic&lt;br/&gt;Chow groups. They are essentially secondary invariants
which&lt;br/&gt;mediate between cycles and smooth data. Further development
of&lt;br/&gt;the theory and its application to the study of cycles
is&lt;br/&gt;proposed. A fifth area is concerned with special cycles
in&lt;br/&gt;geometry, in particular Special Lagrangian cycles in Calabi-
Yau&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, and associative and Cayley cycles in $G_2$
and&lt;br/&gt;Spin$_7$ spaces. These latter subjects relate to mirror
symmetry&lt;br/&gt;conjectures and to M-theory in Physics as well as many areas
of&lt;br/&gt;geometry and algebra. This project will also be concerned
with&lt;br/&gt;student development, including an undergraduate
educational&lt;br/&gt;effort aimed at fostering mathematical independence
and&lt;br/&gt;developing interactive enviornments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
concept of central importance in geometry is that of a&lt;br/&gt;``cycle''. In
algebraic geometry a cycle corresponds to the&lt;br/&gt;simultaneous solution of
a system of polynomial equations. In&lt;br/&gt;differential geometry they arise
in many ways: as the large scale&lt;br/&gt;solutions of certain differential
equations, and as the level&lt;br/&gt;sets and singularity sets of
differentiable mappings. Curves and&lt;br/&gt;surfaces in space are simple
examples. Cycles with a particular&lt;br/&gt;geometry also play a fundamental
role in modern physical theories&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is concerned
with the study of cycles across this&lt;br/&gt;broad spectrum. In the algebraic
setting cycles have been related&lt;br/&gt;to fundamental large-scale geometry
of their surrounding&lt;br/&gt;space. This discovery has revealed surprizing and
important&lt;br/&gt;relationships between spaces of algebraic cycles and
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;constructions in algebraic topology and has led to new
insights&lt;br/&gt;in both fields. This work will be
continued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another area of investigation concerns cycles
which form the&lt;br/&gt;boundary of subsets with special geometric structure.
They&lt;br/&gt;represent non-linear versions of classical boundary
value&lt;br/&gt;problems in analysis. Such questions arise in many
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;Recently the proposer has formulated conjectures relating
certain&lt;br/&gt;important classes of such cycles to questions in
approximation&lt;br/&gt;theory and Banach algebras. Successful resolution should
produce&lt;br/&gt;significant new insights in several fields of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A third area of study concerns a mathematical
apparatus developed&lt;br/&gt;by the proposer to detect subtle relationships
between cycles and&lt;br/&gt;the global structure of the space they live in.
This apparatus&lt;br/&gt;encompasses some of the most effective tools
historically&lt;br/&gt;developed for this purpose, and it is much more general.
Further&lt;br/&gt;development of this theory and its applications will be
persued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fourth domain of investigation is concerned with
special cycles&lt;br/&gt;in geometry: Special Lagrangian cycles in Calabi-Yau
manifolds,&lt;br/&gt;and associative and Cayley cycles in G(2) and Spin(7)
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;These latter subjects relate to gauge field theory and gravity
in&lt;br/&gt;Physics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also be concerned
with graduate student&lt;br/&gt;development. Students will be part of the
research team. There&lt;br/&gt;will also be an undergraduate educational effort
aimed at&lt;br/&gt;fostering mathematical independence and developing
interactive&lt;br/&gt;environments.&lt;br/&gt;