* 0404252
* NIRT-Spin Distributions and Dynamics in Magnetic Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Maxim Tsoi, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,400,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative NSF-03-043, category NIRT. The effort involves a team of materials
scientists with complementary expertise in magnetic thin film growth,
nanostructure fabrication, mesoscopic physics and magnetic materials. The
scientific objective of the research program is to advance the fundamental
understanding of spin distributions and spin dynamics, including damping, in
nanostructured magnetic materials on picosecond time scales. The development of
high-performance ultrahigh-frequency magnetic materials will require new tools
for probing and accurately modeling spin distributions on a nanometer spatial
scale and spin dynamics on a sub-picosecond time scale. The current research
combines technique development (spin-polarized electron scanning tunneling
microscopy and femtosecond laser-based spin-dynamics), and novel materials
synthesis (self-assembly and template growth) with multi-scale multi-phenomena
theory and modeling. Integrated with this are outreach (NSF/UT Austin Research
Experience for Undergraduates program) and educational components (new courses
in nanotechnology and mesoscopic physics) that will provide new materials and
trained personnel required for continued technological advances in magnetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative NSF-03-043 category NIRT. The team
consists of materials scientists with complementary expertise in magnetic thin
film growth, nanostructure fabrication, theoretical materials physics, and
magnetic materials characterization to address new scientific and technological
issues that arise in submicrometer scale magnetic structures. The objective is
to advance fundamental understanding of relationships between materials
properties and magnetic response in microfabricated magnetic materials.
Scientific and technological relationships between dimensionality, shape, and
structure of nanoparticles and their magnetic properties will be investigated.
The effort combines technique development (new high-speed high-spatial
resolution probes of magnetic response) with new methods of producing sub-micron
magnetic structures (atomic self-assembly), and powerful numerical/theoretical
methods for simulating and understanding magnetic response. The research may
lead to new magnetic materials with applications using currently unused high-
frequency bands in radar, telecommunications, radio astronomy, spectroscopy and
imaging. The research is integrated with educational and outreach activities
including new graduate level courses covering magnetic nanostructures and
technology and undergraduate research experience activities. The program is
designed to attract and train the next generation of scientists and engineers
required for continued scientific and technological advances in the application
of magnetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;