* 0404937
* Evolution of Chemical Bonding Upon Fusion of Planar Aromatic Clusters Into 2-D and 3-D Clusters and Into 3-D Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Alexander Boldyrev, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 05/31/2008
* USD 248,500.00

Dr. A. I. Boldyrev, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Utah State
University, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Program of the Chemistry Division for research into the chemical bonding in two
and three dimensional clusters and networks. The project will explore the
concept of multiple aromaticity as a tool in explaining structure, chemical
bonding and other molecular properties of small main group clusters. The central
goal is the development of an understanding of how chemical bonding evolves upon
fusion of planar aromatic metal clusters into two- and three-dimensional
clusters and into two- and three-dimensional networks. For example, the
octahedral Al6(2-) does not follow Wade's rules, but can be explained on the
basis of fusion of two doubly aromatic Al3(-) clusters. Theoretical calculations
will be used to analyze if aromaticity evolves as triangular and square aromatic
clusters fuse into larger two- and three-dimensional clusters. While most of the
work will center on aluminum, selected systems that contain other metals will be
studied. In collaboration with Dr. Lai-Sheng Wang, Pacific Northwest National
Laboratories, representative clusters will be prepared in the gas phase and
their properties compared with theoretical predictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aluminum alloys are an example of solids formed out of
fused building blocks. Aluminum forms alloys with most metallic elements and
some of these alloys have significant applications in aerospace and automobile
industries. This project will provide a theoretical understanding of the bonding
in such species and provide insight into the structure and strength of these
alloys. Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project will be
exposed to a wide training in computational chemistry and gas phase
spectroscopy. Specific attention will be devoted to including students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;