* 0404853
* Computational Methods for Electronic Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* David Ceperley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2008
* USD 540,000.00

The long-range goal of this research is to develop theoretical and computational
methods to predict accurately the properties of many-electron systems and then
to apply the methods to important condensed matter systems. The focus of this
research is primarily on the development and application of quantum Monte Carlo
(QMC) methods. However, part of the research attempts to tie these approaches to
other theoretical issues such as the fundamental distinction between metals and
insulators in terms of the manybodyelectron wave function.

QMC can provide very accurate results for electronic systems: the most well-
known example is the homogenous electron gas where QMC has provided the
benchmark upon which are based most density functional (DFT) calculations. DFT-
based methods are the only current method feasible for accurate large-scale
simulations of realistic systems; however, even the improved functionals have
well-known defects. The past few years have seen substantial progress in
coupling the simulation of ions at a finite temperature with QMC simulation of
the electrons (the CEIMC method). In addition to being more accurate, in cases
where other averaging must be performed, the QMC approach can be as efficient as
DFT- based approaches. Applications to extended systems of hydrogen are now in
production. In the near future there will be development of QMC methods, with
emphasis upon more accurate wave functions, improved boundary conditions, and
new methods able to use much larger computational facilities efficiently. The
research will enable applications to elements with core electrons using more
accurate pseudopotentials. Methods to calculate electronic forces will enable
dynamical calculations of ionic systems.

Applications of the methods will include hydrogen throughout the whole phase
diagram of temperature and pressure. Although there have been numerous previous
QMC and DFT simulations, the CEIMC method removes most of their limitations. The
connection between the insulator-metallic transition, the atomic molecular-
transition and temperature and zero point effects is still lacking in current
approaches. The simulations should clarify the situation, especially under
conditions where experiment is non-existent or unreliable. A further challenge
is the microscopic simulation of water from first principles, which is
absolutely fundamental to many scientific questions and which appears to be
within reach of QMC simulation. The power of this approach can be applied to
other problems, for example, new methods to simulate electrons and their spin
states in real nanostructure devices, potentially more accurately and
efficiently than with existing grid-based approaches. The entire device can be
simulated by coupling two random walks-one to solve the electrostatic equations
in a complicated structure and another for the Nbody quantum equation for the
electrons.

The computational complexity of the simulation of the basic equations of matter
(on classical not quantum computers) is a very important and fundamental issue.
The challenge is to solve accurately problems with many interacting particles,
including strongly interacting systems and cooperative phenomena. QMC methods
have made it possible to compute the thermodynamic properties of bosonic
systems, including superfuidity. However, the fermion sign problem is a critical
issue limiting present work, and steps toward solving or minimizing the sign
problem are among the outstanding challenges in computational science. In
addition, development of new computational approaches frequently leads to new
theoretical understanding as well as algorithms useful in other disciplines.

The development of these computational quantum methods will have a qualitative
impact upon the course of many fields of science including physics, materials
science, chemistry and even biology, by enabling much more accurate, and
potentially faster, simulation of a broad range of systems. The calculations
will resolve questions about the properties of hydrogen at high temperatures and
pressures, the basis of models for the formation of Jovian planets; the
microscopic properties of water and solutions; and properties of nanoscale
systems. The research is carried out primarily by graduate students and postdocs
who often go later to industry, thus transferring the latest computational
methods. Algorithms and software developed as a result of the research will be
made available to the general research community through the Materials
Computation Center and used in undergraduate courses, graduate courses, and
summer schools at the University of Illinois and elsewhere.