* 0404114
* NER: Carbon Nanotube Synthesis:  Assessing Economic and Environmental Tradeoffs in Process Design
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Jacqueline Isaacs, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 06/30/2006
* USD 129,989.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NER. The extraordinary properties of carbon
nanotubes (e.g., electrical, mechanical and chemical) have led to research in
drug delivery and medical diagnostic applications, and offer great promise for
delivering new and improved environmental technologies. However, it appears that
few researchers are including green engineering principles in the development of
these processes, and with the general concern over nanotech development, it
would be prudent to assess the tradeoffs in process alternatives while the
processes are in their developmental phases, to allow creation of more
sustainable processes. This project therefore addresses societal implications of
nanotechnology. The potential for harmful societal implications of
nanotechnology has generated policy analyses and legislative congressional
hearings. Many organizations have been responsive to the need to address
potential consequences, including the National Nanotechnology Initiative, the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the National Academy of Engineering
(NAE), by holding workshops, and colloquia to address issues that cross
disciplinary boundaries. A draft document on guidelines for responsible
nanotechnology development practices is available on the Foresight Institute's
website, but most scientists and engineers are not aware of its existence.
Although the document includes some specific recommendations intended to provide
a basis for responsible development of molecular nanotechnology, it does not
address methods for researchers to assess responsible process design. The
proposed research addresses this need. Given the potential benefits and concerns
over the use of single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), this proposal focuses on
assessment of the tradeoffs among the technological, environmental and economic
characteristics of SWNT synthesis. In a collaborative one-year Nano Exploratory
Research (NER) plan, the principal investigators at Northeastern University (NU)
and Wake Forest University (WFU) will gather pertinent information on single
wall nanotube (SWNT) processes: products created, materials used, effluents
generated to the environment, and energy used. WFU will provide this information
to develop inventories for their SWNT processes. NU will develop life cycle
analysis (LCA) approaches to track materials. NU will gather technical process
information from WFU to develop technical cost models (TCMs) to assess the
process economics for scaled-up operations, including environmental costs for
effluent disposal and worker safety. The cost models will include tangible
environmental process costs. WFU will track environmental aspects of lab-scale
SWNT arc, CVD, and laser-assisted CVD processes with regard to energy utilized,
waste gas emissions, solid waste production and possible airborne hazards for
production of SWNTs. Based on NU's modeling results for process improvement, WFU
will run trial experiments and characterize the resulting products. NU and WFU
will collaboratively assess inputs and determine preliminary results for the
most environmentally benign approaches to SWNT synthesis. The expertise of the
PIs is complementary. NU has a track record of successful development and
utilization of LCA and TCM models, while WFU is a leader in the development of
process alternatives for the synthesis of various types of single-walled
nanotubes. Given the potential benefits and concerns over the use of SWNTs, and
the fact that many new (and existing) businesses are currently working to
commercialize the process, assessment of the tradeoffs among the technological,
environmental and economic characteristics is critical. The intellectual merit
in this work resides in the application of green engineering principles to
developmental nanotechnologies. There is significant broader impact associated
with the development of environmentally benign nanotech process design. Results
from this one-year project are expected to provide information on alternative
process choices that will allow researchers and process developers to make
informed decisions for appropriate use and scale-up of the technology. Through
this project, laboratory researchers, graduate students and undergraduates
(through a course module) will become aware of the associated societal and
ethical issues, and can work to incorporate appropriate tradeoffs during process
development. Dissemination of this work through the existing NSEC and MRSEC
Centers will allow other researchers to become familiar with environmentally
benign process design practices.