* 0404299
* NER:  Hydrogen Separation by Hierarchical Palladium/Inorganic Nanocomposited Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Yunfeng Lu, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2006
* USD 124,260.00

Lu, Yunfeng Tulane University

"NER: Hydrogen Separation by Hierarchical Palladium/Inorganic Nanocomposite
Membranes"

Hydrogen separation is a key component of the future hydrogen energy economy.
Hydrogen separation membranes constitute the forefront in this field because of
their low cost and applicability to high temperature feedstreams in refineries.
However, before wide-scale commercial implementation can occur, more durable and
efficient membranes must be synthesized in an inexpensive and simple manner.

This experimental research directly addresses these challenges by developing
nanostructured palladium alloy/ inorganic membrane assemblies with improved
membrane mechanical stability, lower overall membrane costs, and significantly
improved hydrogen permeability and selectivity. Devices will be fabricated using
template-assisted electrodeposition inside surfactant templated mesoporous
silica layers that have controllable, ordered pore structures. The
electrodeposition of palladium and palladium alloys produces a thin, dense,
nanocrystalline metal/ silica nanocomposite with hierarchical structural control
on an alumina membrane support. The unique properties endowed by the nanoscale
palladium structure will result in enhanced hydrogen transport properties due to
new diffusion pathways. A molecular dynamics mathematical model will describe
the hydrogen transport in the bulk, in the grain boundaries, and on the internal
metal surface. This study will provide a fundamental understanding of the
different routes and mechanisms for diffusion through a nanoscale material. The
knowledge gained can be applied to other nanomaterial projects and future
membrane applications.

Success of this project will directly answer the current hydrogen separation
challenges and prepare this field for the future hydrogen energy economy. All
results from this research will be quickly disseminated to the general public in
the form of peer reviewed journal articles and presentations at national
scientific conferences. The educational plan is built on general teaching
techniques and available education infrastructure in the area. Because of
limited nanotechnology funding and education in the area, the PI will focus on
improving education in this region through nanotechnology programs, courses, and
conferences. The educational program will focus on the unique properties of
nanomaterials, laboratory and industrial synthesis techniques, advanced device
fabrication, and possible solutions to our energy needs through nanotechnology.
This project will incorporate Nanoscale science and engineering (NSE) education
into the current department curriculum in order to prepare students to become
the future, as well as the present, technological workforce.

