* 0404335
* Modelling and Designing Ferroelectrics with Defects and in Two-Dimensional Forms
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2010
* Laurent Bellaiche, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2010
* USD 240,000.00

This theoretical research will build a program aimed at investigating defects in
ferroelectrics and revealing their effects on local and ground-state structures,
phase transitions, dielectric and electromechanical responses; determining and
understanding the properties of ferroelectric thin films; and, designing new
ferroelectrics with optimal and/or original properties. The research program is
integrated with the educational experiences of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives will be achieved through
the development and/or use of the following state-of-the-art and ab initio
numerical tools: accurate first-principles techniques, including total energy
calculations, computation of phonon spectrum, modern theory of polarization and
electric-field effects; effective Hamiltonian approaches that will extend the
reach of first-principles calculations by realistically mimicking defects in
perovskites and/or ferroelectric thin films at finite-temperature; and the
inverse method that allows an efficient design of materials with improved
properties. Collaborations with well-known European groups and industries having
a vital experimental or applied program in ferroelectrics will be
strengthened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cooperative activities between Arkansas
and its European partners will allow a careful comparison between predictions
and measurements, which is important to fully understand the systems to be
investigated, and to refine the numerical tools to be developed (if needed).
Many defects and thin films, and their effects on properties, are going to be
investigated. Examples include chemically-ordered nanoscale regions in relaxors,
oxygen vacancies in BaTiO3, Pb vacancies and Pb misplaced on B sites in
Pb(Sc,Nb)O3, La dopants in Pb(Zr,Ti)O3, and (parasitic) pyrochlore phases. Other
examples are the dependencies of the phase transitions sequence and nature
(i.e., normal vs. diffuse) of BaTiO3 thin films on their thickness, surface
termination, growth orientation, substrate, pressure, mechanical boundary
conditions and electric fields. Particular emphasis will be put on determining
how some striking features known to occur in some bulk materials, - e.g.,
quantum effects in KtaO3, monoclinic phase and antiferrodistortive displacements
in Pb(Zr,Ti)O3, and the role of internal electric field and atomic ordering on
properties of Pb(Sc,Nb)O3 - evolve when going from bulk to thin films. New
phenomena and optimization of piezoelectric and dielectric properties are also
expected to be discovered by playing with the (atomic and film-related) degrees
of freedom in Pb(Sc,Nb,Ti)O3 thin films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad knowledge
of perovskites containing defects, and of ferroelectric thin films, will be
gained thanks to the diversity of techniques to be used and the variety of
systems to be investigated. In addition, to build a network that will be the
basis for future collaboration and exchange of students between the involved
institutions, the collaborative efforts have also the potential to result in the
realization of devices with improved and/or new functionalities, and that will
positively affect quality of life and improve safety. A website will report a
database related to the findings, and will provide the codes to be developed
during the project. In addition, students will be trained at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical research program investigates
new ferroelectric materials and thin films formed from these materials.
Ferroelectric materials are unique in their ability to create a spontaneous
polarization when certain conditions are met. This makes the materials
particularly useful in a variety of applications. The proposed program has an
extensive international collaboration with groups in Europe. Students will
participate in the research at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;