* 0404278
* NIRT: Multiphase Functional Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Derrick Dean, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,300,000.00

This nanoscale interdisciplinary research team (NIRT) award involves
collaboration between participants at Tuskegee University, University of Alabama
at Birmingham(UAB) and Cornell University, and is co-funded by the NSF Divisions
of Materials Research, Chemistry, Civil and Mechanical Systems, Manufacturing
and Industrial Innovation, and Electrical and Communication Systems. Many new
engineering materials are composites with anisotropic structure on nanometer and
sub-nanometer length scales. While much academic research has been devoted to
synthesis and characterization of homogeneous two-component nanocomposite
materials, very little attention has been given to understanding and exploiting
important synergistic effects that arise when nanostructures are added to
multiphase polymer materials. Controlled integration of nanostructures that can
compatibilize, align, or alter the crystalline morphology of multi-component
polymer mixtures dramatically increases the physical sophistication of
conventional nanocomposite materials and provides new strategies for materials
design on the nanoscale. The objective of the proposed research is three-fold.
First, to develop a new class of functional nanocomposite materials based on
dispersed anisotropic nanostructures in single-component and multi-component
polymer mixtures. Second, to improve fundamental understanding of how surface
functionalized nanostructures affect phase behavior, crystalline morphology,
rheology, curing kinetics, and properties of multiphase polymeric materials.
Finally, to quantify the effect of processing shear fields and polymer particle
interactions on alignment and spatial distribution of anisotropic nanostructures
in synthetic polymers. Our work will focus on surface-functionalized carbon
nanotubes (CNT) and silica nanorods dispersed in model polymer systems. Each
system will be chosen to introduce progressively greater degrees of complexity
to the basic nanocomposite motif, providing new insight into methods for
controlling polymer structure at the nanoscale using anisotropic nanostructures.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research is important for scientific
as well as practical reasons. Our work, for example, exploits the known high
surface/volume ratio of nanostructures to simultaneously compatibilize and
reinforce polymer mixtures. We also study, for the first time, how processing
shear fields influence the spatial distribution of dispersed nanoparticles in
polymer hosts and how these effects can be exploited to create macroscopic
objects with novel core/shell transport properties. The proposed study is also
among the first to utilize solid-state deformation to align nanostructures and
polymer molecules in a nanocomposite material. If successful, this work will
improve&lt;br/&gt;fundamental understanding of nanocomposite materials and will
help advance the state of&lt;br/&gt;the art for creating polymers with graded
property profiles.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Students at Tuskegee, UAB and
Cornell that participate in the proposed research will receive unique, broad-
based education in materials chemistry, materials physics, flow behavior of
multiphase polymer liquids, and solid state properties of nanostructured
materials. Students from our institutions will spend time working with a NIRT
team member from another institution. This will foster deeper collaborative
research relationships among participating faculty and will enhance the quality
of the learning experience provided to our students, both graduate and
undergraduate. Students at each university will also be exposed to courses in
nanostructured materials science and processing. Outreach efforts will include
activities involving exposure of K-12 students to nanoscale science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;