* 0404682
* Mathematical Finance and Stochastic Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Steven Shreve, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2009
* USD 522,593.00

This proposal has two parts. The part on stochastic networks will
&lt;br/&gt;consider networks of queues in heavy traffic when tasks have due
dates. &lt;br/&gt;The lead times (time until due date) of these tasks are
modeled as &lt;br/&gt;counting measures on the real line. As part of a previous
project, the &lt;br/&gt;limit of these measure-valued processes was identified
as the network &lt;br/&gt;traffic intensity approached one. This project will
identify the &lt;br/&gt;difference between the limiting measure-valued process
and the pre-limit &lt;br/&gt;processes, so that the accuracy of using the
limiting process as a model &lt;br/&gt;for a heavily loaded network can be
determined. The second part of the &lt;br/&gt;proposal treats credit risk in
financial markets. Of particular interest &lt;br/&gt;is the spread movements of
tranches of collaterialized loan obligations. &lt;br/&gt;These respond to market
expectations concerning the default probabilities &lt;br/&gt;of the loans
composing the structure, but in a highly nonlinear
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer networks, manufacturing networks and
telephone networks have the &lt;br/&gt;common feature that tasks (e.g.,
messages, silicon wafers, telephone &lt;br/&gt;calls) arrive at stations (e.g.,
computers,, machines, switches) at random &lt;br/&gt;times and require random
amounts of service. Under heavy traffic &lt;br/&gt;conditions, the performance
of these networks can be analyzed using the &lt;br/&gt;theory of Brownian
motion. In this project, we consider networks in which &lt;br/&gt;tasks arrive
and must move through and exit the network ahead &lt;br/&gt;of deadlines. This
project will develop a method to determine what &lt;br/&gt;proportion of tasks a
network will process within their deadlines. &lt;br/&gt;Brownian motion is also
the fundamental process for building models of the &lt;br/&gt;behavior of prices
in financial markets. A second part of this proposal &lt;br/&gt;will consider
prices of financial assets that are backed by loan &lt;br/&gt;payments (e.g.,
mortgage-backed securities). These assets are &lt;br/&gt;sensitive to the credit
risk of the loans backing them. Construction of &lt;br/&gt;reliable models for
the price movements of these assets is an important &lt;br/&gt;step in measuring
and controlling the risk associated with holding &lt;br/&gt;and trading these
securities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;