* 0404400
* NIRT:    Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Aqueous Geochemical Interfaces - The Role of Nanoscale and Molecular Structures in Dictating Environmental Reactivity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Paras Trivedi, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,437,539.00

0404400&lt;br/&gt;Trainor&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposal is an
interdisciplinary approach to molecular and nanoscale investigations of iron-
oxide surface structure and reactivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
of the proposed activity: The research proposed here will utilize state-of-the-
art experimental and theoretical methods to provide unique information about the
fundamental controls on reactivity of iron-oxides. Experiments using both single
crystal substrates and nanoparticle composites of hematite will be used to
determine reactivity trends with respect to adsorption of contaminant metal
ions, and how these vary with surface orientation, surface quality, and reaction
with "surface modifying species". The complementary nature of the proposed
techniques will allow multiple avenues of investigation to be pursued in a
coherent and synergistic effort and will result in a better understanding of the
systems under investigation as compared with decoupled, independent studies. The
proposed methodology also overcomes current limitations on in-situ surface
structural studies of nanoscale particles by taking full advantage of recent
advances in synchrotron-based surface structural techniques and periodic ab-
initio methods. One of the main contributions of this work will be to explain
reactivity trends in terms of molecular scale surface structure and nanoscale
surface topography/defect density. This will allow the important question of
scaling to be addressed since the effects of surface defects on reactivity are
anticipated to increase dramatically as particle size decreases to the nanometer
scale. This research team is particularly well qualified for an
interdisciplinary collaboration aimed at obtaining fundamental information on
mineral surface structure and reactivity relevant to the environmental interface
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed activity: Chemical
processes at nanoscale solid/aqueous solution interfaces have far-reaching
impacts in environmental chemistry and geochemistry, as well as in various areas
of technology that depend on surface reactions, such as heterogeneous catalysis
and corrosion control. The work proposed here will lead to improved predictions
about metal ion sequestration on (and release from) mineral surfaces, which will
ultimately lead to improvements in quantitative models used for assessment of
contaminant risk and the design of contaminant remediation strategies. While
pursing the technical goals of this project, a major emphasis will be placed on
providing educational opportunities to undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral students. Student participants will be involved in all aspects of this
project, thereby providing research experience in synchrotron-based
experimentation, ab-initio electronic structure calculations, and analytical
laboratory practices. Thus one of the main impacts of this project will be to
produce the next generation of scientists, including women and minorities, who
are well trained in the theory and techniques of molecular environmental
science, which is highly interdisciplinary and presents major challenges in
terms of understanding fundamental chemical processes due to the complexity of
environmental systems. Additional educational impact of this work will be
reflected in the development of facilities and expertise at the member
institutions and by dissemination of results to the broader scientific and
general community through peer reviewed publications and presentations.