* 0404668
* Quantitative Analysis of Fracture Surfaces Using Stereological Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Arun Gokhale, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 10/31/2008
* USD 450,109.00

This renewal award by the Division of Materials Research to Georgia Institute of
Technology is to develop general and unbiased practical quantitative
fractographic techniques for quantitative characterization of fracture micro-
mechanisms and microstructural geometry observed in the fracture surfaces. In
addition, with this award, Professor Gokhale will develop new stereological and
digital image analysis techniques for quantitative characterization of the
geometry of three-dimensional (3D) microstructures, and techniques for
mathematical representation and computer simulation of the microstructural
geometry. The study of microstructures is central to science and engineering
disciplines where microscopes are used to characterize internal morphological
structures. The geometry of fracture surfaces often contains key information
concerning the microstructural features that play a dominant role in the
deformation and fracture processes of materials. The specific scientific tasks
of this award would be development of stereological and image analysis
techniques for unbiased estimation of n-point statistical correlation functions
for the features in the 3D microstructures and the fracture surfaces.
Development of the techniques for computer simulations of 3D microstructures
statistically similar to the corresponding real microstructures, and development
of image analysis based techniques for 3D quantitative fractography will be part
of this study. Techniques for quantitative microstructure characterization of
thin films and bulk nano-structured materials would also be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intrinsic merit of this research is in the
development of the enabling techniques, tools, and methodologies for
quantitative characterization, mathematical modeling, and representation of the
complex geometries of microstructures and non-planar fracture surfaces in 3D
space. The general stereological and image analysis techniques to be developed
would be applicable for quantitative characterization of any internal structure
contained in any reference space. For example, these techniques will equally be
applicable for quantitative characterization of pores in concrete, nerve fibers
and capillaries in biological tissues, roots in plants, air sacks in lungs,
minerals in rock, and pore channels in soils. The fractographic techniques would
be applicable to material fracture surfaces as well as to frozen fracture
surfaces of biological tissues. Human resource development occurs though
participation of graduate and undergraduate students, outreach through
involvement in the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) and Research
Experience for Teachers (RET) programs, continuing education through teaching of
short courses/workshops, and dissimilation of the research results through
publications. An Internet website for quantitative microstructure database will
be created.&lt;br/&gt;