* 0404715
* Algebraic Varieties, Birational Geometry and the Structure of the Galois Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Fedor Bogomolov, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 135,000.00

DMS-0404715 Fedor Bogomolov

The PI is going to continue his study of the geometry and analytic properties of
infinite universal coverings of smooth complex projective varieties. These are
rather complicated analytic varieties, which in most of the cases have infinite
topological type. However in all known cases these varieties are holomorphically
convex and there are results establishing this fact for a broad range of
projective varieties. The proofs usually exploit the properties of
representations of the fundamental group of the initial variety. The objective
is to establish a realistic version of holomorphic convexity conjecture for
these universal coverings. Though holomoprhic convexity of the universal
coverings was proved in many important cases the PI proposes to show the
existence of such coverings containing infinite chains of compact curves thus
violating holomoprhic convexity. For varieties defined over finite fields PI
focus is to establish the analogue of Torelli theorem for the projective curves
of genus greather than 1 defined over finite field.Namely every such curve has
an imbedding into a torsion group of points of it's jacobian. The latter is an
inifinite torsion group, which depends (almost) only on the genus of the initial
curve as an abstract group. Thus the image of the curve in jacobian provides
with an infinite subset of points in this standard torsion group consisting of
all points of the curve over algebraic closure of the finite field. The
objective is to show that this set theoretic image defines the curve completely
as an algebraic object.

The proposed research here lies at the interface of algebraic geometry, number
theory, group theory and topology. The PI will study different aspects of the
geometry of algebraic varieties defined over algebraically closed fields. For
algebraic curves defined over number fields the research will focus on finding a
minimal class of curves (conjecturally one curve) with the property that
nonramified coverings of curves from the class dominate all the other curves
defined over algebraic numbers. Bely's theorem indicated that the geometry of
algebraic varieties defined over number fields substantially differs from the
geometry of generic algebraic varieties over complex numbers. The long-term
objective is to find a precise formulation for this phenomenon.