* 0404181
* NER:     Field-Aligned Nanotube Suspensions for the Active Control of Heat Transfer in Nanosystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Michael Bronikowski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 06/30/2006
* USD 104,998.00

Continued miniaturization of nanoscale devices like Si microelectronics is
likely to increase the importance of thermal management technologies.
Nanofluids, consisting of nanoparticles or carbon nanotubes suspended in
liquids, have shown promise for enhancing the thermal transport of liquids used
in thermal management systems. Carbon nanotube suspensions, for example, have
been demonstrated to increase the thermal conductivity of base liquids by up to
2.5 x for a volume fraction of only 1%. Studies to date on nanotube suspensions
have not exploited one of the remarkable properties of carbon nanotubes: the
thermal conductivity is anisotropic and approaches that of diamond or graphite
along the axis of the nanotube. By aligning carbon nanotubes in liquid
suspension with an applied electric field, the nanofluid is expected to show
even greater enhancement of thermal conductivity. Moreover, the thermal
conductivity will be anisotropic and controllable. By changing the orientation
of the suspended carbon nanotubes with an applied electric field, it should be
possible to actively control thermal conductivity and heat transfer with no
moving parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments are proposed on the thermal
properties of aligned nanotubes in liquid suspension. The primary objectives of
the proposed research are to demonstrate the feasibility of aligning carbon
nanotubes, and to show that the thermal conductivity is anisotropic and
controllable. Heat flux will be measured across the nanofluid for varying
carbon-nanotube orientations relative to a temperature gradient. Further
experiments will seek to measure the thermal conductivity tensor versus
nanotubes orientation and degree of
alignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Demonstration of the feasibility of carbon-
nanotube alignment for active control of thermal conductivity will open the door
to innovative thermal management strategies for nanoscale systems such as next-
generation microprocessors. The research activities involve graduate and
undergraduate students, and also leverages the outreach and curriculum
development efforts of the Nanomaterials Science and Engineering (NMSE)
Initiative at Rutgers University.&lt;br/&gt;