* 0404370
* NIRT:    Nanotube Based Structures for High Resolution Control of Thermal Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* David Bahr, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,005,000.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: CTS-0404370 Principal Investigator: Cecilia D. Richards
Affiliation: Washington State University Proposal Title: NIRT: Nanotube based
structures for high resolution control of thermal transport

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. The focus of this work is the use of
mixed-scale architectures to bridge scales from nanometer level structures to
micrometer level components to millimeter level devices and materials. We
propose to incorporate carbon nanotubes into microscale composites to create a
new kind of mesoscale device, a thermal switch. Arrays of thermal switches will
then be produced in batch to create sheets with spatially and temporally
controllable "digital" thermal conductivity. Mixed-scale architectures can be
used to bridge scales from nanometers to micrometers to milimeters in order to
manufacture materials and devices whose pertinent dimensions range from
nanoscale to microscale to mesoscale. Carbon nanotubes (CNT's) are inherently
one-dimensional mixed-scale structures, with diameters in the range of nm and
lengths in the range of mm. We take advantage of this 103 aspect ratio to bring
superior thermal and mechanical properties (due to the CNT's nanometer scale
diameters), to micro-scale components (making use of the CNT's micrometer scale
lengths). Many microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) are also inherently two-
dimensional mixed-scale structures with thicknesses in the range of mm and
planar dimensions in the range of mm. We take advantage of this 103 aspect
ratio, to bring the superior thermal and mechanical properties of the micro-
scale components to effective use on the meso-scale. Carbon nanotubes will be
synthesized and then extensively characterized. The nanoscale thermal and
mechanical properties of the CNT's will be modeled. The CNT's will then be
assembled into aligned arrays within a matrix and formed into micron scale
blocks. The thermal and mechanical properties of the aligned CNT composite
blocks will then be characterized and modeled. Finally, the CNT composite blocks
will be utilized to fabricate prototypes of thermal switch devices. The
educational plan targets undergraduates, under represented groups, K-12, and
teachers. This work will result in strong interactions between a large, rural
research institution and two urban campuses, making it easier for students from
a wide range of demographics to participate in cutting edge research projects.
Instrumentation for characterizing thermo-mechanical responses of nanotube
assemblies will be created, allowing future work to proceed in these areas. High
school teachers from the Northwest will be able to get hands on tools to bring
nanotechnology back to their schools, helping to motivate future generations of
scientists and engineers. Research on this project will closely couple
undergraduates and graduate students, helping to foster integrating research
into all levels of education, particularly in groups traditionally under-
represented from science and engineering.

The research is being funded by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing
Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.