* 0404297
* NER: Negative-Differential-Resistance in Heterobilayer Junctions: The Role of the Molecule-Molecule Interface
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Thomas Hoye, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2007
* USD 99,940.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0404297&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kiehl , Richard&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER:
Negative-Di_erential-Resistance in Heterobilayer Junctions: The Role of the
Molecule-Molecule Interface&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
systematic study of the relationship between chemical structure and electrical
characteristics in a two-layer molecular junction is proposed. The junction is
comprised of two thin layers of molecules (self-assembled monolayers) that are
sandwiched between metal contacts and share a common interface - i.e., a metal-
molecule(1)-molecule(2)-metal structure. The co-PI's have shown that such
junctions exhibit reproducible negative differential resistance (NDR) for
certain combinations of the two molecular components. Such a junction is an
ideal platform for experimental study since it permits the systematic variation
of the molecular components and of the chemical nature of the molecule-molecule
interface. The present study is predicated on the assumption that the chemical
nature of the termini of the two layers impacts the electrical characteristics
in a major way through its influence on the electrical and mechanical
environment, which would affect charge transfer and the freedom for
conformational changes. This study will contribute to the basic understanding of
NDR in molecular junctions and will lead to means for optimizing molecular NDR
for electronics applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;