* 0404911
* Project CAT: Assessing Critical Thinking
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Joseph Redding, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 04/30/2008
* USD 499,996.00

The primary goal for this project is to build on past efforts and refine a
promising assessment instrument to evaluate critical thinking skills, CAT
(Critical thinking Assessment Test). The refinement of this assessment tool
focuses on five critical areas (1) Refining the CAT assessment tool so that it
has high face validity when evaluated by a broad spectrum of faculty across the
country in STEM and non-STEM disciplines. (2) Refining the CAT assessment using
expert evaluation in the area of learning theory and learning sciences to
establish construct validity. (3) Refining the CAT assessment so that it
continues to have high criterion validity when compared to other instruments
that measure critical thinking and intellectual performance. (4) Refining the
CAT assessment so that it is culturally fair. (5) Refining the CAT assessment so
that it is has high reliability. In the process of achieving these objectives
Tennessee Technological University is partnering with six other institutions
across the country (University of Texas, University of Colorado, University of
Washington, University of Hawaii, University of Southern Maine, and Howard
University) to use and score a critical thinking assessment test that provides
insights into their own students' critical thinking skills. Schools were
carefully selected to provide geographic, ethnic, racial, public versus private,
socio-economic, and size diversity. Once the assessment tool is fully developed
the project can become self-sustaining by providing the test at cost to other
institutions. There is little question that as a result of an increasingly
technological and information driven society the ability to think critically has
become a cornerstone to both workplace development and effective educational
programs. Critical thinking is central to both the National Science Standards
(Forawi, 2001) and the National Educational Technology Standards (International
Society for Technology Education, 2003). Despite the central importance of
critical thinking in the workplace and education, existing assessment tools are
plagued by problems related to validity, reliability, and cultural fairness
(U.S. Department of Education, 2000). According to Bransford et al. (2000) "a
challenge for the learning sciences is to provide a theoretical framework that
links assessment practices to learning theory." The intellectual merit of this
project is to refine such an assessment device for critical thinking based upon
current theories of learning and cognition. Another merit of this project is
that it seeks to refine an assessment device for critical thinking that has high
face validity for a broad spectrum of faculty across the country. The perceived
validity of the assessment tool is important because it will have a direct
bearing on the motivation of faculty to improve their students' critical
thinking skills. The broader impact of this project is that by providing an
instrument for assessing critical thinking and problem solving skills to other
universities across the nation, one can encourage improvements in the quality of
students' critical thinking and problem solving skills. Institutional goals for
improving education are often assessment driven (Vogler, 2002), hence the
development of a valid, reliable and culturally fair critical thinking
assessment tool would encourage more institutions to focus on the teaching of
critical thinking skills in universities across the country. These higher order
thinking skills are essential in an economy that has shifted from manufacturing
to information technology and services.