* 0404088
* NER:  Modeling and Simulation of Fibrin Fibers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Richard Superfine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0404088&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of NC Chapel
Hill&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Lin , Ming&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER: Modeling
and Simulation of Fibrin
Fibers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fibrin fibers are the
major structural components of blood clots. Determining the mechanical
properties of these fibers will provide new insights into the wound healing
process and advance our understanding of heart attacks and strokes. There has
been considerable interest in determining the response of fibrin clots to
mechanical stresses. &lt;br/&gt;Most of the investigations in the past have
mainly focused on the bulk mechanical properties of whole fibrin clots.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a preliminary feasibility study on the use
of a gross model based on continuum mechanics to qualitatively model and
simulate the behavior of individual fibrin fibers, for better understanding of
their mechanical properties. The underlying theme of proposed research is design
of novel computational models, simulation methods and software systems based on
the "multi-scale" framework, i.e. describing geometry, numerics, and physical
simulation across different scales. Given the high complexity of molecular
structures at the nanoscale, this approach could potentially offer a robust and
efficient solution that scales up to large-sized problems and perhaps adequately
models the mutual interaction among multiple nano-entities in complex physical
or biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure the correctness of our
proposed models and simulation methods, we will test and verify our approaches
by comparing the simulation results with experimental data. This will provide
timely feedback and allow rapid modification of our proposed models and
simulation methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;