* 0404823
* Construction of a low-level 14C facility at the University of Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Jay Quade, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 164,727.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. J. Quade, A. Jull and N. Lifton
at the University of Arizona will build a new, state-of-the-art laboratory
facility that will permit carbon-14 dating of very old samples, beyond about
45,000 years. Carbon-14 dating is an essential dating technique for
archeologists and geologists alike, and its use in samples younger than 40,000
years old is relatively straightforward. In samples older than that, so little
of the original carbon-14 is left for dating that samples are easily
contaminated by younger carbon-14 in the air and from natural waters, thus
making samples appear much younger than they are. The proposed facility at
Arizona will be specifically constructed to deal with these old samples by
removing minute quantities of contamination, and by thoroughly isolating samples
from the atmosphere during the extraction process. If all goes as planned, it
will be possible to reliably date previously undatable archeological material in
the 40-60,000 years range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archeologists stand to benefit
the most from these new analytical capabilities. As just one example, there is a
highly contentious debate among archaeologists over the timing and geographic
extent of the coexistence between Neanderthals and anatomically modern human
populations in Europe during the period ~30 to 50 14C kyr B.P. In recent decades
a complex picture has emerged of the temporal and geographic overlap between
Middle and Upper Paleolithic populations. The basis for this view is largely
radiocarbon dating of a large number of new and re-excavated sites, mostly using
the standard 14C dating method on charcoal. What is suggested from the dating of
these sites is that Neanderthal and anatomically modern human populations may
have lived adjacent to each other for thousands of years in parts of western
Europe. Our facility, once constructed, will be uniquely positioned to examine
whether these and other reconstructions of the peopling of Europe are
chronologically sound or merely artifacts of
contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Anthropology at the
University of Arizona recently received an IGERT (Integrative Graduate Education
and Research Traineeship Program) grant from NSF intended to train
geoarchaeology and archaeology students in one of three research areas:
chronometry, paleoecology, and technology. At least one and perhaps two IGERT
fellowship students will join this project and make the development and
applications of the new extraction lines either all or part of their graduate
research. The proposed research described herein is exactly the kind of graduate
student training opportunity in innovative new directions envisioned by the
IGERT program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When the new extraction lines are
constructed relevant archaeological samples will be obtained and
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;