* 0404587
* Electronic Interactions of Metal Ions with Solids, Adatoms and Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Jory Yarmoff, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2008
* USD 452,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0404587&lt;br/&gt;Yarmoff/UC-
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Yarmoff and his colleagues at the
University of California-Riverside are studying the fundamental aspects of the
interactions of ions with solid surfaces. Using metal and semiconductor probe
ions, they are investigating the charge resolved scattering of low energy ions
from metal and semiconductor surfaces. They are using these probes to evaluate
the unique electronic states of nano-scaled materials. Collaboration with
Professor Sroubek of the Czech Republic addresses the fundamental theory of
these charge exchange and charge neutralization processes. The Analytical and
Surface Chemistry Program provides these researchers with support to examine
these fundamental processes. The impact of this work on related areas of surface
analysis, surface modification, electronic device processing and catalysis is
likely to be significant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Yarmoff and his
collaborators at UC-Riverside are probing the fundamentals of ion-solid
interactions. A range of substrates are being examined, including nano-clusters
of metals and semiconductors. Fundamental understanding of the ion-surface
interaction is crucial to important applications in electronic device
processing, heterogeneous catalysis, and nanomaterial synthesis and processing.
&lt;br/&gt;