* 0404575
* CRC: Exploiting Self-Assembly in Biological and Synthetic Macromolecules to Create Novel Hybrid Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,408,050.00

Anna Balazs, Gilbert Walker, Thomas Russell, and Todd Emrick are supported with
a collaborative award to study self-assembly processes. Additional partners in
this collaboration include Craig Hawker (IBM Almaden), Linda Molnar (NASA) and
Jonathan Trent (NASA). Their goal is to create novel materials by exploiting
synergistic interactions that arise when two distinct self-assembling processes
occur silmultaneously in one system. One component is chaperonin proteins that
self-assemble into fibers, bundles or sheets, the other is synthetic block
copolymers that form lamellar, cylindrical, spherical and more complicated
phases. By linking or embedding one phase in another, one self-organization
process can influence the other and lead to novel new assemblies. This study
integrates theory and experiment to probe cooperative behavior and understand
fundamental self-assembly processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
synthetic molecules interact with biological molecules is essential to
biomaterials and biosensors. Potential applications of this research include
antimicrobial coatings, responsive materials, drug delivery and biomolecular
electronics. This project is funded through the Collaborative Research in
Chemistry Program (CRC) and provides outstanding opportunities for
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers to acquire
knowledge and skills in very broad areas of research, including materials
synthesis, theory, polymer engineering, physical chemistry and
nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;