* 0404695
* CRC: Ordering Processes in Water, Aqueous Solutions, and Water-Biomolecule Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Peter Rossky, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2010
* USD 700,000.00

This award supports the collaborative efforts of C. Austen Angell (Arizona State
University), Pablo G. Debenedetti (Princeton University),Peter Rossky
(University of Texas at Austin), H. Eugene Stanley (Boston University) and
Srikanth Sastry (Jawajaral Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research in
Bangalore, India) in understanding cooperative transitions in water and aqueous
solutions. This project will investigate how solvent organization and structure
affects cooperative transitions and explore whether there exist common features
or principles across a broad range of these cooperative transitions. This
interdisciplinary collaboration will include a novel experimental approach to
study the energetics and kinetics of protein folding (and other ordering
phenomena) using non-crystallizing but non-perturbing solvents; molecular
simulations of self-assembly involving free energy perturbation and "steered"
dynamics; new computational approaches to the study of phase transitions and
dynamics in supercooled water, including quantification of dynamic heterogeneity
and its relationship to configurational entropy, and energy landscape-based
approaches for calculating liquid and amorphous water's free energy surface; a
new formalism for the quantification of structural order in simulations of neat
water and of water near solutes and surfaces; and novel computational approaches
for the study of polypeptide aggregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved
understanding of the role of water and co-solutes on molecular order has far-
reaching consequences for directed self-assembly of advanced materials and the
molecular basis of life processes, including metabolic control of gene
expression, protein folding (and misfolding in disease states) and the long-term
preservation and storage of natural tissues and materials. The proposed work
will also provide outstanding opportunities for undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers to integrate experiment and theory and
work in a team at the interface of chemistry and biology. This project is funded
through the Collaborative Research in Chemistry Program (CRC) in the NSF
Division of Chemistry and the Africa, Near East and South Asia (ANESA) Program
in the Office of International Science and Engineering.