* 0404306
* NER: Investigation of the Mechanism of Electrical Conductivity in Titanium Carbide Coated Nanotube Reinforced Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Gouri Radhakrishnan, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 107,500.00

The objective of this research is to investigate the effect of a thin conductive
layer deposited on nanotube (NT) and nanofiber (NF) reinforced polymers. The
approach will be to deposit a layer (50nm) of titanium carbide (TiC) on NT and
NF polymer (polyethylene, polypropylene, and liquid crystal polymers)
composites. Interfacial analysis and electrical studies (resistivity and
electromagnetic attenuation) will be conducted. Preliminary observations
indicate a significant increase in electrical conductivity upon coating the
sample, to a value higher than that of both, the uncoated material and the TiC.
This investigation will offer exciting insight into the interactions between
conducting surface and conducting matrix. The study offers the possibility of
being able to lower the percolation threshold of NT/NF polymer composites. In
parallel, this investigation could provide a technological breakthrough for a
new class of materials whose electrical conductivities can be tailored according
to the desired application.&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas Pan American is a
Hispanic Serving Institution with more than 85% Hispanic enrollment. NSF funding
to Dr. Lozano has allowed the development of a strong research group (mainly
undergraduates). The opportunity to work on cutting edge research has already
motivated students to pursue advanced degrees, increasing the number of under-
represented scientists. The collaborative effort will offer an exciting
opportunity for UTPA students to participate in research at The Aerospace
Corporation to gain valuable practical experience. Results derived from this
research will promote insights into interfacial and electrical properties of a
new class of materials providing tools for tailoring manufacturing techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;