* 0404057
* NIRT: Direct Electronic Sensing of Biomolecular Activity and Signaling
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Gregory Weiss, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,649,997.00

This award supports a project proposed in response to the Nanoscale Science and
Engineering initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. The investigators supported
through the award will develop an innovative electronic architecture to
construct novel molecular sensors. The architecture will employ carbon nanotube
coupled to individual, biologically active molecules such as the myosin light
chain kinase (MLCK). Using the electronic signatures generated by kinase
recognition and binding events, the interdisciplinary team intends to explore
enzymatic activity and biomolecular dynamics at the single molecule limit. At
this limit, the electronic signals generated by a particular biomolecular
interaction can be unambiguously identified, and the relevant time scales for
protein-protein interactions and conformational changes can be directly
measured. The real-time, high bandwidth signal acquisition made possible by the
nanotube sensor platform enables a search for reproducible electronic signatures
from particular biologic interactions. In order to monitor such signals, carbon
nanotube circuits will be tailored to incorporate individual MLCK and calmodulin
molecules using phage display techniques to isolate and synthesize special
molecular agents for effective attachment and transduction. To mitigate the risk
that a single approach will fail in reaching the research goal, two
complementary sensing architectures will be developed. In one, protein activity
will modulate the conductivity of a nanotube-based transistor; in the other, a
protein-coated nanotube tip will form an electrochemical electrode. In addition
to their research agenda, the investigators aim to initiate and grow an
interdisciplinary research group for the education of undergraduate, graduate
and postgraduate researchers. This collaborative group will develop a hands-on
training environment where student researchers from disparate fields can work
together on research projects requiring specializations encompassing
nanomaterials synthesis, analytical chemistry, and chemical and molecular
biology. The group will also extend a research internship program for high
school students, including those from traditionally underrepresented groups.
This internship program will build upon successful previous efforts conducted by
the investigators at a smaller scale.