* 0404195
* NIRT: Nanohybrids and Nanobiohybrids, Bottom-Up Approach to Nanopatterned Surface Arrays and Application
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Barbara Baird, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,109,938.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT), cofunded by the Division
of Materials Research, the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems, and the
Division of Engineering Education and Centers, will develop a "bottom-up"
approach based on block copolymer directed thin film assembly of silica
nanostructures on silicon and subsequent laser induced melting to generate
silicon surface arrays with spacings down to the molecular level (~10 nm). The
aim is to understand the dynamics governing creation of these structures, as
well as to invent enabling technologies that will allow inexpensive fabrication
of large areas of such nanostructures without the use of traditional
photolithography. In a first application we will engineer the surfaces towards
integration of biomolecules, i.e., to match the natural spacing of an antibody.
The team consists of B. Baird, D. Muller, S. Gruner, C. Ober (collaborator), M.
Thompson, and U. Wiesner. This work falls into the NSF research and education
themes "Nanoscale Structures, Novel Phenomena, and Quantum Control" and (to a
lesser extend) "Nanoscale Devices and System Architecture". Intellectual merit
of the proposed activity Understanding nanostructured thin film formation and
nanopillar array formation including the effects of surface wetting and crystal
growth in small dimensions will have impact on many areas of nanotechnology. If
successful we will enable technologies for the inexpensive fabrication of large
areas of such nanostructures without the use of traditional photolithography.
This will open up the field to many which currently don't have access to such
expensive facilities. Furthermore, engineering the surface structure of a
synthetic material towards the molecular architecture of a biomolecule
constitutes a powerful paradigm for nanobiotechnology and may lead to completely
novel ways of organizing, e.g., proteins on solid substrates for analysis and
detection. Cornell is uniquely positioned to make advances in this field and the
program will make effective use of Cornell facilities such as the Cornell High
Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) as well as facilities of the Cornell Center
for Materials Research (CCMR) and the Nanobiotechnology Center (NBTC). Broader
impacts resulting from the proposed activity Through the collaborative
environment with activities ranging from organic synthesis to materials
characterization to biology we will promote a way of teaching, training, and
learning and thus a unique educational experience for postdoctoral researchers,
graduate and undergraduate students not frequently obtained. We will also
involve other components of training and development of human resources
including the participation of underrepresented groups, efforts to enhance the
infrastructure for research and education, and industrial outreach. To this end
we intend to work with the excellent and proven platforms provided by the NSF
funded Cornell Center for Materials Research (CCMR) and Nanobiotechnology Center
(NBTC). In particular, because of the large multiplication effect we will
develop Teacher Teaching Teacher (T3) workshops with hands-on lessons that can
be brought back into the classrooms, and we will build on a successful
collaboration with Simmons College, a primary female college, to introduce
students to concepts of nanoscale science and engineering.

