* 0404011
* NER: Automatic Placement Algorithms for Quantum-dot Cellular Automata
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Sung Lim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2006
* USD 74,208.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0404011&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: GA Tech Res Corp -
GIT&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Lim , Sung&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER: Automatic
Placement Algorithms for Quantum-dot Cellular
Automata&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum-dot
cellular automata (QCA) is a revolutionary computing paradigm well suited to
nano-electronic implementation and scaling to molecular dimensions. In QCA,
binary information is encoded in the position of single electrons among a group
of dots forming a cell. In QCA, electrons switch between quantum dots within a
cell, but no current flows between cells. This leads to extremely low power
dissipation and avoids the problem of heat generation that ultimately limits the
integration density of transistor circuits. QCA has moved beyond the realm of
theory and experimental work-basic QCA devices and logic elements have all been
constructed in metal. Our goal is then to develop the first physical design
automation toolset that will help to generate computationally interesting, yet
implementable circuits in QCA, and significantly expand QCA's existing systems-
level infrastructure. We leverage our ties to physical scientists who are
working to build real QCA devices. Based upon this interaction, a set of near-
term buildability constraints has evolved: essentially a list of logical
constructs that are viewed as implementable by physical scientists in the
nearer-term. Until recently, most of the design optimizations have been done by
hand. Then these initial attempts to automate the process of removing a single,
undesirable, and unimplementable feature from a design were quite
successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We now intend to use CAD, especially physical
layout automation, to address all undesirable features of design that could
hinder movement toward a buildability point in QCA. The net result should be an
expanded subset of computationally interesting tasks that can be accomplished
within the constraints of a given buildability point. CAD will also be used to
project what is possible as the state-of-the-art in physical science expands.
Our QCA placement, the first step in QCA physical design automation, is divided
into zone partitioning, zone placement, and cell placement steps. The purpose of
zone partitioning is to initially partition a given circuit such that a single
clock potential modulates the inter-dot barriers of all QCA cells within each
zone. The zone placement step takes as input a set of zones; each zone will have
been assigned a clocking label that will ensure QCA signals arrive at the proper
place at the proper time. The output of zone placement is the best possible
layout for arranging the zones on a two dimensional chip area. Finally, cell
placement will visit each zone and determine ideal locations for individual QCA
logic gates. &lt;br/&gt;