* 0404510
* The Roc de Combe Faunal Assemblages and Early Upper Paleolithic Human Subsistence in Southwestern France
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Angela Close, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2008
* USD 38,739.00

The means by which modern peoples replaced Neandertals in Europe remain unclear.
Many have assumed that this replacement was related to a greater ability on the
part of modern peoples to obtain food. Since large mammals formed a very
substantial part of the diet of both sets of populations, this would suggest
that modern peoples were in some way more efficient hunters than were
Neandertals. However, recent analyses of dietary differences across the
transition from Neandertals to moderns in southwestern France suggest otherwise.
This work, based on the bone assemblages from the archaeological site of Grotte
XVI, failed to find any significant, behaviorally-caused differences in hunting
practices between Neandertals and early modern human groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These conclusions are based on a single site, and it is
possible that other sites, when analyzed from the same perspective, will show
differences in human hunting abilities that may help account for the demise of
Neandertals. In the research to be conducted during this study, Dr. Donald K.
Grayson will team up with paleontologist Dr. Francoise Delpech (University of
Bordeaux) to analyze bone assemblages left by the latest Neandertals and
earliest modern humans at the site of Roc de Combe, also in southwestern France.
This research asks whether applying the Grotte XVI protocol to a different set
of assemblages of the same age will replicate the Grotte XVI results. If those
results are replicated, it will become increasingly unlikely that the
replacement of Neandertals by modern peoples can be attributed to differences in
the use of large mammals as food. It will remain possible that the energetic
costs involved in pursuing larger mammals differed between the two populations,
and future subsistence-oriented research on this question in southwestern Europe
might be profitably focused on this possibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research proposed here can be expected to have a variety of broader impacts.
First, Dr. Grayson's previous research in this area has strongly suggested that
higher summer temperatures led to decreasing abundances of reindeer during the
later Ice Age. If this finding is confirmed, it will have important implications
for understanding of the impact of global warming on reindeer and caribou
populations, a matter of deep concern to both scientists and native peoples.
Second, to judge by the media coverage it received throughout the world, Grotte
XVI work was of great general interest and, as such, helped to improve the
public's understanding of the deeper human past. Similar interest in the results
of the work at Roc de Combe is expected. Third, this thoroughly
interdisciplinary research will continue to build ties between American and
French scientists. Finally, ongoing work will be incorporated into the courses
taught by Dr. Grayson at the University of Washington, including courses on
zooarchaeology, extinctions, and human impacts on the environment. Participants
in those courses have included many undergraduates who went on to pursue higher
degrees in various disciplines, or completed their Ph.D.s at the University of
Washington to become productive members of the scientific community in the
United States or elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;