* 0404842
* Optimization and Simulation of Constrained Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Stephen Campbell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Stephen L. Campbell will perform research on optimization, numerical methods for
constrained differential equations, and constrained optimal control. This
research will result in improved algorithms and new theoretical understanding of
numerical methods for differential algebraic equations (DAEs) and the solution
of inequality constrained optimal control problems by direct transcription
approaches. More specifically, a DAE is an implicit differential equation. An
integer quantity called the index is one measure of how different a DAE is from
being an explicit ordinary differential equation. Many problems are most
naturally initially modeled as a DAE particularly those that are analyzed and
simulated using computer generated mathematical models. DAEs occur in
optimization when the original problem is a DAE, because of the activation of
constraints, and when partial differential equations are numerically solved
using the method of lines. Because of the importance of DAEs in applications, a
variety of numerical techniques have been developed in recent years to simulate
and analyze DAEs although most of these methods only work on specific classes of
problems with special structure and low index. The development of more general
DAE integrators is one focus of this proposal. Direct transcription methods are
a popular approach for the solution of optimal control problems. Recently it has
been shown that the usual theory of DAE integrators needs to be substantially
modified when DAEs occur during the numerical solution by direct transcription
methods of inequality constrained optimal control problems. A second primary
focus of this proposal is the numerical solution of inequality constrained
optimal control problems using direct transcription methods.

Throughout industry there is a need for the development of more efficient
processes and systems. This is essential for improved performance, conserving of
resources, and industrial and military competitiveness. This increased
performance requires working with complex mathematical models of the systems in
question. In many areas it is becoming necessary to utilize larger, more
complex, and more complete models of the physical process or system. Two
important parts of systems design are simulation and optimization. In
applications there are many constraints. These constraints range from mission
constraints (such as flying within certain flight corridors or intercepting
specific targets) to physical constraints (such as contact between a robotic arm
and a tool) to financial or cost constraints. These constraints pose both
theoretical and computational challenges which increase with the model's
complexity. This project is to develop both mathematical theory and numerical
algorithms for the numerical simulation and optimal control of complex systems
with constraints. The proposer has ongoing collaborations with developers of
software used in a number of industries including the aerospace industry. The
results of this research will both be incorporated into production computer
codes as part of collaborations of the Principal Investigator and also shared
with others developing numerical software. These algorithms and software will
have very wide applicability. The current collaborations involve the aerospace
industry including space and aircraft mission planning, robotic manufacturing,
and optimization of chemical processes. In addition to the significant research
to be accomplished, graduate students will play a fundamental role in this
research. The training of the next generation of researchers in this area is
another important contribution of this project. As with prior students of the
Principle Investigator, the students trained on this project will move on to
work in Industry, National Laboratories and Research Centers, the Armed Forces,
and Academia.