* 0404913
* The NASA-CRCES-IPRS Workshop on Decadal Climate Variability; Kona, Hawaii; February 23-26, 2004
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Vikram Mehta, The Center for Research on the Changing Earth System
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 01/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

The Workshop will be held in Kona, Hawaii from 23 rd to 26th February 2004 and
will be co-sponsored by National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA),
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and National Science
Foundation (NSF). The Organizing Committee for the Workshop consists of Drs. Tom
Delworth (NOAA), Chet Koblinsky (NOAA), Eric Lindstrom (NASA Oceanography),
Zhengyu Liu (University of Wisconsin), Jay McCreary (University of Hawaii),
Jerry Meehl (National Center for Atmospheric Research), Vikram Mehta (PI), and
Jim O'Brien (Florida State University). The format will consist of oral
presentations and discussion sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applicants will be
selected by the Organizing Committee based on their performance in the
competition outlined as follows. Applicants, either individually or in groups,
will write a literature review on a topic of their choice from one of the themes
from the workshop. Ten authors of the best review papers will receive full
travel and per-diem expenses to go to this Workshop; one of the authors of each
paper will be required to orally present his/her review paper in the Workshop.
For winning papers with multiple authors, all authors will receive travel and
per diem expenses to go to the Workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The workshop provides an excellent opportunity for graduate
students to interact with leaders in the field of low frequency climate
variability and hence will add substantially to their normal university
education and training experiences.