* 0404286
* NIRT: Watching Proteins Bend DNA with Subnanometer Resolution
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Meredith Betterton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,490,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. This interdisciplinary research effort
will combine high-resolution single-molecule experiments and mathematical
modeling with ensemble biochemical assays to study protein-DNA interactions that
control gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human transcription factor
TATA box-binding protein (TBP) is the central protein in a larger protein
complex (TFIID) that binds to DNA sequences in genes and controls how genes are
transcribed into messenger RNA. The proposed project will investigate the
mechanism of DNA binding by single TBP molecules and TFIID complexes to
illuminate a key first step in transcription initiation. A unique optical
trapping instrument with sub-nanometer resolution will be developed to enable
single-molecule studies of biological complexes. The improved apparatus will
allow direct detection of the binding of TBP to TATA-box sequences, via the
apparent shortening of a DNA molecule due to the 100-degree kink in the DNA
backbone caused by TBP. Ensemble biochemical experiments will be carefully
coordinated for comparison with the innovative single-molecule results.
Theoretical analysis of the experimental data will determine the bend angle, and
provide testable predictions for the search time required by TBP to find the
TATA box. The analysis will enable an energetic description of the binding as a
function of DNA tension and will further illuminate the structure of multi-
protein complexes bound to DNA, by predicting the different experimental
signatures of protein-induced bending of the DNA and wrapping of the DNA around
the complex. Experiments and theoretical analysis will examine how DNA length,
the number of TATA-box sequences per DNA construct, and the presence of other
DNA-binding obstacle proteins affect the time for TBP to find a TATA
box.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a multifaceted approach to education
that will include training of undergraduate and graduate students in research,
mentoring students in course development and science teaching, and using a
unique mechanism to explain the science to the general public. Students will
develop a deep understanding of biophysics and its interrelation to other
disciplines. Joint meetings of the interdisciplinary research team will bring
together students and researchers with backgrounds including applied math,
biology, and physics.&lt;br/&gt;