* 0404874
* The Processing of Highly Porous Ceramics by Analogy with Quasi-Regular Eutectic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Ian Nettleship, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 259,622.00

Highly porous ceramics are being processed by the directional solidification of
ice through colloids. On freeze drying the ice sublimes leaving unidirectional
pore channels in the ceramics. Preliminary studies have lead to the hypothesis
that the pore morphologies can be understood using an analogy with quasi-regular
directional solidification of eutectic microstructures. Quantitative in situ
experiments are being conducted to directly observe the morphology of the moving
solidification interface and the relationship between the interfacial velocity
and the spacing of the ice crystals. This will allow us to examine the
applicability of eutectic solidification theory to colloids and explore the
range of pore structures that could be processed. At the same time a "power-
down" solidification apparatus is being built to control the temperature
gradient across larger bulk samples during freezing. This will enable
quantitative relationships to be determined between the pore structure and
processing variables such as temperature gradient, the volume fraction of solids
in the colloid and the sintering temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
should result in a new class of high porosity ceramics suitable for a range of
applications such as ceramic filters for environmental protection and ceramic
bioreactors for tissue engineering and organ regeneration. Graduate and
undergraduate students will learn the materials science of ceramics processing
and develop an appreciation of the requirements for these applications of highly
porous ceramics.