* 0404031
* NIRT:  Theoretical Nanomechanics: From Cells to Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Rob Phillips, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glaucio H. Paulino
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,460,000.00

A diverse group of theoretical scientists and engineers will investigate the
&lt;br/&gt;mechanical behavior of nanoscale crystalline solids, biological
materials, &lt;br/&gt;and combined solid-state--biological systems. Our strategy
will be to &lt;br/&gt;develop broadly applicable theoretical and computational
methods by &lt;br/&gt;examining three paradigmatic nanomechanics problems:
friction in NEMS, &lt;br/&gt;the mechanics of biological materials, and the
design and simulation of &lt;br/&gt;bio-functionalized NEMS devices . We will
supplement these research and educational activities with an extensive outreach
program, consisting of a &lt;br/&gt;summer school on nanomechanics and a public
lecture series on nanoscale &lt;br/&gt;science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?
Traditional atomistic &lt;br/&gt;and continuum mechanics approaches have been
unable to describe the &lt;br/&gt;mechanical properties of many nanoscale
systems of interest. In our opinion, &lt;br/&gt;new theoretical and
computational approaches are required that are &lt;br/&gt;genuinely multi-scale
in nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader impacts of the proposed
activity? The broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;are twofold: First, the education and
training of students will be integrated &lt;br/&gt;with every aspect of our
research program. Also, graduate students and postdocs would be the principal
audience at the nanomechanics summer school. Second, &lt;br/&gt;the evening
lecture series would be directly targeted to the general public, and
&lt;br/&gt;would enhance public awareness of and appreciation of nanoscale
science and&lt;br/&gt;engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NIRT proposal
focuses on the NSE theme Multi-scale, Multi-phenomena &lt;br/&gt;Theory,
Modeling and Simulation at the Nanoscale, and is funded by the CMS,
&lt;br/&gt;DMS and DMR divisions of the NSF.&lt;br/&gt;