* 0404308
* NIRT: Nanomanufacturing Strategy and System Design for Nanoscale Patterned Magnetic Recording Medium
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* John Wolfe, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,338,349.00

The objectives of this research are: 1) to develop patterned magnetic recording
media design guidelines for "next generation" information storage systems; 2) to
develop highly exchange-coupled patterned media materials using combinatorial
materials synthesis; 3) to develop manufacturing strategies at the nanometer
scale using a combination of Multi-Atom Beam Lithography and Step-and-Flash
Imprint Lithography; 4) to demonstrate a prototype of a functional patterned
medium at the scale of 25 nm/bit or 1 Terabit/in2; and 5) to extend the
technology to the superparamagnetic limit at 3-4 nm/bit using a novel patterning
approach based on self-assembled nanomask lithography. Prototype recording
systems - a quasi-static recording tester and a spin-stand tester - will be used
to evaluate the functionality (e.g., write/read efficiency, signal-to-noise
ratio, bit error rates) of the patterned media. Micromagnetic modeling will be
used to analyze the results and to optimize the design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The approach combines several diverse techniques to explore fundamental research
into the recording physics of patterned media, nanoscale self-assembly, and the
limits of resists and lithography. The proposed technology should enable the
multi-billion dollar information storage industry to continue its record-setting
growth rate for the next 7-15 years. It should also lead to dramatic storage
device miniaturization, acting as a catalyst for a wealth of new mobile
computing applications. The nanofabrication toolset should offer an immediate
benefit to magnetic random access memory and magnetic quantum cellular automata,
and thus has the potential to transform the integrated circuit industry. The
toolset can be applied to molecular and nanoelectronic integrated systems as
well.&lt;br/&gt;