* 0404765
* Computational Methods for Singular and Nearly Singular Integrals with Applications to Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* J. Thomas Beale, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2007
* USD 171,498.00

The purpose of this work is to develop efficient methods for computing singular
or nearly singular integrals and to apply the methods to the numerical
simulation of fluid flow with moving boundaries. The mathematical formulation of
scientific problems often involves singular integrals, such as a harmonic
potential function due to a layer of sources on a curve or surface. For points
near the source, evaluation is not routine because of large derivatives. The
approach of this work, developed in earlier NSF-funded research, is to
regularize the integral in a systematic way, evaluate at grid points as for a
standard integral, and then add local correction terms. The corrections are
derived analytically. For surfaces, overlapping grids are used. The work will be
in several parts: A class of static problems for 3D potentials defined through
surface integrals will be treated, extending earlier work. In order to allow for
boundaries that are not smooth, a method will be derived for computing integrals
on curves with corners in 2D. Application to the computation of moving
boundaries in viscous, incompressible 2D fluid flow will be tested as a possible
improvement in the immersed boundary method or immersed interface method.
Computations will be done for a moving boundary or interface between two
different fluids in 3D without viscosity; water waves are one important case,
and in other cases regularization will be used to control physical
instabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific processes often involve moving
boundaries, such as a drop of one fluid moving through another, or the motion of
an elastic membrane in living tissue. Numerical modeling of such phenomena
involves special difficulties, and several approaches are in use. Important
quantities, such as a jump in pressure, can often be written as singular
integrals like the ones described. The techniques developed in this work could
be used to incorporate integral calculations into numerical methods for viscous
fluid flow with moving boundaries. If this leads to improvement in these
methods, they could be more widely useful for predictions of two-fluid systems
or biological processes with moving membranes. The application to flow without
viscosity could improve understanding of fully nonlinear water waves and the
onset of mixing in an unstable fluid layer.&lt;br/&gt;