* 0404444
* NIRT: Titanium-Based Biomolecular Manipulation Tools
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Cyrus Safinya, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,000,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0404444&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: CARL
MEINHART&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA- SANTA
BARBARA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NIRT: TITANIUM-BASED BIOMOLECULAR
MANIPULATION TOOLS &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response
to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT.
Novel micro/nanofluidic chips will be develop and optimized for separating,
mixing, concentrating and positioning biomolecules and cells. Pioneering work in
titanium micro/nanofabrication technology with alternating current
electrokinetics &amp; microfluidics will be developed to provide unique tools
for the biotechnology industry. Titanium is a relatively new platform for
fabrication of nanostructures. It allows complicated 3-D electrode structures to
be fabricated, and is biologically compatible. Theoretical and experimental
analysis of electrokinetic phenomena will be conducted to investigate details of
the underlying physics. The titanium fabrication technology has the potential to
revolutionize micro/nanoscale devices, especially in the areas of biotechnology,
drug delivery, and in vivo sensing &amp; probing, where durability and bio-
compatibility are critical. The advanced electrokinetics and nanoscale electrode
structures can be used to concentrate small (~50 nm) proteins and viral
particles, which has not been achievable previously using dielectrophoresis.
This research project will provide an opportunity to educate graduate students
in the areas of micro/nano fabrication, nanofluidics, electrokinetics, and cell
culturing in micro/nanodevices. The PIs teach a newly-developed three course
sequence at the senior/graduate level on MEMS/NEMS design &amp; fabrication,
micro/nanofluidics &amp; electrokinetics. These courses give students broad
exposure to fundamental issues and the current state of the art in MEMS/NEMS and
train students for careers and research opportunities in nanotechnology. The
research program will also be used to advance underrepresented groups in science
and engineering. In addition, the PIs will continue their outreach activities at
local high schools, educating students and teachers about how science and
technology impacts society, and encouraging students to pursue careers in
nanotechnology &amp; science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;