* 0404291
* NIRT: Interphase Design for Extraordinary Nanocomposites: Multiscale Modeling and Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Irene Beyerlein, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,354,100.00

NIRT: INTERPHASE DESIGN FOR EXTRAORDINARY NANOCOMPOSITES: MULTISCALE MODELING
AND CHARACTERIZATION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;L. C. Brinson, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;S.K. Kumar, L. Schadler, RPI&lt;br/&gt;I. Beyerlein,
Antonio Redondo, Los Alamos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;200 word
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose an integrated experimental and
theoretical program to characterize and model the mechanical behavior of carbon
nanotube (NT) reinforced polymer composites across length and time scales
spanning from the atomic to macroscopic. Our focus is to understand the
deformation and failure mechanism in these materials and specifically how those
are impacted by the chemistry and morphology of the NTs. We will intertwine
molecular scale models, coarse graining, micromechanics and continuum mechanics
to address these issues. The models will be closely coupled to experiments at
several length/time scales. A hierarchical approach will allow us to assess the
importance of different types of chemical interactions between NT and polymer
and different types of NT morphologies on deformation from the elastic range
through fracture and failure. This work will help guide the design and
development of nanocomposites in general. Applications of nano-composites with
designer properties are far-reaching, including aerospace structures, medical
devices, and coatings. Results from this work will define new durable,
lightweight materials for use in structures from the very small (MEMS and chips)
to the very large (spacecraft). Even more broadly, the techniques that are
developed to link length scales will be applicable across a broad range of
materials modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;