* 0404027
* Dissertation Research: Social Emplacement on an Early Maya Landscape: Assessing Preclassic Duration at Aguateca and Punta de Chimino, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Takeshi Inomata, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Takeshi Inomata, Bruce Bachand will excavate Late
Preclassic cultural remains at the neighboring Maya centers of Aguateca and
Punta de Chimino in Guatemala's Petexbatun region. Preliminary excavations
indicate these centers were occupied during an unstable political period in
ancient Maya culture history from 100 B.C. to A.D. 350. Both communities erected
small pyramids at this time in an effort to anchor their social identities and
political dispositions in a place. Bachand's excavations will refine the
chronology at these two centers using radiocarbon and thermoluminescence dates
retrieved from burials, cache deposits, middens, and plaster surfaces in an
effort to trace a sequence of modifications to public spaces, monumental
buildings, and surrounding residences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In agrarian
cultures like the Maya, a community's social identity, its connection to
forbearers, and its collective memory become materially fused in physical
places. A number of practices characterize Preclassic Maya social emplacement-
burial of the dead, expansion of residential buildings, maintenance and
refurbishment of public spaces, and the deposition of ritual objects in public
spaces. The frequency, duration, and social nature of these practices are
indicative of a Maya community's rootedness or attachment to a place at various
moments in time. This study aims to correlate the local expression of these
practices with evidence of political change in adjacent areas within the Maya
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has multiple levels of significance
for anthropology, archaeology, and the prehistory of the Maya lowlands. For
anthropology, it addresses how people anchor themselves to places materially
during times of broad cultural change, especially political change entailing the
reinvention of leadership and reshaping of local community identities when a
state disintegrates. In the archaeological sphere, the project seeks to develop
more effective and accurate means of chronometric dating through the creative
acquisition of samples and application of 'reality based' statistical tools.
Finally, the early cultural history of the Maya region will be improved. New
dates and new archaeological evidence will be used to assess how early
Petexbatun communities fit into the social fabric of a rapidly changing Late
Preclassic landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides addressing scientific
questions, Bachand's project will enhance modern people's emplacement on the
Petexbatun landscape. Local Q'eqchi' Maya are developing their own archaeo-
tourism businesses as large, internationally funded restoration projects
approach completion at Aguateca and Dos Pilas. Q'eqchi' Maya will learn about
their ancestral roots as project excavators. Bachand will also help the owner's
of the local Chimino's Island Lodge develop interpretive media for visitors to
Punta de Chimino. Improvements of this kind attract foreign tourists, encourage
local entrepreneurship, and foster appreciation for the region's cultural
patrimony. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;