* 0404174
* NER: Nanofluid Characteristics in Pool Boiling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Ranganathan Kumar, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 12/31/2006
* USD 106,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CTS-0404174&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Ranganathan Kumar, Jayanta S. Kapat, and Sudipta
Seal&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation: University of Central Florida&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: NER: Nanofluid characteristics in Pool Boiling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NER. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle
suspensions have recently been discovered to enhance the heat transfer of
fluids. Relative to micron-sized suspensions, the nano-sized suspensions are
much more resistant to settling in stationary fluids, which is a significant
concern when micron-sized suspensions are considered. In addition, the thermal
conductivity of the nanofluid increases as the size of the nanoparticles
decreases. With this added benefit, it is worth exploring nanoparticle
suspension as potential coolants in a number of engineering applications. The
heat transfer characteristics are significantly better in a nanofluid, which
increases the power capability provided to a system prior to catastrophic
failure. Nanofluids may also offer a potential back fit to existing cooling
systems without a major overhaul in several industries. Because of this
potential, fundamental understanding of the physical mechanisms in particle
motion and how the particles affect the critical heat flux need to be studied.
This research will focus on quantifying and understanding the source of the
greater than expected thermal conductivity of nanofluids. As part of this study,
the following tasks will be performed.&lt;br/&gt; - Different diameter ceria and
silica particles will be suspended in water and other fluids at different
concentrations, and pool-boiling experiments will be done. Different levels of
enhancement of CHF will be measured with corresponding measurements of thermal
conductivity.&lt;br/&gt; - For each experiment, the deposition of the particles
on the wire will be measured. These deposited wires will be imaged using an SEM
or TEM at different concentrations to understand the role of nanofins on the
heat transfer.&lt;br/&gt; - For selected experiments, fluorescence imaging will
be done using a fluorescence microscope to track the nanoparticles and to
understand the particle preference, agglomeration characteristics and affinity
to materials at different temperature. Since the silica particles do not
fluoresce, quantum dots will be used to dope silica for imaging at least in one
experiment for a specific diameter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the boiling
characteristics in pool boiling is similar to flow boiling, nanofluids have
opened up exciting possibilities of raising chip power in electronic components,
reducing fuel element surface temperature in pressurized water reactors, and
reducing corrosion rates in cooling channels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is being funded by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the
Chemical and Transport Systems Division.&lt;br/&gt;