* 0404405
* The Role of Meso-Scale Processes in Controlling the Upper Ocean Carbon Cycle in the Coastal Environment - An Integrated Study in Santa Monica Bay, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Nicolas Gruber, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 645,234.00

0404405 Gruber

Intellectual merit The coastal oceans are some of the most productive and
biogeochemically active marine environments. Relative to open-ocean cycling,
however, comparatively little is known about the overall role of these areas in
the global carbon cycle (e.g. Liu et al. [2000]). One of the major challenges
confronting research in the coastal environment is its very high spatio-temporal
variability mainly as a result of meso- and submesoscale processes. The integral
role of these processes for the coastal ocean carbon cycle and their impact on
the net exchange of CO2 with the atmosphere are virtually unknown.

We propose to address this challenge by conducting an integrated and multi-
disciplinary observational program in Santa Monica Bay, CA. In particular, we
will address the following three goals: (i) quantify the upper ocean carbon
budget of Santa Monica Bay over seasonal to annual timescales, (ii) determine
the integral contribution of meso- and submesoscale processes to this budget and
to the air-sea exchange of CO2, and (iii) quantify the relative roles of
physical and biological processes in controlling the carbon balance within
mesoscale features as well as over the entire testbed region.

We plan to address these goals with three research elements: (i) time-series
observations from an interdisciplinary moored platform (see
http://www.ioe.ucla.edu/mucla), (ii) bi-weekly shipboard based water sampling at
the mooring site for shorebased analysis of water column carbon and
biogeochemical properties, and (iii) process cruises scheduled on an event basis
to study the temporal evolution of the 3-D structure of the carbon and physical
fields associated with a mesoscale or sub-mesoscale phenomenon. Analyses of the
results from these efforts will be greatly aided by the availability of very
high-resolution ocean carbon cycle hindcast simulations of the area using the
Regional Oceanic Modeling System (independently funded).

The proposal's unique contribution consists of the embedding of the process
studies into the framework of a multidisciplinary time-series. The proposed work
builds upon the strength and expertise of the PI and his team in the areas of
modeling and data analyses, while continuing the expansion into the
observational realm to address an urgent need for critical new carbon
observations. We already have initiated work on all program elements and will be
able to leverage this proposal upon a number of existing grants and synergistic
activities of other investigators at UCLA and at partner institutions.

Broader impact By working toward the understanding of the net impact of meso-
and sub- mesoscale processes on the upper ocean carbon cycle in the coastal
environment, our proposed program addresses two formidable challenges that the
carbon community is facing currently. The ubiquitous presence of mesoscale
variability poses serious problems for the design of an observing network that
attempts to quantify the coastal ocean sources and sinks of atmospheric CO2,
such as is being planned for the North American Carbon Program. In addition,
carbon-cycle modeling studies that require long integrations, such as those
associated with climate change, do not have the computational resources to
resolve all mesoscale and submesoscale processes explicitly and therefore need
to incorporate the net effect of them in a parametric form.

Our proposed project will build upon many already existing educational and
public outreach activities. These include the incorporation of data as examples
and homework assignments into several undergraduate classes as well as the
undertaking of several educational cruises centered around the mooring platform.
In addition, we will make use of UCLA's long tradition in oceano- graphic
teaching at primary and secondary schools. In particular, we will collaborate
with the NSF funded Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence at UCLA in
order to reach out to K-12 teachers and their students.