* 0404124
* NIRT:  Fundamental Understanding of Nanofluidics for Advanced Bioseparation and Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Cornelius Ivory, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0404124&lt;br/&gt;S. Han, University of New
Mexico&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research team will
investigate the transport of complex fluids in channels of nanoscale dimensions.
Our scientific goal is to render an accurate description of biomolecular
structural changes, reaction, and transport in nanochannels as a function of
built-in as well as externally applied potentials. The understanding of such
fluid and molecular transport, which cannot be accurately modeled by continuum
mechanics, is imperative for the development of a new generation of devices to
address the urgent need for efficient separation of proteins in the context of
their application to proteomics, environmental science, and advanced
diagnostics. The technological and scientific outcome from this research will
enable high throughput separation, purification, identification, and
determination of structure-function relationships of biomolecular species and
biomolecular complexes. The proposed activities consist of two main categories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanofluidics of Complex Aqueous Solutions. The team will
investigate the following physical processes to fundamentally understand the
behavior of aqueous solutions containing dissolved proteins passing through
nanochannels: electro-osmosis in nanochannels with overlapping (or nearly
overlapping) double layers; impact of a field-effect-transistor-like gate
electric field on solution pH during electrophoresis; and effect of fluid
inhomogeneity on electrokinetic phenomena. The team will employ both theoretical
(quasi-continuum model, molecular dynamics simulations, and Boltzmann kinetic
model) and experimental (fluorescence spectroscopy; electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy; substrate-potential-modulated, time-resolved Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy; and nanomachined-waveguide-assisted Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy) techniques to predictably describe and probe the
transport of protein molecules in electrolyte buffer solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applied Bioseparation and Analysis. The team will exploit
this fundamental understanding of nanofluidics to develop advanced bioseparation
schemes based largely on nanoelectrophoresis. Nanofluidic Switching relies on
modulation of the zeta-potential in the nanochannels driven by a gate potential
applied to the semiconductor substrate surrounding the nanochannels, but
separated from the fluid by a thin oxide. The field effect transistor (FET)
analogue based on this nanofluidic switching concept may potentially lead to
integrated nanofluidic circuits consisting of all solid-state electrokinetic
pumps, valves, and filters. It will also allow nanochannel pH modulation, which
can then be applied in Nanoelectrochromatography, allowing target proteins to be
bound and released by changing the voltage on the semiconductor substrate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to Sandia National
Laboratories and Computational Fluid Dynamics Research Corporation, the team has
an on-going collaboration with Intel Corporation in the area of microfluidic
protein separations, which will synergistically enhance the scientific and
technical impact of proposed research. The University of New Mexico (UNM) will
benefit from the established systems biology program at Washington State
University (WSU), while WSU will benefit from UNM's nanofabrication capability.
The proposed research program offers an interdisciplinary educational
environment to mentor 1 postdoctoral researcher, 5 graduate students, and 3
summer undergraduate students. The information gathered from research also
provides a knowledge base for course development. The team will develop a course
in Non-Continuum Fluid Mechanics at UNM during the 2nd year of this research.
The principal investigator (PI) and co-PIs will also actively participate in the
development of courses in nanofabrication, bioseparation, spectroscopic imaging,
and optics. The course content will substantially draw from the proposed
research and reflect its latest advances. The new elective courses will broadly
impact the students from various disciplines that range from chemical
engineering, to biology, to mathematics. Such course development serves the goal
of the School of Engineering at UNM to launch a degree program in Nano/Micro
Materials, Devices, and Systems (NMMDS). Educational research in this
scientifically fertile area will serve the students who desire to pursue a
career that promises rapid growth and potentially significant societal impact.
In addition to graduate students, the PIs will continue to actively involve
underrepresented undergraduate students with research. The outreach program will
be coordinated with Diversity Programs and Engineering Student Programs at UNM
to actively educate prospective high school students of the research-oriented
educational opportunities. At WSU, the College of Engineering and Architecture
organizes three 6-day summer youth camps, called Native Youth Exploring
Engineering (NY.EE) and a new HY.EE equivalent for Hispanic high school
students. NY'EE attracts about eighty 9th-11th-grade students from WA, ID, MT
and OR Indian reservations. All these outreach programs have significant
potential to improve the percentage of high school students pursuing post-
secondary education and increasing the enrollment of minority students
(especially Hispanics and Native Americans) and women. The educational plan
directly addresses the expressed needs of both students and faculty at UNM and
WSU. This project will also enhance the NSF"s EPSCoR initiative in nanomaterials
in &lt;br/&gt;New Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and Education Themes:
Nanoscale Structures, Novel Phenomena, and Quantum Control; Biosystems at the
Nanoscale; and Multi-scale, Multi-phenomena Theory, Modeling and Simulation at
the Nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division of
Chemical &amp; Transport Systems and Design, Manufacture &amp; Industrial
Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;