* 0404314
* NIRT:  Combustion-Generated Nanoparticles:  The Role of Transition Metals in Nanoparticle and Pollutant Formation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Erwin Poliakoff, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,200,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;NIRT: Combustion-Generated Nanoparticles--&lt;br/&gt;The Role of
Transition Metals in Nanoparticle and Pollutant
Formation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0404314&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses: 1.) The role of combustion-generated metal oxide nanoparticles in the
formation/growth of primarily carbonaceous nanoparticles and 2.) The role of
metal oxides condensed on growing nanoparticles in the formation of organic
pollutants. Ni and Cu have been identified as important metals for initial
study. The reactivity of their oxides under a range of conditions is being
studied using a variety of experimental techniques. Dendrimeric synthesis
techniques is used to create 1-3 nm metal oxide nanoparticles with and without
associated carbonaceous layers; sol-gel techniques are used to create thin
metal-oxide films on carbon and silica. The reactions of organic chemicals with
these nanoparticle surrogates from 200 to 1100 C under oxidative and pyrolytic
conditions are studied using a high-temperature flow reactor coupled with GC-MS,
EPR, and FTIR analysis. Metal-catalyzed PAH formation is studied using HPLC-UV
absorption. The nature of the metal oxides and their chemical binding is
characterized using x-ray spectroscopic techniques at the LSU synchrotron
facility. Ab initio modeling techniques are used to assess nanoparticle
geometries, reaction sites, possible reaction mechanisms, and how they may vary
as a function of particle size and metal identity. &lt;br/&gt;It has been
estimated that over 650,000 people die prematurely in the US each year due to
exposure to airborne fine particles. PM2.5, defined as particles with a mean
aerodynamic diameter of less than 2.5 microns, have been shown to initiate
cardiopulmonary disease and cancer in exposed populations. It has been realized
only recently, however, that submicron, combustion-generated nanoparticles are
the likely cause (alone or in combination with other pollutants) for the
majority of these deaths and associated illnesses. Although health-effects
research programs have been initiated by NIH and EPA, the causative agents
remain unknown and progress is hindered by lack of understanding of the complex
composition and reactivity of combustion-generated nanoparticles. The impetus of
this program is practical, viz. to understand the origin and nature of
combustion-generated nanoparticles so that their environmental impact can be
minimized. The goal is contribute to the understanding of the chemical factors
impacting the health effects of combustion-generated nanoparticles so that their
effects can be mitigated or eliminated through combustion control.&lt;br/&gt;