* 0404927
* Collaborative Research:  Writing for Learning and Assessment In Engineering Design Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* D Millard, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2008
* USD 25,688.00

Our project focuses on communication assignments and formative assessment to
improve the teaching of engineering design. Specifically, we use Calibrated
Peer-Review (CPR) - an end-to-end computer-mediated learning environment
developed at UCLA- that seamlessly integrates writing as a vehicle for critical
thinking into a technical or content course. We are testing the premise that a
series of well-designed communication assignments can serve as enablers for
students to enact the "habits of mind" fundamental to professional engineering
practice. These assignments fully exploit CPR's four web-delivered, guided-
inductive workspaces that (1) teach students how to recognize levels of
accomplishment for specific activities, (2) guide peer-review sessions that
produce both qualitative and quantitative formative assessment data, and (3)
encourage deep-structured student self-reflection both on the task product and
on the task process.

We are using the assessment data collected by CPR platform to provide formative
assessment, both for students and for faculty in engineering design courses. Our
project exploits writing/communication as an analog for thinking in order to
understand how students learn in a design course. This deepened awareness of the
learning process, in turn, helps instructors to formulate activities that engage
the students in types of "second order" problem-solving skills, such as meta-
cognition, social context sensitivity, and self-reliance within the process of
learning.