* 0404067
* NER:  Using Surface Interactions and Continuum Models to Develop New Modes of Nano-Device Operation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Vincent Crespi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2006
* USD 116,000.00

Four exploratory nano-scale devices that take advantage of surface interactions
are highlighted in this proposal. The first uses lattice registry to make nano-
devices featuring tunable rotary and translational motion. The others use the
bistability (tube/ribbon) of nanotubes caused by surface adhesion and atomic-
scale registry to develop nano-pumps, vices, switches, and interconnected
networks with unique mechanical properties. To determine the feasibility of
these devices, new multi-scale modeling techniques must be developed. These
models must incorporate the important physics at every level from quantum
mechanical to structural. The combined areas of expertise of the PIs covers this
full range, allowing them to carefully decide what physics must be included and
what can be neglected at each scale. Dr. Crespi's newly developed potential for
atomic-scale registry and surface interaction will be integrated into the
nonlinear structural theories developed by Dr. Mockensturm using so-called
Cosserat continuum mechanics. Theoretical studies of these devices which are
difficult and computationally expensive using molecular dynamics become feasible
using continuum models. Regardless of the ultimate success of these speculative
devices, the new modeling techniques developed will provide a foundation for
further device discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As sizes decrease to the atomic
scale, surface interactions take on a more important role, to the point where
they can induce novel and macroscopically peculiar behaviors. At the ultimate
limit of a nanostructure, it is possible for essentially every atom to be at the
surface, particularly in carbon-based nanostructures which can have a two
dimensional crystalline structure (graphite, not diamond). Long-range surface
interactions are, thus, a fundamental mechanism in nano-scale devices that are
rarely important in the macroscopic world and typically ignored. At the nano-
scale, van der Waals' interactions make devices behave as if they are coated
with a thick layer of molasses. These surface interactions allow carbon
nanotubes to have two stable states. The most commonly seen state is tubular.
However, a so-called nano-ribbon is just another stable (collapsed) state of
nanotubes. In this research the investigators will use this bi-stable behavior
to develop new modes of nano-device operation. Specifically, the feasibility of
nano-pumps, vices, switches, and interconnected networks with unique mechanical
properties will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;