* 0404557
* Counting Manifolds and Embeddings of Free Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2007
* Tsachik Gelander, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 11/30/2007
* USD 105,001.00

The proposed research includes two main projects. The first one,
counting&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, is in a sense a continuous analog of asymptotic
group theory. &lt;br/&gt;The guiding line is to convert finiteness results about
locally symmetric&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, which follow from rigidity phenomenon and
arithmeticity, to&lt;br/&gt;concrete quantitative statements. It is closely
related to some central&lt;br/&gt;questions in mathematics such as the
congruence subgroup problem, and to&lt;br/&gt;the remarkable finiteness theorem
of Borel and Prasad, and it has&lt;br/&gt;applications in Riemannian geometry,
number theory and theoretical&lt;br/&gt;physics. This project continues earlier
work of the P.I. and joint work of&lt;br/&gt;the P.I. with Burger, Lubotzky and
Mozes. The second main project concerns&lt;br/&gt;embeddings of free groups into
groups with some geometric structure. This&lt;br/&gt;plays a central role in the
study of linear and topological groups (in&lt;br/&gt;particular subgroups of Lie
groups over local fields), and impacts some&lt;br/&gt;topics in differential
geometry, ergodic theory, geometric group theory,&lt;br/&gt;unitary
representations and profinite groups. One target, which the
P.I.&lt;br/&gt;pursues in collaboration with E. Breuillard, is to obtain an
effective&lt;br/&gt;version to Tits alternative, a weak version of which was
proved by Eskin,&lt;br/&gt;Mozes and Oh, while solving Gromov's exponential
growth conjecture. Other&lt;br/&gt;problems are related to the Auslander
conjecture. This project is also&lt;br/&gt;related to the study of dense
subgroups of analytic Lie groups, and the&lt;br/&gt;``opposite'' problem of
classifying the (analytic) metric completions of a&lt;br/&gt;given countable
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several classical finiteness statement
concerning locally&lt;br/&gt;symmetric spaces which have been known for more
than 30 years, and yet&lt;br/&gt;have no quantitative proofs, or for which the
existing estimates are&lt;br/&gt;suboptimal. One example is the classical
theorem of Wang (and its strong&lt;br/&gt;version due to Borel and Prasad) about
the finiteness of the number of&lt;br/&gt;manifolds with bounded volume; we
would like to have good estimates for&lt;br/&gt;this number. Another example is
the fact that the fundamental group of a&lt;br/&gt;manifold with finite volume
is finitely presented; the size of a minimal&lt;br/&gt;presentation can be
estimated in terms of the volume. More generally, we&lt;br/&gt;study relations
between the volume of manifolds and their geometric&lt;br/&gt;structure. The
second project deals with free subgroups. In his celebrated&lt;br/&gt;1972 paper
J. Tits proved that any finitely generated linear group which&lt;br/&gt;is not
virtually solvable contains a non-commutative free subgroup.
This&lt;br/&gt;result, known today as the Tits alternative, answered a
conjecture of Bass&lt;br/&gt;and Serre and was an important step toward the
understanding of linear&lt;br/&gt;groups. Any improvement in Tits' theorem has
immediate corollaries in&lt;br/&gt;various different fields of mathematics. The
P.I. and E. Breuillard had&lt;br/&gt;recently established a topological version
of Tits theorem which answered&lt;br/&gt;several questions in dynamics,
Riemannian foliations and profinite
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;