* 0404069
* NER: Nanotube Circuit Fabrication Using Patterned Graphene
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Charles Marcus, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 106,960.00

The objective of this proposal is to investigate a new approach for fabricating
nanoscale electronic circuits. The approach is to selectively deposit, then
lithographically pattern, layers of graphitic carbon on substrates of TiC or Pt,
then induce the patterned layers to roll up into small-diameter tubes by
heating. This approach allows complex and massively integrated circuits,
including branching elements, with controlled chirality of the constituent tube-
like elements. &lt;br/&gt;The ability to pattern complex circuits of nanotubes,
control chirality by setting the direction of individual components based on
orientation, and to form complex circuit topologies would constitute a
revolution in electronics, and would therefore have a broad societal impact.
Arguably, without a breakthrough of this sort, nanotubes will not be useful for
electronics. Our educational objective is to provide an exciting research
environment and opportunities for career advancement for young scientists. The
cross-disciplinary nature of the research will provide them with exposure to
different disciplines, including Physics, Materials Science, Chemistry, and
Engineering. All three participating groups have strong track records of
emphasizing undergraduate research. Overall, this project has the potential to
yield a breakthrough in the nanofabrication of circuits. In concert, we will
train young scientists in an exciting field that emphasizes collaborative and
cross-disciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;