* 0404738
* SGER:  Identifying the Target of the Spliceosomal DEAD-box Prp5 Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Stephanie Ruby, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Ming Lei
* 03/31/2006
* USD 168,976.00

This project's objective is to apply a new biochemical method, directed hydroxyl
radical mapping, to identify the RNA target of the spliceosomal DEAD-box protein
Prp5p of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Prp5p is one of many DEXD/H
helicases that use energy from hydrolyzing nucleotides to alter nucleic acid
structure. DEXD/H proteins share a common helicase core structure that consists
of two domains with the motifs lining an inter-domain cleft. The nucleotide and
magnesium ion reside at the bottom of the cleft. The target nucleic acid
substrate may lie across the upper part of the cleft. Despite this structural
information, the targets of the RNA helicases (including the ten spliceosomal,
DEXD/H-box proteins) have yet to be identified. Preliminary data indicate that
Prp5p physically interacts with U2 snRNP, its posited target, as well as pre-
mRNA and even perhaps U1 snRNP. The directed hydroxyl radical mapping method
will be used to discover which RNA binds to Prp5p's helicase core in the
spliceosome. This in vitro method uses hydroxyl radicals generated by a Fe(II)
group tethered to a protein at a specific position via the linker BABE and the
sulfhydryl group of a cysteine (C). The radicals cleave any nucleic acid within
40 Angstroms. For identifying the target of Prp5p, in vitro mutagenesis will be
used to create a C-less form of recombinant Prp5 protein. A single C will then
be introduced at various positions within the helicase core and BABE-Fe
covalently attached. Recombinant, derivatized Prp5p will then be introduced into
the spliceosome in an in vitro splicing reaction. Directed hydroxyl radical
cleavage of any RNA interacting with Prp5p in the spliceosome will be induced by
the addition of hydrogen peroxide to the splicing reaction and any cleaved RNAs
will be detected by biochemical assays. There will be several benefits resulting
from this project. Because of the common structure of DEXD/H proteins, this
method will be readily applicable to many other DEXD/H proteins, including the
other spliceosomal DEXD/H box proteins. Furthermore, the results of this project
will contribute to understanding several properties of biomolecular machines
including the mechanism for converting energy from an enzymatic reaction to the
work of unwinding nucleic acids. This research project will involve students at
an EPSCoR and designated minority institution.