* 0404836
* Domain Walls and Twin Boundaries in Ferromagnetic Shape Memory Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 424,990.00

This renewal award by the Division of Materials Research to Carnegie-Mellon
University is to apply electron microscopic techniques to ferromagnetic shape
memory alloys (FSMA) and intermetallics, and in particular to try to understand
the nature of the tweed structures. With this award, Professor De Graef will
study the physical and magnetic microstructure of alloys of Nickel-Manganese-
Gallium and Cobalt-Nickel-Gallium, with an emphasis on compositions with near
room temperature phase transformations. The microscopy techniques, which were
developed by the investigator, will be used for simultaneously imaging twins and
other crystal defects that move during FSMA actuation, and the magnetic domain
walls that drive the twin boundary motion. Proposed research would contribute
significantly to the fundamental understanding of the mechanisms that couple the
magnetic field to the atomic displacements associated with the actuation in
ferromagnetic shape memory alloys. FSMA area is of considerable interest for
potential applications of them as high-strain, moderate-frequency actuators and
sensors&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Science developed by this award would shed light
into our understanding of the motion of magnetic domains and twin boundaries.
The characterization tools and methods developed by this project for
ferromagnetic shape memory alloys will also have a positive impact on the
ability to characterize magnetic recording media. There would be significant
contributions for graduate education, course development, and teaching of
advanced materials characterization by the proposed studies. Development of an
interactive web-based site with the help of undergraduate students from both
Materials Science and Engineering and Computer departments for an undergraduate
textbook on crystallography and diffraction would be part of this project.