* 0404030
* NIRT: Laser-Guided  Assembly of Nanosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Gerard Wong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,300,000.00

The promise of nanotechnology won't be realized unless nanometer-scale
structures can be assembled together inexpensively into a working system. The
goal of this proposal is to develop and test a revolutionary tool that uses
light-pressure forces to rapidly assemble complex nanosystems comprised of
structures ranging in size from ~10nm to 1mm. Intellectual Merit: We plan to
develop a tool to assemble a nanosystem layer-by-layer using light pressure
forces to produce multiple, independent optical traps for organizing
simultaneously tens of thousands of nanometer-scale structures within each
layer. The optical traps will be produced either by rapidly scanning a laser
beam from one trap location to the next, relying on the viscosity of the medium
to stabilize the position until the trap is refreshed, or by generating a
hologram, where multiple optical traps are created simultaneously by controlling
the intensity and phase profile of the beam using a spatial light modulator.
Either way, the tool will have to compensate in real-time for the scattering
environment of the trap during the layer-by-layer assembly. Therefore, there are
two elements at the core of this proposal: 1. the efficient simulation of the
dynamic electromagnetic environment of the trap, which is used to predict in
real-time the required intensity and phase profiles for the laser; and 2. the
concomitant synthesis through adaptive optics of the
trap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Aside from the development of a new
tool for nanoscale manufacturing that assembles nanometer-scale objects using
light, there is a broader impact of this work derived from the nature of the
testbeds we choose to explore, which can only be fabricated through optical
manipulation. In particular, we plan to contribute to the understanding of self-
assembly and locomotion in living cells through our work on "artificial
cytoskeletons," by using optical tweezers to control the assembly of the
molecular networks that form the cell's structure. Moreover, our work will
affect supra-molecular chemistry in a fundamental way by augmenting the weak
noncovalent bonds that form soft-condensed matter systems such as proteins,
biological membranes and DNA with "optical binding" forces. By using optical
binding forces in conjunction with supra-molecular forces, we hope to gain
insight into the structure of the supra-molecular aggregates and their
interactions. In addition, significant educational efforts are planned in the
form of monthly seminars, innovative new interdisciplinary courses, and
extensive involvement of undergraduate students in the research. &lt;br/&gt;