* 0404961
* RUI:      Pattern Formation in Reaction-Advection-Diffusion Systems with Lagrangian Chaos
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Thomas Solomon, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2008
* USD 150,000.00

This individual investigator award funds experiments that will study the effects
of fluid mixing on pattern formation in interacting fluid systems. The
experiments will focus in particular on the role of Lagrangian chaos (chaotic
mixing) on the pattern formation process. Two different fluid flows will be
used: a blinking vortex flow, and an oscillating vortex chain in an annular
configuration. Initially, the experiments will use the Belousov-Zhabotinsky
reaction, an oscillatory chemical reaction, although studies will also be made
with other interacting systems, such as liquid crystals or oil/wax systems
undergoing phase transitions, and slime mold cultures. In addition to
investigating the pattern formation process, the experiments will also test
theoretical predictions about the effects of enhanced diffusive and
superdiffusive transport on the propagation of reactive fronts. These
experiments address an issue that is of great importance to a wide variety of
systems (since flows are so common in reacting systems), and yet one that has
received surprisingly little attention. In addition to helping to elucidate the
pattern-formation processes, the results of the experiments will help in the
future development of microfluidic devices in which chaos is the dominant mixing
mechanism. The experiments will be performed with undergraduate students who
will participate in all aspects of the research. These experiences form a
valuable first step in the training of the next generation of scientists.

There is a great deal of interest in the development of microfluidic devices -
extremely small scale "factories" that process and produce chemical and
biological agents in packages as small as an integrated circuit. This is just
one example of a system in which fluid mixing plays a critical role in a
reaction process. This NSF DMR award supports experiments that will study the
interaction of fluid mixing and reaction in slow-moving, well-ordered flows
(such as those in microfluidic devices). In particular, the experiments will
explore the importance of chaotic mixing, which has been demonstrated to be the
dominant mixing mechanisms for slow-moving and small-scale flows. The flows
studied will be composed of vortices (whirlpools) that oscillate in a manner
that results in chaotic mixing. Initially, the experiments will use chemical
reactions, although studies will also be made with other interacting systems,
such as liquid crystals, oil/wax systems and slime mold cultures. In addition to
being relevant to the development of microfluidic devices, results from these
studies may also help explain the behavior of plasmas in fusion reactors, the
patterns that form during the fabrication of alloys from a melt, and the
spreading of diseases during an epidemic. The experiments will be performed with
undergraduate students who will participate in all aspects of the research.
These experiences form a valuable first step in the training of the next
generation of scientists.