* 0404130
* Collaborative Research: Watershed Carbon Distribution and Flux Across Environmental Gradients
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Brian McGlynn, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2010
* USD 346,953.00

0404130&lt;br/&gt;McGlynn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Watershed carbon distribution
and flux across environmental gradients &lt;br/&gt;The central roles of carbon
dioxide (CO2) in climate change and the removal of base cations from soils has
&lt;br/&gt;been established. However, the spatial and temporal variation of CO2
production and efflux from catchment soils remains poorly understood. We are
just beginning to develop the methods to up-scale from point measurements such
as those made by flux towers or respiration chambers to larger spatial scales
such as plots or watersheds. How the primary CO2 forcing factors vary across
climatic, environmental, biogeochemical, and topographic gradients needs to be
addressed. In addition, complementary investigation of the topographic controls
on C accumulation and the mobilization of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) s
central to understanding the links between the landscape and the C cycle at the
watershed scale. Many investigations of C allocation and movement focus on
atmospheric exchange, neglecting the loss of C in stream water. Recent work has
given us insight into the processes controlling the timing and magnitude of
stream water C exports. We believe that understanding topographic controls and
stream-catchment connections are integral to understanding total C flux from
catchments. The concept of biogeochemical similarity, related to hydrological
similarity, has been identified as a powerful tool in understanding the spatial
patterns of biogeochemical processes. Our research will test the applicability
of this concept for soil respiration and DOC export and will identify the
critical set of measurements necessary to quantify the spatial and temporal
variability in the first-order controls on soil CO2 production and surface
efflux. This field-derived information will then inform and constrain our model
that simulates the variability &lt;br/&gt;of these parameters through space and
time. These spatially distributed data are central to simulation of the
&lt;br/&gt;production and transport of soil CO2. By combining extensive field
measurements and quantification of the factors influencing soil respiration such
as soil temperature, soil moisture, soil fertility, and climatic variables with
numerical modeling techniques, this work will provide a way forward for
measuring and modeling the extensive but poorly understood exchange of water, C,
and energy between soils and the atmosphere. The objectives of this research are
(1) to quantify CO2 efflux and to develop and apply a model of catchment
respiration, incorporating soil air pCO2, vertical soil water transport of
dissolved CO2, and surface CO2 efflux, (2) to explore the extent to which
topography can be used to explain the variability inherent in the factors
driving respiration, and (3) To quantify the &lt;br/&gt;topographic controls on
the distribution of soil C in the watershed and link C accumulation in the
landscape, DOC transport, and stream DOC export at the watershed scale.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity This work will provide
empirical information and the foundation for development and application of a
framework for understanding the spatial and temporal variably of soil
respiration and resultant soil air CO2 concentration, atmospheric exchange, and
streamwater C export. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity. &lt;br/&gt;The inclusion of undergraduates and graduate students in
all aspects of research is a primary goal of this &lt;br/&gt;work. Frostburg
State University is a predominantly undergraduate institution, and as such, has
limited &lt;br/&gt;opportunities for undergraduates to obtain research
experience. This research will provide Frostburg students, both now and in the
future with experience and opportunities through collaborative linkages made
between Frostburg State University, The University of Virginia, and Montana
State University (EPSCoR institution). Students will be integral members of the
research team and will be encouraged to take ownership of their contributions
through publication and presentation of their findings at national meetings.
This research will enhance teaching activities (undergraduate and graduate)
through inclusion of near real-time data in class exercises and field-based
learning. &lt;br/&gt;This work will also strengthen the research infrastructure
at Frostburg, helping to advance students and faculty from undergraduate
institutions that are underrepresented in the fields of hydrology and
biogeochemistry. If funded, the Big Sky Institute for Science and Natural
History has agreed to provide additional support for participation of a graduate
student in the BSI Graduate Fellows Program. Under that program, the Fellow
would receive training in effective communication of their results to K-12
communities and the public. The fellows program provides graduate students
training and opportunities to communicate science, encourages young scientists
to understand their role in disseminating scientific findings to the public, and
helps fulfill BSI.s mission of combining current &lt;br/&gt;research with
inquiry-based learning for people of all ages and all walks of life. This work
will also produce a dataset of soil air CO2 concentrations, efflux, semi-
distributed field measurements and simulations of driving factors through time,
and links to streamwater C export. Our datasets will be made freely available on
the web to other researchers and can serve as a test data set for models of CO2
production, flux, and streamwater C export. To date, no such dataset is
available (to the authors. knowledge), yet this is critical to understanding C
accumulation and flux across environmental gradients by providing a testing
ground and comparison set. &lt;br/&gt;