* 0404560
* SGER: Isolating Quantitative Kernel Traits With Near Infrared Spectroscopy
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Andrew Settles, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 11/30/2004
* USD 99,996.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will provide proof of concept funding
for the use of single-kernel near infrared reflectance (NIR) and transmittance
(NIT) spectroscopy for high-throughput identification and genetic analysis of
seed composition mutants of corn. This is a high-risk project because seed
composition is highly variable, and the genetic basis of seed composition is
poorly understood. This is in part because the biosynthetic pathways and
physiological process that influence seed development are complex. In addition,
these phenotypes are highly sensitive to environmental influence and therefore
difficult to study. The approach is potentially of high payoff both because of
high scientific interest in the processes that control seed composition, and
because these traits have very high commercial
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inbred Uniform Mu corn mutant populations will be
screened for changes in oil, protein, carbohydrate and caloric content using
NIR. Mutants will be tested for heritability. To gauge the relative effects of
genotype versus environment, all putative mutants will be sampled from lines
grown in two field seasons. Novel statistical methods will be developed for
analyzing the complex data sets derived from NIR
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes an interdisciplinary approach
that incorporates novel engineering, plant&lt;br/&gt;genetics, and statistical
methods to isolate single-locus quantitative traits of agricultural importance.
Because these traits are likely to be Mutator transposon-tagged, there is the
potential to rapidly identify genes that affect quantitative compositional
traits in corn seeds. &lt;br/&gt;