* 0404259
* NIRT: Directed Assembly of Nanostructures: Theory, Simulations, and Experiments in Hard and Soft Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* John Bassani, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,300,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. Directed self-assembly and aggregation
offers tremendous possibilities for making structures at the nanoscale. The
challenge lies in the requirement that atoms, molecules, or particles be
assembled into complex and highly organized nanometer-sized structures across
centimeters. Potential applications for such structures arise in a wide range of
technologies, including nano and molecular electronics, high-density patterned
media for data storage, optoelectronics, and nanosensor arrays to name a few.
&lt;br/&gt;The use of externally applied fields to control and direct micro- and
nanostructural evolution is a very promising avenue for achieving such precise
control of aggregation. The practical application of external-field interactions
with matter to create nanoscale, ordered aggregates will require both
fundamental understanding and engineering design methodologies. While many of
the initial discoveries of novel phase behavior in microscale and nanoscale
systems have arisen from purely experimental investigations, it is increasingly
apparent that the ability to model and predict microstructural evolution will be
of central importance for achieving effective and practical control at the
nanoscale. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to accomplish this goal with a
substantial modeling and theoretical effort in conjunction with state-of-the-art
experiments in both hard and soft material systems, each of which offers
complementary advantages. Hard (or atomic) systems, e.g. nanoprecipitates in
crystalline materials, are very difficult to completely characterize either
experimentally or theoretically. Colloidal or soft systems, on the other hand,
offer greater flexibility both in setting the "microscopic" properties that
control particle-particle interactions and in the ability to make direct
experimental observations, particularly in the case of time-dependent phenomena.
The outcome of this research will be a physically based framework for achieving
directed aggregation in both hard and soft systems. In both cases, the unifying
theme will be the induction and control of transport by externally applied
fields. Examples include stresses in hard materials, entropic fields in soft
materials, and chemical potentials in both. &lt;br/&gt;The concept of field-
assisted directed assembly is not material specific and the proposed research
will serve as the general foundation for modeling and experimental design of
directed nanoscale aggregation in a very broad range of materials. It may
provide entirely new insights into the mechanisms of aggregation and reveal
aspects that are common to practically all materials. At the same time, by
exploiting common underlying characteristics, a deeper understanding will enable
transfer of methodologies among different technological applications. Such
unifying concepts are of paramount importance as high-tech materials are
becoming more complex and ostensibly unrelated. &lt;br/&gt;Finally, the impact
of this research on the education of graduate students is expected to be far
reaching. It is increasingly apparent that a new generation of scientists and
engineers is needed to lead the development of nanotechnology, which requires
combined training in chemical engineering, materials science, and mechanics of
materials. This closely-knit project will provide an ideal framework for this
type of cross-disciplinary training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is being
funded jointly by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the
Chemical and Transport Systems Division, the Interfacial, Transport and
Thermodynamics Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division, the
Mechanics and Structures of Materials Program of the Civil and Mechanical
Systems Division, and the Nanomanufacturing Program of the Design, Manufacturing
and Industrial Innovation Division.&lt;br/&gt;