* 0404445
* High-Sensitivity Thermodynamic Measurements of Interacting Disordered Quantum Hall Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Hong-Wen Jiang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 09/30/2008
* USD 326,962.00

This experimental condensed matter physics project involves high-sensitivity
thermodynamic measurements of interacting disordered semiconductor
heterostructures. The thermodynamic measurements provide probes the many-body
ground state properties of these devices. Specifically, two high sensitivity
measurements are planned. First, spatial distribution of the thermodynamic
compressibility of a two-dimensional electron layer will be mapped out using a
cryogenic scanning tunneling microscope. Second, orbital and spin magnetization
of a strongly interacting hole device will be measured using a torsion
magnetometer. Emphasis will be on how the disorder can quantitatively and
qualitatively alter the many-body ground state properties. Several outstanding
questions will be addressed concerning the nature of the insulating and the
metallic states in two-dimensions at zero magnetic field, the evolution of these
phases to the quantum Hall states as the magnetic field is increased, and the
spin states of an interacting system with disorders. The results anticipated
from these experiments are expected to provide a better understanding of the
effects of disorder on correlated low-dimensional semiconductor devices. This
advanced basic knowledge should have broader impacts on the development of the
next generation of semiconductor devices for high-speed communications, signal
processing, imaging, and detection. For example, the new technological areas
such as semiconductor-based quantum computation, quantum communications, and
spintronics are known to depend heavily on this kind of knowledge basis. In
addition, the high sensitivity measurement techniques developed in this research
can be used beyond the semiconductor devices. Thermodynamic properties of a
board spectrum of small-scale condensed matter materials can be potentially
studied with these technical tools. Finally, the hands-on research will give
graduate students as well as undergraduate students an excellent preparation for
careers in academe, industry, and government.

This experimental condensed matter physics involves high-sensitivity
thermodynamic measurements of semiconductor heterostructures. These devices are
very similar to those widely used on high-speed electronics in information
processing. Unlike the more conventional electrical measurements, the
thermodynamic measurements provide means to understand the fundamental energy
configuration of these electronic devices. Two specific experiments will be
conducted. A low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope will be used to map
out the local electrical compressibility of an electron device. The tiny
magnetization of a layer of charge carriers will be measured by an ultra-
sensitive torsion magnetometer. The results anticipated from these experiments
are expected to lead fundamental insights in the physics of these semiconductor
devices; particularly the basic questions that cannot be answered by the
conventional transport measurements. This basic knowledge should have impact on
next generation of semiconductor devices for high-speed communications, signal
processing, imaging, and detection. For example, the new technological areas
such as semiconductor-based quantum computation, quantum communications, and
spintronics are known to depend heavily on this kind of knowledge basis. In
addition, the high sensitivity measurement techniques developed in this research
can be used beyond the semiconductor devices. Thermodynamic properties of a
board spectrum of small-scale condensed matter materials can be potentially
studied with these technical tools. The hands-on research will give involved
graduate students as well as undergraduate students an excellent preparation for
careers in academe, industry, and government.