* 0404894
* Conference: Biological Membranes: Emerging Challenges at the Interface between Theory, Computer Simulation, and Experiment to be held in June 2004 in Sun Valley, Idaho
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Scott Feller, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2005
* USD 3,000.00

The interface between theory, computer simulation, and experiment is a critical
area for the development of methods to characterize complex macromolecular
assemblies of biological importance. Lipid bilayer membranes are an ideal target
for this combined experimental/theoretical approach, because of both the
practical importance of the cell membrane and because there is an active
community of researchers in the membrane biophysics community who are committed
to collaborative, multi-disciplinary approaches. To facilitate communication
among investigators, and to identify challenges in the field where theory,
computation, and experiment can complement each other, the P.I. (Scott Feller)
and Greg Voth are organizing a meeting to be held June 20-25,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An explicit goal of this meeting will be to develop
relationships between established researchers in the field and beginning
investigators, specifically women and members of under-represented minority
groups who are found predominantly, at least in the membrane field, among the
junior investigators (many of whom are in the process of establishing funding in
their labs). Several women are among the invited speakers, as well as an
African-American. This grant will support travel costs for these beginning
investigators as well as postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduates, in the
hope of expanding and diversifying the field of membrane
biophysics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;