* 0404169
* Collaborative Research:  Episodic, ENSO-Orchestrated Carbon Sequestration in Amazonian River Basins by Erosion-Sedimentation Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Anthony Aufdenkampe, Stroud Water Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2007
* USD 217,176.00

0404169&lt;br/&gt; Aufdenkampe &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
group proposal addresses a three-step process that could represent a
major&lt;br/&gt;carbon sink in Amazonian foreland basins. Stated as hypotheses,
the proposal suggests: 1) extensive&lt;br/&gt;Andean hillslope failure and
channel migration during large La Nina associated storms mobilizes
vast&lt;br/&gt;quantities of fresh organic matter and sediment with low organic
carbon (OC) content ; 2) within the&lt;br/&gt;river, mineral surfaces acquire
normal OC loadings via sorption as they are rapidly evacuated from
the&lt;br/&gt;mountainous source basins to adjacent foreland depocenters; and 3)
deposited sediments preserve "fresh"&lt;br/&gt;carbon within organo-mineral
complexes and by deep burial in point bars and "crevasse-splay"
deposits&lt;br/&gt;that have little potential for exchange with the biosphere
and atmosphere. Calculations presented in the&lt;br/&gt;Project Description
(C.1.2) suggest that this process could sequester ~ 300 Mtonnes of carbon per
event in&lt;br/&gt;the Amazonian foreland. When extrapolated globally to other
humid tropical regions, these estimates are&lt;br/&gt;equivalent to 50-100% of
the average annual "missing carbon sink" or 50-100% of atmospheric
CO2&lt;br/&gt;anomalies typically observed during La Nina.&lt;br/&gt;To explore
these hypothesis, proposers will study 1) the rates and mechanics of
sediment&lt;br/&gt;mobilization, transport, and deposition of river sediment
during extreme events, 2) the associations of&lt;br/&gt;organic carbon with
sediments at erosional and depositional sites, and 3) the transfer of OC from
rapid&lt;br/&gt;(&lt;5 y) to slower (&gt;50 y) turnover pools, via sorption and
deep burial processes. We will employ a&lt;br/&gt;combination of GIS analysis of
satellite images to map changes associated with individual large
storms&lt;br/&gt;(hillslope failures and river migration); field surveys of
sediment transport processes; and laboratory&lt;br/&gt;analysis of archived and
newly collected samples to determine organic carbon concentrations, sources
and&lt;br/&gt;turnover times; sediment characteristics; and transport/deposition
timing and rates (geochronology).&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is a
collaborative, multi-disciplinary, multi-national research effort
that&lt;br/&gt;builds upon a record of prior and current NSF-funded results of
decadal-scale sediment fluxes and organic&lt;br/&gt;carbon dynamics within river
basins of the Amazon. In close coordination with sediment-
flux,&lt;br/&gt;geochronological, geochemical, and process-mapping (GIS) studies
conducted by scientists from Univ. of&lt;br/&gt;Washington, scientists at Stroud
Water Research Center and Univ. of California Davis will investigate
the&lt;br/&gt;quantities, sources, and sequestration of organic carbon mobilized
during by these geomorphological&lt;br/&gt;processes. In addition, this project
benefits from a close working collaboration with the French Institut
de&lt;br/&gt;Recherche pour le Developpement (IRD), with whom we will conduct
fieldwork in the Andes and&lt;br/&gt;foreland basins of Bolivia and Peru during
both the dry and wet seasons. Additional collaborations are&lt;br/&gt;with the
Univ. Nacional Agraria La Molina (UNALM) and the Univ. of California Santa
Barabara. These&lt;br/&gt;continuing international collaborations offer
considerable scientific and logistical advantages and cost&lt;br/&gt;savings for
this current proposal to study the carbon transported and deposited by extreme
storm events.&lt;br/&gt;If this research effort substantiates the primary
hypothesis, such continental-scale, climate-driven,&lt;br/&gt;erosion-
sedimentation processes will be demonstrated to represent substantial,
previously unrecognized&lt;br/&gt;natural carbon sinks of global significance.
Furthermore, these processes could potentially result in
the&lt;br/&gt;sequestration of similar quantities of carbon by anthropogenically
accelerated erosion-sedimentation.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, this research
benefits anyone interested in the geochemical processes of organic
carbon&lt;br/&gt;preservation in sediment and soils or the
timing/rates/mechanics of landsliding, sediment transport,&lt;br/&gt;channel-
floodplain interaction, and sedimentary basin dynamics during extreme, ENSO-
orchestrated&lt;br/&gt;floods.&lt;br/&gt;The strong bridging between the
disciplines of geomorphology, biogeochemistry and organic&lt;br/&gt;geochemistry
has broader impacts on earth science as a whole, by offering new perspectives
that will&lt;br/&gt;facilitate the development of new geochemical and GIS
techniques. Enhanced collaboration with IRD&lt;br/&gt;supports a productive and
visible international, interdisciplinary scientific partnership. For example,
our&lt;br/&gt;previous collaborative research with IRD resulted in new
understandings of mercury contamination&lt;br/&gt;dynamics within riparian food
sources to indigenous human populations. The PIs have a record of
public&lt;br/&gt;outreach, and this project will generate data products useful
to educators and researchers, including our&lt;br/&gt;own teaching and public
presentations to both scientists and general audiences. Furthermore, this
will&lt;br/&gt;provide valuable research experience to many undergraduate and
some graduate students in the USA and&lt;br/&gt;South America, including funds
for these students to publish and present results at meetings.&lt;br/&gt;