* 0404137
* NIRT:  Nanocrystalline Diamond Thin Films for MEMS and Biomedical Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Ashok Kumar, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,438,578.00

The objective of this research is to synthesize nanocrystalline diamond thin
films with very small grain size (5-10 nm), lower surface roughness (20-30 nm)
and less internal stress and utilize its extraordinary properties in various
applications such as microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and biomedical
devices. The research focus will be: 1) to synthesize nanostructured (5-10nm)
diamond thin films by using novel plasma chemistry; 2) to develop and apply
advanced characterization techniques to understand mechanical and tribological
properties of this material at the nanoscale; 3) to demonstrate potential
applications in critical technologies including high fidelity MEMS and
biomedical devices; 4) to model the growth and resulting properties of
nanodiamond thin films important for MEMS and bioapplications. The rationale for
this project is based on the fact that material properties change drastically as
the grain size of the materials reduces to the nano-scale. By controlling the
grain size and grain boundary structure at the nanoscale extraordinary materials
properties will be achieved including high hardness, high fracture strength,
high Young's modulus, extremely low friction coefficient and high wear
resistance, negligible stiction, low residual stress in as-deposited films.
&lt;br/&gt; On a broader scale, successful completion of this research program
will lead to a knowledge base for design of novel nanostructured materials and
devices. The NIRT projects will provide a unique environment for the research,
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students from different
disciplines in interdisciplinary setting with active participation of national
laboratories, industry and international collaborators. The synergism and
complementary expertise of the participants will allow our group to address
complex problems and facilitate sharing of ideas and results. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved in the development and use of cutting-edge
research tools and will receive excellent training at the frontiers of
nanotechnology. A vigorous education and outreach program will be aggressively
pursued to bring nanotechnology to pre-college students, teachers and general
public. An essential and important component of this research will be the
dissemination of the results through publications in journals, presentation at
meetings, and directly to collaborators. This NIRT program will strive to
educate next generation of scientists and engineers that will play a key role in
advancing nanotechnology research and development in 21st Century. &lt;br/&gt;