* 0404002
* NIRT: Photonic Crystal Fibers with Nanoscale Functionalized Air Holes as Robust Chemical and Biological Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Henry Du, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,300,000.00

0404002&lt;br/&gt;Du&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The array of axially aligned air holes
and the resultant optical characteristics in silica photonic crystal fibers
(PCFs) present an enormous opportunity to develop sensors with detection
sensitivity not achievable by conventional optical fiber technology. This NIRT
project aims to explore the frontier of hollow- and solid-core PCFs with
nanoscale-functionalized air holes for chemical and biological sensing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PCFs will be fabricated via a modified sol-gel method for
optical fibers. Nanoscale surface functionalization will be conducted following
two strategies: (1) surface attachment of Ag nanoparticles mediated by self-
assembled monolayers for chemical sensing, where surface-enhanced Raman
scattering can be exploited and (2) surface binding of biospecific recognition
entities for biological sensing. Surface functionalization studies will employ
various surface-sensitive analytical tools. Sensing measurements will make use
of a range of state-of-the-art laser techniques. Experimental studies will be
augmented by computer simulation, taking into account of the effects of surface
functionalization, analyte medium, and biospecific interactions on the optical
characteristics of PCFs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project represents the
first known endeavor to integrate PCFs with nanotechnology for potentially
robust chemical and biological sensing. It will yield a wealth of fundamental
and experimental information in the various task areas. Success of the project
will enhance the prospects of nanoscale-functionalized PCF sensors, sensor
arrays, and sensor networks for diverse applications such as remote and dynamic
environmental monitoring, manufacturing process safety, medical diagnosis, early
warning of biological and chemical warfare, and homeland defense.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;