* 0404380
* NER: Rules for the Physical Implementation of Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Alain Martin, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2005
* USD 111,999.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0404380&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: California Inst of
Tech&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Martin , Alain&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER:
Rules for the Physical Implementation of
Computations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;A modern digital chip is a
complex distributed system where many actions are performed concurrently. So far
this difficult concurrency problem has been solved rather crudely but
conveniently by distributing a global timing reference signal (the global
``clock'') and by estimating how long each action takes. (The estimations are
necessary to schedule the clock signals.) This approach will not work in
nanotechnology mainly because the variations of physical parameters due to
fabrication imprecision will make the use of a global time reference either too
brittle or too costly!. It is therefore very likely that nanotechnology-
implemented digital computations will be asynchronous, i.e. the sequencing and
timing of the steps of a computation will take place without reference to a
clock signal and possibly without knowledge about delays. Such an approach is
called ``delay-insensitive.''&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advantages of such an
approach are enormous because independence of delay implies independence from
many physical parameter variations. But now the question is: What are the
requirements to implement a collection of partially ordered binary transitions
(a low-level description of a digital computation) into a provably equivalent
collection of events (voltage transitions or other) in a physical medium: a
deep-submicron CMOS chip, a network or nanowires and nanotubes, a cellular
replication of DNA strands, or other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, how do
we justify replacing binary transitions on Boolean variables with continuous
variations of physical quantities and being able to argue that the variables
have a well-defined value at any time. (With a clock, we only need to look at
the physical quantities at well-defined moments.) How do we guarantee that the
signals are able to absorb noise and degradation: in other words how
systematically do we inject energy in the system to restore the signals? Again,
without a global time reference, how do we distribute a single signal (say the
output of a gate) to different parts of the circuit and&lt;br/&gt;assume that
the values received are consistent at the times they are
used?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to construct large-scale systems, we need to
define a set of rules that guarantee that any implementation that follows the
rules will be correct by construction: Given the complexity of such systems the
engineer cannot afford to finetune every single gate to make sure that it
behaves correctly. Those rules will be based on a universal model of the digital
side of the computation that we think is both a convenient ``object code'' of
any high-level representation of the computation, and a ``thin'' direct
interface to the physical device. What those rules are and how they can be
ported from one technology to another is the subject of this exploratory
research. We think we can formalize the rules for deep submicron silicon
technology and then extrapolate them to first SiNW and CNT thanks to the strong
activity in this area at Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;