* 0404243
* NER:  High Throughput Manufacturing of Nanoporous Films via Flow-Induced Micelle Alignment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Radhakrishna Sureshkumar, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2007
* USD 131,778.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0404243 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: AMY Q. SHEN INSTITUTION:
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY

NER: HIGH THROUGHPUT MANUFACTURING OF NANOPOROUS FILMS VIA FLOW-INDUCED MICELLE
ALIGNMENT

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NER. Recent advances in rheo-optical
characterization and theoretical modeling of self-assembled fluids (e.g.
wormlike micelles) provide unique opportunities for developing high throughput
and well controlled process designs for nanostructured film synthesis. However,
the wide variety of rheological behaviors that these systems exhibit poses
challenges for process design. For example, wormlike micelles show highly non-
Newtonian and/or viscoelastic flow behavior that is sensitive to salt
concentration and temperature. The central goal of this project is to explore
whether existing knowledge on the rheology of wormlike micellar solutions may be
used advantageously to develop efficient coating process for tailor making
nanostructured films. Specifically, the proposed research will entail the
following collaborative activities: (a) Developing and optimizing a coating
apparatus to guide and control the self-assembly and molecular alignment during
the film synthesis for high throughput results. (b) Systematic characterization
of thin films synthesized under different physiochemical and hydrodynamic
conditions using well characterized fluids. (c) Theoretical modeling to
understand the influence of viscoelastic and/or non-Newtonian effects on the
coating process. It is envisioned that the proposed research will lead to the
development of experimentally validated models and numerical simulations that
will allow engineers and researchers to synthesize nanoporous films at high
production rate. Such user-friendly numerical simulation software will have
technological relevance in biosensors, optics, catalysis, quantum electronics,
and energetic materials. Broader Impacts include educational objectives as well
as the involvement of underrepresented minority groups. The numerical simulation
modules will be developed for potential use in core curriculum via courses on
fluid mechanics, heat transfer, process design and materials science.