* 0404376
* NIRT: Zeolite Nanoparticles: Energy, Environment, and Microelectronics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2010
* Mark Davis, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 05/31/2010
* USD 1,358,911.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT. Zeolites and zeolite-like materials are
crystalline oxides with uniform nanometer-scale pores; they have been
commercially used with remarkable success as catalysts and separation media for
the past several decades in the form of microparticles formed into pellets or
granules. This research will focus on the use of zeolite nanoparticles in a thin
film configuration which are very promising for a number of new applications
including low dielectric constant (low-k) films that are critically needed for
the future generation computer chips, and high performance polymer-zeolite
nanocomposite membranes that are key to the commercialization of proton exchange
membrane fuel cells. A number of long-term fundamental issues still exist, and
will be addressed in this proposed project: (i) synthesis of dispersible zeolite
nanoparticles with small diameter, designed pore size, cavity, composition, and
organic functional groups, (ii) theoretical calculation of zeolite properties
such as k, elastic modulus, and heat conductivity, and (iii) development of
methodologies for incorporation of zeolite nanoparticles into high performance
low-k films and fuel cell membranes. &lt;br/&gt; The scale-down of zeolite
particles from micrometer to nanometer and the addition of the designed
properties to the zeolite nanoparticles will bring revolutionary solutions to
many critical problems in the fields of energy, environment, and
microelectronics, and will represent a paradigm shift in zeolite science and
technology. Synthesis of zeolite nanoparticles with designed properties and
their successful demonstration as an enabling nanotechnology will become the new
frontier for zeolite science and technology. The basic sciences developed in
this proposal will have far reaching implications for other technologies e.g.,
corrosion-resistant coatings and nanocomposite membranes for air/liquid
separation that are important to pollution prevention and energy conservation. A
unique team environment has been established that will help train graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers in a multidisciplinary fashion. Education
and training for under-represented minority undergraduate students, and outreach
to K-12 school students and teachers are also an essential part of the project
plan.&lt;br/&gt;