* 0404113
* SGER:  A Computing Paradigm for Collaborative Multiple Mobile Agent Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Randy Y.C. Chow, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract

The project is an exploratory research into the potential of using a new
promising programming paradigm, which combines two agent-based concepts: mobile
agent computing and multiple collaborative agent systems, for emerging
distributed applications. One major obstacle that hinders the development of
mobile agent systems is due to the concern of agent protection against malicious
hosts. The research conjectures that the issue can be addressed and the security
of agents can be enhanced by relying on the concept of protection as a whole,
i.e., the secrecy and integrity of a mobile agent processes can be better
protected through dispersion of its functions and data resulting in a system of
multiple collaborating mobile agents. Viewing from a different angle, the
research extends multiple agent systems with a new dimension in mobility. This
extension will broaden the application of distributed collaborative agent
systems. The goal of this research is to prove the feasibility and the holistic
effect of unifying mobility and distributiveness in the design of future
Internet services, and meanwhile, to identify system requirements and their
supporting algorithms/protocols in this new computing paradigm. Since the
proposed research is on the design of a general computing system architecture
for distributed applications, its impact will be broad and potentially useful
for any network-based applications that require agent collaboration. The initial
system assumption is most likely to be well suited for e-commerce systems where
security is an essential requirement. From the educational perspective, the
project is ideal for research pursuing graduate students since it involves a
broad spectrum of fundamental research topics in algorithm and theory,
distributed systems, mobile and pervasive computing, and can cross into AI and
language design.

