* 0404125
* NER: Multi-timescale Molecular Simulation of Fluidity of Ultrathin Nanoconfined Aqueous Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Yongsheng Leng, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2006
* USD 128,439.00

Cummings, Peter T.&lt;br/&gt;Vanderbilt University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"NER:
Multi-timescale Molecular Simulation of Fluidity of Ultrathin Nanoconfined
Aqueous Systems."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of nanoconfined aqueous
system are of considerable interest and importance in areas as diverse as clay
swelling, bio-lubrication, charge migration in living systems, and the friction
control in micro/nano electro-mechanical systems (M/NEMS), both natural and man-
made. Although significant progress toward our understanding of the physics of
liquids in the vicinity of solid surfaces, and particularly under nanoscale
confinement, has been made in the past few decades, very few theoretical studies
have been conducted to investigate the adsorbed structure and frictional
properties of nanoconfined associative aqueous films. To understand the
frictional dynamics underlying the observed phenomena in surface force balance
(SFB) experiments of hydration bound layers between two mica surfaces, we
propose a nanoscale exploratory research (NER) project that involves the
development and application of "multi-timescale" molecular simulations to
encompass the SFB experimental timescales. The approach incorporates a realistic
molecular model for complex mica-liquid system and a hybrid simulation technique
that combines microscopic molecular relaxation with macroscopic dynamics of
mechanical systems. Both conventional molecular dynamics and hybrid simulation
techniques will be explored in the proposal. Moreover, the transient time
correlation function (TTCF) method of non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD)
will be extended to study very low shear rates, allowing a direct comparison
between molecular dynamics, the hybrid simulation results and experimental data.
New physical insights into the structure of bound hydration layers, the
interfacial dynamics (diffusivity of molecules, fluidity of hydration sheath),
and the macroscopic dynamics of the driven mica plate will emerge. These
insights are urgently needed since recent findings of possible Pt nanoparticle
contamination on the surfaces of the experimental apparatuses, and the potential
impact of the contamination, have thrown doubt on much of the accepted
experimental findings of the past decade. Modeling and simulation tools of the
kind proposed for development in this project can play an essential role in the
coming debate over the impact of such contamination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed work results from integrating the efforts of
Cummings, Leng, and Delhommelle (who will join Cummings group beginning from
June 1, 2004) with extensive backgrounds in computational nanoscience, solid
mechanics and nanotribology, and NEMD. These efforts will greatly enhance our
understanding of the properties of aqueous liquids in nanoconfinement. This will
play a key role in the understanding nature's micro/nano electro-mechanical
systems (M/NEMS) (e.g., flagellar motors in bacteria) and will provide insight
into the design of synthetic M/NEMS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the proposed research include the development of multi-timescale molecular
simulation methodology and using the real molecular model to investigate
nanoconfined aqueous system in naturally occurring environment. The hybrid
molecular simulation method proposed will overcome the timescale issue
encountered in conventional molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and can be
applied to other nanoscale processes, such as nanoindentation, atomic force
microscopy (AFM) and chemical force microscopy (CFM), and binding/unbinding bio-
molecules in living systems, as well as recovery of petroleum from underground
reservoirs (energy extraction), etc.&lt;br/&gt;