* 0404983
* UMEB:  Comparative Ecology:  Perspectives on Environments Across Space, Time and Cultures
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Gary Belovsky, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sally E. O'Connor
* 04/30/2008
* USD 371,265.00

The University of Notre Dame (ND) and the Confederated Salish and Kootenai
Tribes of Montana (CS&KT) have a joint venture for education and research on
environmental biology, which includes an educational program for undergraduates
from all universities. Each student cohort participates in two summer sessions
(10 weeks each): the summer between Sophomore and Junior years in northern
Michigan and the summer between Junior and Senior years in Montana. Each summer
session is preceded by a one semester preparatory course. A cohort consists of 8
students; 4 will be Native Americans. UMEB funding supports 8 Native American
students (two cohorts). Summer sessions are offered by ten faculty from four
universities.

Each summer session includes various field ecology course modules. The modules
offered in Michigan are forest, aquatic, insect, amphibian/reptile, and
mammalian/avian ecology. The modules offered in Montana are grassland and
montane ecology and paleoecology. Both summers also contain a module offered by
archaeologists and tribal members on the ecology of traditional life ways of
local Native Americans and how the environment shaped these and the peoples'
environmental attitudes. However, the main focus is each student's independent
research project and environmental monitoring by student teams. Research topics
are focused on course modules or projects of senior researchers working on the
properties. Team-based monitoring is overseen by senior scientists. In the
second summer, research projects and monitoring stress ecological comparisons
between the properties.

The program seeks to instill four qualities in environmental biology students:
1) scientific knowledge on a diversity of environments; 2) ability to integrate
this knowledge with others in a team; 3) ability to generate scientific
knowledge through independent research; and 4) ability to consider a diversity
of environmental attitudes, especially those of Native Americans, because novel
attitudes may aid in addressing environmental problems.

Native American students will be better educated in environmental biology to
manage tribal lands. Non-Native American students will be exposed to Native
American attitudes that may aid in solving complex environmental problems and
foster environmental justice for all groups. For more information, contact Dr.
Gary Belovsky (phone: 574 631 0172; e-mail: Belovsky.1@nd.edu).

