* 0404167
* NER:     An AFM-based Technique for Nanoscale Flow Mapping
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Theodorian Borca-Tasciuc, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 129,945.00

&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0404167&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
THEODORIAN BORCA-TASCIUC&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: RENSSELAER POLYTECHNIC
INST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NER: AN AFM-BASED TECHNIQUE FOR NANOSCALE
FLOW MAPPING &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to
Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 03-043, category NER.
Understanding the dynamics and the structure of flows in and around
nanostructures and liquid-solid interfaces is critical for the advancement of
future generations of fluidic based biological and chemical sensors. Currently
available flow field characterization methods such as Laser Doppler Velocimetry
(LDV) and Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) rely on optical sensing and are
limited in resolution by the wavelength of light. A novel experimental technique
based on Magnetic Force Microscopy (MFM) detection of ferromagnetic or
paramagnetic nano-particles seeding the flow will be developed under this grant.
The technique will then be utilized for measurements of the flow field in
electroosmotic microchannel flows and in the vicinity of a DNA molecule in the
flow. These experiments will set the stage to conduct studies of flows relevant
to bio-fluidic and bio-sensing applications such as flows containing DNA
molecules. The challenges of this project will be met by a team with expertise
in both experimental measurements and theoretical modeling and computation. The
proposed research, if successful, will lead to an understanding of key aspects
of fluid flow at the nanoscale, and will pave the way for designing better
microfluidic and nanofluidic systems for chemical and biological sensing and
nanomanufacturing. Moreover, by facilitating the study of flows in the vicinity
of DNA and other bio-molecules and individual cells this technique will open new
horizons for understanding physiological processes in biological systems. This
will have a tremendous impact on biotechnology. The proposed research activity
is integrated with a comprehensive educational and outreach program. The results
will be made available through a novel haptic device interface and on-line
accessible experiments and demonstrations of nanoscale fluid flow phenomena to
be developed by undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;