* 0404954
* Nonlinear and Non-Stationary Time Series Modeling and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Zongwu Cai, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing grant
* grace yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 69,973.00

This proposal concerns scientific research and education on a variety of
statistical methodological developments and foundational research with
particular applications in economics and other applied fields and it consists of
two subjects. The first subject is to study a new class of nonlinear seasonal
time series models to characterize the seasonal variations in nonlinear and non-
stationary time series. The models are decomposed into a common trend function
over periods and additive seasonal effect functions that are specific to each
season within the periods. Also, the models will be extended to the time-varying
coefficient seasonal time series models to include exogenous variables. The
nonparametric techniques will be developed to estimate the trend and seasonal
effect functions and the asymptotic properties of all the proposed estimators
will be established under the strong mixing conditions without any specification
of the error distribution. The second subject is to develop the nonparametric
modeling methods to analyze nonlinear and non-stationary time series data by
considering the following nonparametric or semi-parametric models: the time-
varying coefficient time series regression models with nonlinear time trend
function and/or integrated regressors and/or correlated errors, the
nonparametric or semi-parametric co-integration models, and the nonparametric or
semi-parametric (dynamic) panel models with nonlinear time trend function and/or
integrated regressors and/or correlated errors. The central components of this
proposal are the developments of nonparametric modeling techniques to those
models and to make those models practically useful. Specifically, the local
linear model-fitting scheme will be developed to estimate the nonparametric time
trend and the coefficient functions and the nonparametric regression functions.
Moreover, the asymptotic properties of all the proposed estimators will be
established under some regularity conditions without specifying the error
distribution. Particularly, the attention will be paid on the asymptotic
properties for the non-stationary cases due to different rates of convergence
(by comparing with the stationary cases). Further, the bandwidth selection issue
will be addressed particularly for the non-stationary cases. Finally, to test
the misspecification and stationarity, a nonparametric version of the
generalized likelihood ratio test together with a simple nonparametric version
of bootstrap will be proposed and investigated.

The intellectual merit of this proposal is not only to propose and develop
several nonlinear and non-stationary time series regression models but also
develop novel nonparametric modeling methodologies to make these models
practically applicable. The new statistical methods will possess the advantage
of requiring fewer assumptions than previously developed methods. Hence, the
conclusions obtained from them should be less dubious. The broader impacts of
this proposal are that this proposal represents a comprehensive and long-term
attack on a host of important data analytic problems in applied fields and that
the results will be of long-term theoretical and practical interests and will
provide near-term solutions to real-world problems. The methods are based on the
transparent ideas that can be easily incorporated into the classroom and
graduate students are presently involved in the various projects described and
more will become involved.