* 0404793
* XXV International Colloquium on Group Theoretical Methods in Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Willard Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

This award furnishes travel and local expenses for U.S. participants in the 25th
International Colloquium on Group Theoretical Methods in Physics, held in
Cocoyoc, Mexico, 2-6 August 2004. This is the biannual meeting of the community
of physicists, mathematicians, and engineers who practice the methods of
symmetry. It was last held in North America in 1988, so it provides an
especially good opportunity for U.S. junior researchers in this broad field. The
purpose of the meeting is to review the principal developments that have
occurred in recent years, to present the main results leading to current work in
the subject in a coherent form that will be accessible to graduate students and
young researchers newly entering the domain, and to point out the most promising
directions for future research. In particular, the meeting's special panel on
"Group theory in the XXI Century," is meant to provide guidance to junior
researchers, and the Proceedings will be published. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Group
theory is the mathematics of symmetry. Modern physical theories make extensive
use of group theoretical ideas to represent the symmetries observed in nature.
The periodic table of the elements, atomic spectral analysis, classification of
crystal structure, and theories of elementary particles all involve group-
theoretic models. The concept of what is an explicitly solvable classical or
quantum mechanical system is best understood in terms of the symmetry of the
system. Engineering areas such as tomography and signal processing, including
wavelets, radar, and sonar, are intimately bound up with harmonic analysis, the
expansion and analysis of functions on groups. This conference explores current
developments and open problems in this important, multidisciplinary field. The
principal topics for the meeting are: Lie groups, quantum groups, representation
theory, and special functions; Supersymmetry, superstrings, and quantum gravity;
Integrability, nonlinear systems, and quantum chaos; Discrete systems and signal
analysis; Foundations of quantum mechanics; Semigroups, time asymmetry, and
resonances; Quantum computing; Linear and nonlinear optics; Nuclear, atomic, and
molecular physics; Elementary particle physics; and Condensed matter and
statistical physics.&lt;br/&gt;