* 0404630
* Symposium T: Self-Organized Processes in Semiconductor Heteroepitaxy; MRS Meeting
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2004
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 09/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

A Symposium on Self-Organized Processes in Semiconductor Heteroepitaxy will be
held December 1-5, 2003 at the Fall MRS Meeting, Boston, MA. The symposium is
organized to bring together theoreticians and experimentalists from disciplines
including physics, chemistry, materials science, and electrical engineering.
Issues related to the understanding, control, and applications of self-organized
processes in semiconductor epitaxy, e.g., strain-induced self-assembly;
clustering, alloy phase separation, and composition modulation; and long- and
short-range ordering will be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;Sessions will be held on: 1)
Quantum Dots: Ordering and Patterning; 2) Quantum Dots and Wires: Structure,
Spectroscopy, and Transport; 3) Quantum Dots and Wires: Devices; 4) Spins in
Semiconductor Nanostructures; 5) Composition Modulation; and 6) Atomic Ordering.
The symposium is expected to stimulate collaboration and discussion between
researchers, especially between young professionals and established experts and
to identify critical scientific issues.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An evaluation of
the progress and status of fundamental phenomena involved in self-organized
processes in semiconductor epitaxy and the utilization of self-organized
processes in the growth and processing of electronic materials and device
related structures will be of great value to progress in the
electronics/photonics field. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and
future directions, it is expected that new ties will be established among
universities, research institutions, and industry. The requested NSF funds will
be used to facilitate participation in the meeting by young faculty,
postdoctoral research associates and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;