* 0404767
* The geometry, topology and asymptotics of the word problem
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Timothy Riley, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2005
* USD 107,999.00

The proposed research is in Geometric Group Theory, specifically on
&lt;br/&gt;problems pertaining to the geometry, topology and asymptotics of the
&lt;br/&gt;word problem, particularly along avenues initiated by Gromov in his
&lt;br/&gt;seminal book "Asymptotic Invariants of Infinite Groups." A first
&lt;br/&gt;direction concerns isoperimetric and filling length functions, a
&lt;br/&gt;meeting point of geometry and algorithmic complexity. Examples of
&lt;br/&gt;problems for attack here are whether Cohen's Double Exponential
&lt;br/&gt;Theorem is sharp, and to establish long standing claims of Thurston
&lt;br/&gt;about isoperimetric functions of the Special Linear Groups. Also
&lt;br/&gt;addressed in the proposal is a question of Gromov about the
uniqueness &lt;br/&gt;of a limit of a group viewed from increasingly distant
vantage points &lt;br/&gt;(an asymptotic cone); a line of attack is being
pursued in &lt;br/&gt;collaboration with M.R. Bridson. Another area is the
"grammar of the &lt;br/&gt;Word Problem", where geometry meets linguistic
complexity. The P.I. &lt;br/&gt;proposes to investigate the combings of
nilpotent groups as well as &lt;br/&gt;applications to the Andrews-Curtis
Conjecture. The proposal includes &lt;br/&gt;collaborative work and it is
anticipated that the inter-disciplinary &lt;br/&gt;nature of the work will
enable additional collaborative efforts both &lt;br/&gt;in the United States and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Word Problem was posed by Max Dehn in 1912, who
presciently &lt;br/&gt;described it as a "fundamental problem whose solution is
very &lt;br/&gt;difficult and which will not be possible without a penetrating
study &lt;br/&gt;of the subject." The Word Problem for a group (a fundamental
&lt;br/&gt;algebraic object capturing symmetries) asks for a systematic method
&lt;br/&gt;(in modern terms, an algorithm) which, given a finite list (a "word")
&lt;br/&gt;of basic symmetries (distinguished group elements known as
&lt;br/&gt;"generators"), declares whether or not their product is the identity
&lt;br/&gt;(the trivial symmetry that moves nothing). One of the crowning
&lt;br/&gt;achievements of 20th century mathematics was the construction by
Boone &lt;br/&gt;and Novikov of groups for which no such algorithm can exist.
However, &lt;br/&gt;that is by no means the end of the story. The Word Problem
transcends &lt;br/&gt;its origins in algebra, decidability and complexity
theory, and turns &lt;br/&gt;out to be a bridge to geometry and topology, as
well as to linguistic &lt;br/&gt;complexity. To a group we can associate a
topological space and vice &lt;br/&gt;versa. Recognising a word to be trivial
amounts to spanning a loop &lt;br/&gt;with a disc in a corresponding space, and
geometrical features of this &lt;br/&gt;disc (such as area) translate to
algorithmic complexity measures (such &lt;br/&gt;as time) of the Word Problem.
Moreover, words over a group form &lt;br/&gt;grammars whose linguistic features
relate to the ease of navigating &lt;br/&gt;around the corresponding space. Thus
there are tantalising links &lt;br/&gt;between minimal surfaces (soap films) and
algorithmic complexity, and &lt;br/&gt;between geometry of spaces and grammars.
These are the connections &lt;br/&gt;the P.I. proposes to develop and
exploit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;