* 0404585
* Surface Science Studies of Hydrocarbon Conversion Reactions on Model Systems and Realistic Catalytic Conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Francisco Zaera, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2007
* USD 465,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0404585&lt;br/&gt;Zaera/UC-
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the selectivity of hydrocarbon
conversion catalysis form the focus of this research project supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. Professor Zaera and his coworkers at
the University of California-Riverside use infrared spectroscopy coupled with a
high pressure nanoliter sized catalytic reactor to probe the detailed kinetics
of hydrocarbon reactions on transition metal surfaces. An understanding of the
detailed kinetics of these reactions is crucial to the design of improved
catalysts for hydrocarbon processing chemistry. The work of the Zaera group
includes extensive and long term collaborations with scientists in Latin
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of catalytic selectivity is
necessary in order to design and implement improved catalytic processes for
hydrocarbon conversions. This improved understanding can impact energy
conversion technologies, the industrial production of hydrocarbon feedstocks,
and the catalytic production of fine chemicals. The work in Professor Zaera's
laboratory at the University of California-Riverside addresses this question of
selectivity by carrying out fundamental studies of surface reaction kinetics on
well characterized transition metal substrates, using infrared spectroscopy and
a novel nanoliter reactor method. Outreach to researchers in Latin America is
included in this research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;