* 0404931
* Asymptotics and Multi-Phase Solutions of the Whitham Hierarchies
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2007
* USD 183,820.00

The purpose of this project is to study a variety of problems concerning the
Whitham equations, which describe the macroscopic structure of nonlinear
dispersive oscillations. In particular, the proposers will study (1) Whitham
equations for the KdV hierarchy, (2) Large time behavior of the Whitham solution
for the defocusing nonlinear Schroedinger equation, and (3) Whitham dynamics in
equilibrium measures and random matrices. The primary goal of the first project
is to understand the effect of the hyperbolic degeneracy of the Whitham
equations on the nonlinear dispersive oscillations. The basic interest of the
second project is in the large time behavior of the oscillations generated by
the defocusing nonlinear Schroedinger equation. The purpose of the third project
is to study phase transition phenomena in equilibrium measures and random
matrices. The proposed methods will be bothanalytical and computational.

Many wave dynamics in nature undergo dispersive processes, while the dissipative
or diffusive mechanisms are negligible. Examples include magneto-hydrodynamic
waves in plasmas and various nonlinear waves in optics. When the dispersive term
is small, there appear regions in space-time which are filled with small scale
oscillations. Such phenomena have been observed as collisionless shock in
plasmas and optical shocks in optical fibers. A general description of these
nonlinear dispersive oscillations has not been accomplished. The main purpose of
this proposal is to develop a precise mathematical analysis to study those
oscillations. The basic equation to describe those phenomena is so-called the
Whitham equations, which also play an essential role in both zero dispersion
limit and modulation theories of nonlinear dispersive oscillations. Nonlinear
dispersive waves also have physical applications in the transmission and
compression of pulses in optical fibers. The Whitham dynamics in equilibrium
measures and random matrices have been found to be intrinsically connected to
orthogonal polynomials in approximation theory and the Seiberg-Witten solution
of suppersymmetric Yang-Mills theory in high-energy physics. The program
combines research and education by involving graduate students, postdocs and
faculty in the area of Applied Mathematics and Applied Sciences.