* 0404674
* Entropic Forces in Single-Biomolecule Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Philip Nelson, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biology jointly fund this award. It supports theoretical research and education
at the interface of condensed matter physics and biology. &lt;br/&gt;The PI aims
to illuminate the workings of three paradigmatic molecular devices through the
analysis of experiments performed by collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;o DNA loop
formation mediated by repressors such as LacI and GalR is an important mode of
bacterial gene regulation. Recent and pending experiments on the effect of
direct physical manipulation on loop formation will yield insight into the
structure of the "repressosome" complex. Analysis will be performed by a
combination of transfer-matrix and other methods.&lt;br/&gt;o Gene transcription
is widely believed to create torsional stress in DNA. The resulting torsional
stress can in turn affect the transcription of nearby genes, induce structural
transitions in the DNA, and perhaps even assist the disassembly of nucleosomes
downstream of the polymerase. New experiments directly demonstrate torsional
stress by using recombinase to clip out supercoiled segments from a
transcribing, linear DNA construct. These experiments will be analyzed to
confirm their interpretation, and to access experimentally the free energy of
supercoiling and compare it to earlier predictions.&lt;br/&gt;o The ribosome
remains the Everest of molecular machines, despite spectacular progress in
determining its structure. Experiments now underway will determine the effects
of physical forces on the speed of ribosome translation. The analysis of these
experiments involves entropic forces. Required analytic tools will be
constructed and used to help interpret the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;In addition,
the PI will characterize the material properties of a recently discovered DNA
conformation, left-handed "L-DNA" created when B-form is stretched and
undertwisted.&lt;br/&gt;Teaching and outreach: Extending the PI's undergraduate
course and textbook in ways that have been requested by users of the preliminary
versions helps integrate research and education. The work will be distributed
electronically in the form of additional draft chapters of the book. Other
projects will be undertaken to help a broader group of instructors to create
courses in biological physics. Material created in the course, including
classroom demonstrations, will also enter into the PI's lectures to high school
students at Penn's Summer Science Academy. The proposed work will also give one
graduate student interdisciplinary training leading to a Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: Yesterday's discovery is today's tool. The development of techniques for
the manipulation and interrogation of single biomolecules has led to an era in
which these techniques can be used to extract lessons about the mechanisms of
molecular machines and other nanoscale devices used in living cells. For
example, this research will forge links between the micrometer world of optical
manipulation and the nanometer world of molecular machines by determining the
stresses (stretching force and torque) on molecules in terms of the observed or
controlled conditions on the ends of the long tethers used to manipulate them.
The educational component of the project will contribute to the education of
scientists trained in both biological and physical techniques by extending the
PI's prior work to create and disseminate both graduate and undergraduate
courses on biological physics.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials
Research and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology jointly fund this
award. It supports theoretical research and education at the interface of
condensed matter physics and biology. &lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to use methods of
theoretical condensed matter physics to illuminate the workings of molecular
devices relevant to biological cell function and physical aspects of genetic
regulation. New experimental techniques have opened a window into the materials
properties of individual biological molecules and have enabled the building of
links between the structure of biomolecules and the actual function of molecular
devices. This research will involve close work with experimentalists and the
analysis of experiments on biomolecular devices performed by the PI's
collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;Teaching and outreach: Extending the PI's
undergraduate course and textbook in ways that have been requested by users of
the preliminary versions will help integrate research and education. The work
will be distributed electronically in the form of additional draft chapters of
the book. Other projects will be undertaken to help a broader group of
instructors to create courses in biological physics. Material created in the
course, including classroom demonstrations, will also enter into the PI's
lectures to high school students at Penn's Summer Science Academy. The proposed
work will also give one graduate student interdisciplinary training leading to a
Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Yesterday's discovery is today's tool. The
development of techniques for the manipulation and interrogation of single
biomolecules has led to an era in which these techniques can be used to extract
lessons about the mechanisms of molecular machines and other nanoscale devices
used in living cells. For example, this research will forge links between the
micrometer world of optical manipulation and the nanometer world of molecular
machines by determining the stresses (stretching force and torque) on molecules
in terms of the observed or controlled conditions on the ends of the long
tethers used to manipulate them. The educational component of the project will
contribute to the education of scientists trained in both biological and
physical techniques by extending the PI's prior work to create and disseminate
both graduate and undergraduate courses on biological
physics.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;