* 0404542
* Experiments on Atomic-Scale Diffusion of Dopants in Strained and Relaxed Si and SiGe
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Wei-Kan Chu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 398,170.00

This project addresses diffusion of boron in Si or SiGe, utilizing a new
experimental approach. The coefficient of diffusion (D) is normally expressed as
a specific combination (D ~ X(squared)g) of two contributing factors: the
average migrating distance (X) and hopping frequency (g) of the diffusing boron
atoms. For some conditions, e.g., the diffusion of boron in relaxed versus
strained SiGe, significant changes in the average migrating distance may be
involved. In this project, experiments capable of distinguishing between changes
in migrating distances from changes in hopping frequencies will be carried out.
The approach involves refined measurements of the profile spreading of boron,
starting from a sharply localized layer in a superlattice. Standard diffusion
theory with the simplest models indicates that this profile is a Gaussian for
all times. When details of the interaction between dopants (boron) and defects
in parent materials (SiGe) on the atomic scale is taken into account, it is
expected that the profile acquires an exponential character for short times. It
is planned to assess the migrating distance and the hopping frequency separately
by monitoring the gradual disappearance of the exponential character of the
profile as it evolves into a pure Gaussian with increasing annealing time. Doing
this at a range of annealing temperatures is expected to elucidate the
dependence of these quantities separately as a function of temperature. This
information is expected to provide new knowledge of the basic mechanism behind
diffusion of boron in Si or SiGe, and assist explanation of many documented
anomalies. Besides diffusion of boron in Si, strained or strain-relaxed SiGe
systems, the superlattice diffusion marker approach can be extended to other
solid-state systems of which the diffusion mechanism is either unknown or in
debate. For example, the presence of F, N, C, Al, Ga, and In, etc. may affect
the migration of a specific dopant. Attempts to understand and predict such
phenomena using ab initio calculations to compute energy barriers under
different chemical environments are complicated by interrelations of these atoms
and associated strain fields; thus, experimental work is needed to complement
computational results. It is anticipated that the experimental approach
developed in this project will have significant impact in the field of diffusion
of impurities in solids in general. The project includes ab initio calculations
of reaction barrier energies under different chemical and/or physical (strain)
environments to compare and contrast with measurements. Macroscopic consequences
of reaction barrier energies extracted from experiments will be sought and
evaluated. A Monte Carlo simulation code will be developed for computer
experimentation to lend further support to measured migrating distances and
hopping frequencies. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental
research issues associated with electronic/photonic materials having
technological relevance and emphasizes the integration of research and
education. The project will involve an undergraduate and two graduate students
each participating as a team member in conducting research at various stages.
The project also benefits instruction in film growth, material modification,
ion-solid interaction and materials analysis in chemistry and physics
departments. Activities are also devoted to educating high school teachers
through special lectures and high school students through a summer internship
program. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;