* 0404420
* (Non-TEP) Abiotic Particle Formation From Dissolved Organic Matter in Marine Environments: Possible Shunt to the Microbial Loop
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Dale Hebel, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2007
* USD 224,541.00

In the ocean autotrophs are the principle particle vector converting dissolved
inorganic carbon (DIC) &lt;br/&gt;to particulate organic matter (POM). Exudates,
principally derived from phytoplankton as dissolved &lt;br/&gt;organic matter
(DOM), exist in the ocean as labile, semi-labile and refractory DOM. As an
alternate &lt;br/&gt;particulate pathway the microbial loop represents a process
where bacteria are able to metabolize a &lt;br/&gt;portion of this DOM and
therefore convert DOM to POM. This conversion of DOM to POM has &lt;br/&gt;been
found to be substantial, providing significant energy for higher trophic levels.
Recently, a &lt;br/&gt;process has been described where 0.2 um filtered and
poisoned river water produced particles &lt;br/&gt;abiotically in dark
incubations. The analysis of particles and source waters showed that the
particles &lt;br/&gt;are distinctly different from TEP (transparent exopolymers
particles) and were derived from DOM &lt;br/&gt;and contained organic components
found in living organisms (i.e., DNA, carbohydrates, lipids,
&lt;br/&gt;proteins). Over the incubation period the rate and magnitude of
formation, as well as size, of these &lt;br/&gt;abiotic microparticles were
similar to bacteria, and carbon-nitrogen ratios suggest they could be
&lt;br/&gt;nutritionally important. If a similar process occurs in the marine
environment it would by-pass the &lt;br/&gt;traditional biotic microbial loop in
terms of transforming DOM to POM and may constitute an &lt;br/&gt;important
alternate pathway, especially if labile DOM comprise major components of the
abiotic &lt;br/&gt;particle formation pathway. However, if the source material
of the microparticles are composed &lt;br/&gt;primarily of the refractory
fraction of the DOM pool then they may provide a poor nutritional source,
&lt;br/&gt;but may still make a significant contribution to the deep sea carbon
flux. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will examine the abiotic
formation of organic particles in two major contrasting &lt;br/&gt;ocean
environments: the oligotrophic North Pacific near Station ALOHA and the highly
productive &lt;br/&gt;upwelling zone off the Pacific coast of N. America (cruise
of opportunity). Carefully controlled &lt;br/&gt;time-series experimental
incubations will be conducted with filtered and poisoned surface (1% light
&lt;br/&gt;level) and deep (~1000 m) seawater to elucidate the formation rate,
size, quantity, composition and &lt;br/&gt;nutritional quality of abiotically
formed particles as well as a determination of source material.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The results of this research will provide a
first-order global estimate of the &lt;br/&gt;magnitude of this process in the
sea and its significance relative to the traditional microbial loop
&lt;br/&gt;pathway. If the abiotic formation of organic particles is a
significant process in the sea, then this &lt;br/&gt;process could be a
significant shunt to the microbial loop and would expand our understanding of
&lt;br/&gt;particle dynamics in the sea. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
There is a strong educational benefit to these studies. Undergraduate students
will &lt;br/&gt;be intimately involved in the planning and implementation of
this project, and will benefit from &lt;br/&gt;exposure to interdisciplinary
faculty from UH and other institutions involved with HOTs and other
&lt;br/&gt;cruises (informal education in the form of dissemination of ideas,
techniques and field experience). &lt;br/&gt;Project PI Cowen is a faculty
member of the Global Environmental Sciences, a rigorous &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
science major administered through the Department of Oceanography; it is
anticipated &lt;br/&gt;that undergraduate participation in this project will
lead to at least one student Senior Thesis. Cowen &lt;br/&gt;is also involved in
Science-Teacher outreach projects and will continue the very successful .Teacher
&lt;br/&gt;at Sea. outreach program initiated by Cowen as part of another NSF
project; this program integrates &lt;br/&gt;local teachers and their classrooms
into all phases of the research project; in this project we will
&lt;br/&gt;involve teachers in the local sample collections, incubation
experiments and analyses. Teachers. &lt;br/&gt;students will be invited to UH
ships and to analytical facilities for examination of project samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;