* 0404547
* Confident Bayes Regularization in Discrete Multi-way Layouts
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2008
* USD 368,532.00

In a discrete multi-way layout, each of the factors affecting measured response
takes on a finite number of levels, which may be either nominal (pure labels) or
ordinal (real-values whose order and magnitude bear information). Often, only
relatively few noisy observations are made at only some factor-level
combinations that form a subset of all theoretically possible combinations of
the factor levels. Basic problems in analyzing such sparse regression-type data
are to extract efficiently signal from noise at the observed factor-level
combinations; to assess intelligibly the uncertainty in the extracted signal;
and to extrapolate plausibly the extracted signal to the unobserved factor-level
combinations. This project will develop the following data-driven regularization
methodology: use a tractable general probability model for the incomplete multi-
way layout to motivate classes of candidate Bayes estimators for the means of
the multi-way layout; b) estimate the risk of each candidate estimator under
this general model; c) define the regularized estimator to be the candidate
estimator with smallest estimated risk; d) prove theoretically that the risk of
the regularized estimator converges asymptotically to that of the best candidate
estimator; e) develop confidence sets centered at the regularized estimator that
quantify the uncertainty of that estimator; f) experiment with the regularized
estimators on case-study data and on pertinent artificial data.

Important practical instances of the multi-way layout data treated in the
project are spatial data, the gene or protein chip data of bioinformatics, and
the digital images and videos of medical imaging or of industrial quality
control. The project will develop effective, semiautomatic algorithms for
separating pattern from unimportant details or noise in such data. Thereby, it
will serve to focus human intervention on the subtle questions that remain after
effective algorithmic analyses of large multi-way layouts. The project will
contribute to solving several core research challenges identified in Section 4
of the 2003 NSF Report "Statistics: Challenges and Opportunities for the Twenty-
First Century". Amongst these technical challenges are Bayes and biased
estimation, data reduction and compression, and structuring the interaction
between statistical theory and computational experiments. Project results will
be submitted for journal publication and will be posted on the PI's website. A
unified account of the methodology is planned for a monograph. Portions of the
project, including case study applications of the methodology to the data types
listed above, will guide Ph.D. thesis research by the PI's students.