* 0404462
* 2004 Plant-Herbivore Interactions Gordon Conference, February 29-March 5, 2004, Ventura California
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Ellen Simms, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2005
* USD 37,535.00

This is the 9th Gordon Research Conference on Plant-Herbivore Interactions (PHI
GRC), to be held February 29-March 5, 2004 in Ventura, California. This very
successful series will mark its 24th year with a program that looks to the
future of our field. New and emerging approaches and topics were selected by
surveying previous attendees, the broader community that studies plant herbivore
interactions, and the recent literature and granting patterns in the US and
Europe. The program features 24 scientists who have not appeared at previous PHI
GRCs in at least 9 years, whose research is currently producing new and exciting
results, and whose approaches include new methods or concepts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major topics will be: Microbial meddling in the lives of
herbivores, Diets of Generalists, Host specialization in insects, Ecology of
plant herbivore interactions, Multiple selection pressures, Plant allocation:
theory and mechanism, Transgenic (GM) plants: Problems and promise, Interactions
at multiple spatial &amp; temporal scales. This program should follow the
pattern of previous PHI GRCs and produce a highly diverse audience. An
innovation of the 9th conference, which focuses on future developments in the
study of plant-herbivore interactions, is the reservation of two 25-minute
speaking slots for outstanding graduate students who will be chosen on the basis
of their poster abstracts. All student applicants will be encouraged to submit
abstracts. This conference can be expected to help direct future work on plant-
herbivore interactions.&lt;br/&gt;