* 0404514
* Tests of the gravitational inverse square law and equivalence principle, and cryogenic torsion pendulum development
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Riley Newman, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 801,000.00

A program of laboratory tests of fundamental gravitational physics laws is to be
extended, in parallel with development of the cryogenic torsion pendulum as a
general tool for research in gravitational physics. Included in the research
program are: 1) a test of the inverse square distance dependence of the
gravitational force for mass separation on the order of 15 centimeters, 2) tests
of the weak equivalence principle over various ranges, for gravitational field
sources which include laboratory masses, a nearby mountain, and the sun, and 3)
completion of a measurement of the gravitational constant G. These projects are
conducted in a remote underground laboratory (Battelle Gravitational Physics
Laboratory, BGPL) which has been prepared with support from the Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory in a former Nike missile bunker on an isolated
environmental preserve near Richland, Washington. Most of this work is done in
collaboration with the gravitational physics group of Paul Boynton at the
University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A discovery of deviation of the
apparent gravitational force from the inverse square distance dependence of
Newton's law of gravity could signal the existence of new fundamental forces in
Nature, with profound implications for the laws of physics. Similarly, discovery
of a violation of the weak equivalence principle which asserts that all objects
fall with the same acceleration in a gravitational field, would have profound
implications. This principle, which is a foundation stone of Einstein's theory
of General Relativity, is predicted by many modern theories of gravitation to
fail at some level. The measurement of the gravitational constant G will help
resolve significant discrepancies among a number of measurements of this
fundamental constants made in the last two decades. Technological development of
the cryogenic torsion pendulum used in this work will be of potential benefit to
a wide range of experimental research in which it is important to measure small
macroscopic forces with extreme sensitivity.