* 0404659
* Planning for a National Center for Aircraft Technician Education
* EHR,DUE
* 10/15/2003,03/31/2005
* Floyd Curtis, Tarrant County College District
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/2005
* USD 70,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This planning grant project for a
National Center builds on a local project that&lt;br/&gt;-Developed competencies
for aircraft electronics specialty fields with over 100 employers.
&lt;br/&gt;-Developed curriculum for three of ten courses in the Avionics field.
&lt;br/&gt;-Developed select simulations of aircraft electrical systems,
offering low-cost access to instructional technology. &lt;br/&gt;-Field-tested
curriculum and instructional materials with incumbent technicians and
traditional students in Florida, Texas and Minnesota. &lt;br/&gt;-Hosted a
National Conference involving 100 educators, employers and government to examine
efforts to improve standards and curriculum and to build commitment to a
national learning agenda to be carried out by a National Center of Excellence.
&lt;br/&gt;-Established an online collegial network of technician educators
nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;-Established contracts to place interns at numerous
corporate flight departments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During the planning grant
the consortium is: &lt;br/&gt;-Formalizing a partnership to leverage the
expertise, experience and products of the Canadian Aviation Maintenance Council
(CAMC), a Center of Excellence in Canada. &lt;br/&gt;-Establishing procedures to
refine CAMC's national standards, curriculum, certification and accreditation
procedures for U.S. Avionics Technicians. &lt;br/&gt;-Designing a training
program to elevate faculty members' skills to the national standard.
&lt;br/&gt;-Securing donations of electronic simulations of instructional
technologies to make delivery of the training program financially feasible.
&lt;br/&gt;Developing a strategy to use and expand the Technician Educators'
Collegial Network. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The Federal
Aviation Administration has regulated the education and certification of U.S.
Airframe and Powerplant (A&amp;P) Technicians for decades. However, as aircraft
have become increasingly electronics driven, a career path has evolved for
technicians specializing in troubleshooting, maintenance and repair of aircraft
electrical and integrated flight systems. National standards, curricula and
regulatory oversight presently do not exist for Avionics Technicians. While the
FAA recognizes this gap, it has not filled it. Industry, labor and education
have come together, with participation and support from the FAA, to fill this
void in an effort to meet the workforce development needs of aircraft
manufacturers, component manufacturers, airlines, and repair stations throughout
the United States. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;