* 0404834
* Mathematical Analysis of Some Problems of Particle-Liquid Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Giovanni Galdi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 119,850.00

This project studies the motion of small particles in a viscous liquid. The
presence of the particles affects the flow of the liquid, and this, in turn,
affects the motion of the particles, so that the problem of determining the flow
characteristics is highly coupled. The goal of this project is to furnish a
mathematical analysis of some important and still not completely understood
aspects of this fascinating subject. Specifically, the project investigates the
motion of homogeneous, symmetric particles sedimenting in Newtonian and
viscoelastic liquids. The work aims to furnish a quantitative and rigorous
explanation of the so-called "tilt-angle phenomenon" observed in certain
viscoelastic liquids, as well as of the oscillatory behavior shown by the
particle at moderately large Reynolds number. The project also investigates the
well-posedness of the boundary and initial-boundary value problems associated
with the relevant equations of motion. Navier-Stokes and viscoelastic liquid
models such as Oldroyd-B with shear-dependent viscosity will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The orientation of homogeneous long bodies in liquids is a
fundamental issue in many problems of practical interest. In composite
materials, the addition of short fiber-like particles to a polymer matrix will
to enhance the mechanical properties of the material; for instance, it could
make the material softer or harder, and more durable. The degree of enhancement
depends strongly on the orientation of the fibers, and the fiber orientation is
in turn caused by the flow occurring in the mold. Another important application
occurs in separation of macromolecules by electrophoresis, which is employed in
weight determination of proteins, DNA sequencing, and diagnosis of genetic
disease. Electrophoresis involves the motion of charged particles
(macromolecules) in solution, under the influence of an electric field. The
orientation of the molecules plays an important role, since it is responsible
for the loss of separability during steady-field gel electrophoresis. A final,
but not less important, application of particle orientation occurs in blood
flow, where the blood cells under certain flow conditions tend to chain
themselves along the axis of the artery at certain preferred angles. This
project investigates fundamental mathematical questions underlying the behavior
of such particles interacting with the fluids in which they are
immersed.&lt;br/&gt;