* 0404116
* NER:     Geometry and Tensegrity Based Computational Modeling of Birus Assembly Pathways
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Carl Crane, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0404116&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of
Florida&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Sitharam , Meera&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER:
Geometry and Tensegrity Based Computational Modeling of&lt;br/&gt;Birus Assembly
Pathways&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Icosahedral viral
shell assembly is an outstanding, poorly understood example of nanoscale self-
assembly occuring in nature. Mostly identical protein monomers assemble with
high rate of efficacy into a closed icosahedral shell; onset and termination are
spontaneous, and assembly is robust, rapid and economical. All of these
requirements are both desirable and difficult to achieve when engineering self-
assembly at the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to
develop and test a formal, static model capable of answering focused questions
about viral shell assembly pathways, based on geometric constraints and
tensegrity concepts. The model development and testing crucially requires and
integrates the expertise of the 3 PIs in Computer Science, Structural Biology
and Mechanical Enginnering. By carefully defining and focusing on the questions
of interest, the model will avoid expensive dynamics and moreover will be fully
analyzable and refinable. A tractable and provably accurate computational
simulation of the formal model will also be developed. Biochemical and
mathematical justifications of the model assumptions and rigorous comparisons to
other models will be given. The model will be validated using real data from the
structure of 2 specific viruses that contain the minimal number of monomers and
are carefully chosen to test various aspects of the model: the predictions of
the model will be biochemically verified using known information about the
viruses and experiments that are designed to be completed in the project
period.&lt;br/&gt;