* 0404577
* Wave Turbulence:    A Wealth of Applications and a Rich Paradigm for Turbulent Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Alan Newell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2007
* USD 271,510.00

Abstract: DMS-0404577&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Newell and V
Zakharov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wave Turbulence: A Wealth of Applications and a
Rich Paradigm for Turbulent Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wave turbulence is the
study of the statistical behavior of solutions of field equations, usually
conservative and Hamiltonian, describing weakly nonlinear and dispersive wave
systems in the presence of sources and sinks. It has many applications, from
ocean waves to magnetohydrodynamics and optics. But it is not only of interest
because of applications. It provides a nontrivial tool for examining the long
time solution behavior of the underlying Hamiltonian partial di_erential
equations. It is extraordinarily rich in that, save for very rare circumstances,
the theory is not valid for all scales. We have recently developed an
understanding for how to predict the breakdown ranges in
which&lt;br/&gt;randomly occurring, robust and fully nonlinear coherent
structures occur. These lead to anomalous and intermittent behaviors whose
signatures can be seen dramatically in high order moments and sometimes even in
low order ones. It also leads to large deviations from Gaussian statistics.
Because in several cases it is possible to identify and understand the reasons
for the emergence of the randomly occurring structures, wave turbulence provides
a nontrivial paradigm for investigating the guiding principles governing
turbulent and nonequilibrium systems in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wave
turbulence has a wealth of applications and is also a most useful paradigm for
the study of nonequilibrium systems. Therefore, it is an excellent training tool
for students and young scientists because many solutions and bulk properties are
calculable, thus helping those new to the field to gain a concrete understanding
of central issues. The two PI's have been linked with formidable stables of
young researchers throughout their professional lives and have produced more
than 20 Ph.D's who are actively contributing to the field of nonlinear science.
Further, we include in this proposal several concrete actions we plan to take in
order to facilitate the training of new researchers, to collaborate with teams
throughout the world and to disseminate new results.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;