* 0404912
* Spontaneous Pattern Formation and Spontaneous Coherence of Excitons in Coupled Quantum Wells
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* David Snoke, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2007
* USD 414,000.00

This condensed matter physics project focuses on two novel effects in the optics
of semiconductor quantum well structures. The first is the appearance of
sharply-defined luminescence rings at the interface of a two-dimensional
electron gas and a two-dimensional hole gas. This project will explore the role
of Coulomb pressure, the nature of wavelike propagation in the hole gas, and the
effects of externally applied stress and magnetic field on this phenomenon. The
project will also aim at understanding the appearance of periodic structures in
the rings. which have been reported by another experimental group. The second
topic is the long-predicted phenomenon of spontaneous coherence of excitons at
low temperature. This project will develop new designs of the quantum well
structures to maximize the mobility and lifetime of the excitons. A major aim is
to understand the role of disorder in these systems. This project will use a
method of confining the excitons in an in-plane harmonic potential, developed in
earlier NSF-supported work, to make possible a Bose-Einstein condensate of
excitons in two dimensions. Students and post-doctoral associates will receive
training in cutting edge research that will prepare them for careers in academe,
industry, and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In semiconductor structures with
layers that have a thickness of just a few nanometers, electrons can be confined
to two-dimensional motion. This creates a negatively-charged "two-dimensional
electron gas." In the same way, a positively-charged two-dimensional gas can be
created, comprised of "holes" (missing electrons in one of the electron bands.)
Earlier work has shown it is possible to create both of these types of gases in
a single two-dimensional plane, and when this happens, a bright light emission
at the interface between the two gases is observed. This project will aim at
greater understanding of this recently-discovered effect, using cryogenics,
magnetic field, and stress to probe the system. In addition, electrons and holes
in this type of semiconductor nanostructure are predicted to spontaneously
acquire coherence similar to that of a laser or a superconductor. Some research
groups have already reported this to occur, but their claims depend strongly on
understanding the role of disorder in the samples. This project will aim to
create this novel state of matter in a controlled way, using new designs of
semiconductor quantum well structures with low disorder and new experimental
methods for confining the electrons and holes to a small region in the two-
dimensional plane. If this state is verified, it would be as significant as a
new type of superconductor. Students and post-doctoral associates will receive
training in cutting edge research that will prepare them for careers in academe,
industry, and government.&lt;br/&gt;