* 0404914
* SGER: Developing Statistical Models for the Diffusion of Educational Policies and Interventions
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* David Kaplan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 03/31/2006
* USD 100,351.00

The work described in this proposal is to catalog existing mathematical models
of diffusion that are likely to be of relevance to educational evaluation and
relate them to existing statistical methodologies that account for the non-
linear form of the diffusion process as well as the hierarchical organizational
structure of educational systems. In addition, this research will examine how
units (schools, individuals) transition across various states of innovation
adoption. Finally, the implications of this work for the quantitative evaluation
of educational interventions, and in particular the problem of scale-up, will be
explored. Three exploratory studies will be conducted.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
first study will begin by reviewing mathematical models of diffusion that are of
relevance to the study of educational innovations. These models derive from the
seminal work of Mahajan &amp; Peterson (1985). Following the cataloging of
relevant diffusion models, we will examine the utility of a series of
statistical models that capture various aspects of the diffusion process.
Specifically, we will study extensions of discrete time event-history modeling
as a method to account for among group variation in the rate of adoption of
educational innovations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The second study is based on the
premise that understanding how policies and interventions diffuse within and
across levels of the system requires an understanding of the characteristics of
individuals occupying adoption classes at all levels of the system and over
time. This study will examine latent transition analysis as a methodology to
more fully understand classes of adoption behavior and how to model how adoption
class membership can change over time.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The third study
examines the implications of diffusion modeling for the evaluation of
educational innovations. That is, the evaluation of an educational policy or
intervention at any given point in time is dependent on the numbers and types of
adopters at that time point. The problem of evaluating policies and
interventions within the framework of diffusion is akin to evaluating systems in
disequilibria. It is argued that the evaluation of a policy or intervention will
be sensitive to the fact that there may not exist a stable equilibrium of
adoption during the time of measurement. This sensitivity may have profound
effects on quantitative evaluations of policies and interventions. It is argued
that the proposed research will provide rigorous links between the established
literature on the diffusion of innovations and the equally established
literature on educational evaluation and policy analysis. Furthermore, the work
proposed here is timely, given the national focus on determining what works in
the context of educational interventions and the problem of scale-up. This
proposal seeks to develop methodologies that will provide insights into the
dynamics of intervention diffusion that can aid in the evaluation of
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;