* 0404972
* Compositional and Temperature Controls on Structural Order and Properties of Technological Oxide Glasses: NMR Studies and Thermodynamic Analyses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Jonathan Stebbins, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 620,997.00

The overall goal of this project is to better understand and predict the effects
of composition and temperature on the physical and chemical properties of oxide
glasses and glass-forming liquids, especially those containing major amounts of
boron oxide. Such materials have widespread use in technology and are also
fascinating examples of complex, partially disordered network systems. The
primary experimental approach will be to use solid-state Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) to quantitatively determine the short- to intermediate-range
structure. Advanced methods to enhance spectroscopic resolution, such as
multiple quantum 11B, 17O and 27Al NMR and the use of the very high field
spectrometers (e.g. 14.1 and 18.8 Tesla), will be applied. Crystalline model
compounds will be synthesized as needed to help correlate local atomic structure
with experimental observables, and to test the quantitation of spectra of
glasses. Temperature effects on the structure of precursor liquids will be
explored by studying samples of glass cooled at a wide range of rates,
facilitated by a specially developed rapid quench apparatus. Structure-based
thermodynamic models will be developed in order to link spectroscopic results to
critical properties such as configurational entropy, free energy, and thermal
expansivity. Other oxide glass systems will be explored as well, such as
oxyfluorides, oxychlorides, aluminophosphates, and
germanosilicates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxide glasses are used in many critical
technologies, from the relatively mundane (e.g. fiber glass) to the high-tech
(e.g. flat screen computer displays and optical data processing). Many of these
glasses contain boron oxide to help tailor their properties to the application.
Improvements in this technology are still often made by expensive, trial-and-
error methods. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) is one of the few available
methods that can quantitatively determine the atomic-scale structure of these
complex but vital materials, which in turn is essential to formulating accurate,
predictive models of how variations in composition and temperature can be used
to optimize their properties and invent new applications.