* 0404535
* Imputation for Survey Data with Ignorable or Nonignorable Nonresponse
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Jun Shao, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2008
* USD 111,000.00

The proposed research focuses on imputation and variance estimation after
imputation for survey data with nonresponse. The investigator will study
different models that relate auxiliary variables and the variable to be imputed
(e.g., parametric, non-parametric, and semi-parametric models); different
response mechanisms (ignorable or non-ignorable); various imputation techniques
(e.g., regression, nearest neighbor, and random imputation); different types of
estimators (e.g., sample mean and sample quantiles); and different types of data
(e.g., cross-sectional, clustered, or longitudinal data). The investigator will
also study a pseudo empirical likelihood imputation method that provides more
efficient survey estimators than other imputation methods. For each imputation
method, variance estimation that takes nonresponse and imputation into account
will be studied, using a direct derivation approach or a replication method
(such as the jackknife, the balanced half samples, and the bootstrap) that
contains a re-imputation component to assess the variability caused by
imputation.

Many statistics and government agencies collect data through surveys. Most
surveys have nonresponse. Item nonresponse occurs when some sampled units
cooperate in the survey but fail to provide answers to some questions.
Imputation techniques, which insert values for nonrespondents, are commonly used
compensation procedures for item nonresponse. In some cases, when auxiliary
information is properly used, imputation increases statistical accuracy. An
essential requirement for an imputation method is that one can obtain unbiased
(or approximately unbiased) survey estimators and their variability estimators
by treating the imputed values as observed data and using the standard
estimation formulas designed for the case of no nonresponse. This requires
developments on imputation methodology and statistical analysis procedures to
take nonresponse and imputation into account. Since most of the proposed
research topics are motivated by problems in survey agencies such as the Census
Bureau, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Westat, and Statistics Canada, results
obtained from the proposed research will have significant impacts on the
imputation and variance estimation methodology for these survey agencies.