* 0404350
* NER:  Molecule Diffraction and Interferometry Using NanoStructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Alexander Cronin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 07/31/2005
* USD 72,101.00

Controlling the quantum coherence of strongly interacting particles is one of
the grand challenges in quantum engineering. In this context, polar molecules
and electrons are strongly interacting compared to atoms and neutrons, because
of their electric dipole moment and electric charge. Coherent diffraction of
these particles from nano-scale structures will allow us to measure any
perturbations to their quantum state directly by observing the phase and
contrast in their de Broglie wave interference fringes.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore,
diffraction and interference of polar molecules represents research at the
interface between nanotechnology, condensed matter physics, and atomic physics.
Improved gratings with a 100-nanometer period have enabled several atomic
physics and atom-surface studies. The purpose of this NER proposal is to further
develop nanostructure grating technology to study polar molecules, clusters of
atoms, and also electrons.&lt;br/&gt; This research is exploratory because
charged particles or even molecules with large dipole moments are prone to
decoherence. Interactions with the environment, such as scattering molecules
from a background gas, or de-phasing due to stray electric fields, will reduce
the contrast of interference patterns. Even interactions with the nanostructure
gratings themselves may limit the phase coherence of molecule waves. This
research will prove the feasibility of matter wave interferometry with polar
molecules and electrons using nanotechnology gratings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once
proven, several experiments are possible with molecule and electron
interferometers. One application of a molecular interferometer is the
measurement of van der Waals interactions between isolated molecules and
surfaces a few nanometers away. Another application is to measure the tensor
components of polarizability for molecules and clusters. Inertial sensing with
molecules and holography with low energy electrons will also be studied.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular
interferometers are good candidates for ultra precise accelerometers and
gyroscopes. Because of their short wavelengths, molecular interferometers will
provide sensitivity to rotation rates smaller than 1E-9 radians per second given
one second of integration time. Gyroscopes with this sensitivity will be of
interest to geophysics as well as fundamental physics
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron diffraction from nanofabricated gratings
could revolutionize electron holography. Because the nanostructures work as
transmission optics with actual slots on the nanoscale, these gratings will
enable electron holography with two orders of magnitude smaller electron energy
than presently is possible.&lt;br/&gt;Education will be a major result of this
proposed work. Currently three graduate students, and four undergraduates work
on atom optics with the PI. Two students have the Optical Sciences Center as
their home department, so we are building strong ties between the Physics
Department and Optical Sciences Center at the University of Arizona. Our
laboratory gives approximately 30 tours a year to groups of high school
students, engineers, undergraduate classes, graduate students and visitors. The
P.I. also teaches physics classes each semester and gives talks on quantum
optics and new developments in matter wave interferometry. This outreach is
combined with web publications and journal articles to communicate
results.&lt;br/&gt;