* 0404762
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Long-Term Effects of the Developmental Environment on the Immune Response in Ring-Necked Pheasants (Phasianus Colchicus)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Jennifer Grindstaff, Grindstaff              Jennifer       L
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2006
* USD 152,871.00

0404762 Grindstaff

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-two-month research fellowship by Dr. Jennifer
L. Grindstaff to work with Dr. Henrik G. Smith at Lund University on Sweden.

Most research in ecological immunology assumes that developmental stress has
only short-term effects on offspring immune function. This project tests this
assumption in a population of ring-necked pheasants (Phasianus colchicus) by
quantifying the immune response of offspring in adulthood after experimentally
eliminating intestinal parasites in some individuals during ontogeny and/or
during the maternal breeding period. The immune responses during the period of
parasite manipulation are also measured to assess the effects of current
condition on the immune response. Finally, parents and offspring are genotyped
to determine the role of MHC genotype in the immune response to specific
antigens. This research will contribute to our understanding of the role of
development in modulating the adult phenotype and the influence of environmental
versus genetic differences in determining the magnitude of the immune response.