* 0404643
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Bipedal Obstetric Load and the Evolution of Human Lumbopelvic Sexual Dimorphism
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Liza Shapiro, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 06/30/2005
* USD 7,996.00

A developing fetus modifies maternal body proportions and mass distribution
introducing instability to the vertebral column and pelvis. This study
hypothesizes that human sexual dimorphism of lumbar vertebral and pelvic anatomy
represents, in part, unique female adaptations to structural risks associated
with biomechanics of fetal load. The hypothesis differs from the prevailing view
that lumbopelvic sexual dimorphism is entirely related to parturitional
selection favoring a maternal birth canal spacious enough for delivery of a
large-brained or large bodied neonate. As a framework for interpreting the scope
of human lumbopelvic sexual dimorphism, current conclusions may be limited by
focusing only on pelvic morphology directly related to the birthing event and by
failure to consider the attendant stresses of reproductive load. Persistent
interpretation of sexual dimorphism in lumbar and sacral vertebrae as compliant
to the pelvis obscures the possibility that the vertebrae perform a more
immediate function in trunk biomechanics. Although pregnancy is intermittent,
the duration and recurrence of fetal load exert marked stress on the postural
and locomotor skeleton, holding implications not only for modern humans but for
earlier bipeds as well. &lt;br/&gt; Sexual dimorphism of the lumbopelvic
skeleton will be examined morphometrically in 70 human females and 70 human
males and in a comparative sample of 600 individuals of 13 species of nonhuman
primates, including habitually erect taxa, to examine the prediction that
lumbopelvic sexual dimorphism is greater in humans than in other primates. To
investigate the biomechanical impact of human fetal load on the lumbopelvic
skeleton, spinal loading patterns of twenty pregnant females will be
kinematically identified for position of the maternal center of mass, curve of
the lower back and angle of anterior pelvic tilt. The experimental approach will
test hypotheses on weight redistribution and loading of the human female spine
and pelvis during pregnancy; while the comparative morphometric approach will
place these results into broader phylogenetic and evolutionary
contexts.&lt;br/&gt; The wider effects of this project are threefold. First,
reconstruction of adaptive patterns in bipedal obstetric load will provide
evolutionary depth to a human experience currently defined by clinical practice.
Second, the study will provide hands-on research experience for undergraduate
assistants who will gain both academic and practical training in project
management. Third, as a result of volunteer participation in this study,
interactions between the female public and the academic community will help to
advance women's access to current research and will ultimately inform the life
education of women. &lt;br/&gt;