* 0404615
* Statistical Mechanics of Biological Sequence Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ralf Bundschuh, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 167,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education at the interface between
condensed matter physics and biology. The biological sciences are undergoing a
revolutionary change fueled in part by the emergence of experimental techniques
that produce massive amounts of quantitative biological data that need to be
transformed into understanding of biological systems. The PI will use
statistical physics tools to develop new methods to predict the location of new
genes and of RNA editing sites in the mitochondrial genome of the slime mold
Physarum polycephalum. This organism edits its messenger RNAs so that the
translated messenger RNA sequence of a gene differs from its genomic sequence.
This RNA editing leads to a failure of conventional gene prediction techniques.
New transfer matrix algorithms aware of RNA editing will identify genes,
pinpoint editing sites, and shed light on the functioning of the editing
machinery. This project can be described in terms of a physical system with a
complex energy landscape. Beyond applying physical ideas to biological systems,
this interdisciplinary research also advances condensed matter physics by
opening new frontiers of inquiry and by advancing the statistical physics of
disordered systems.&lt;br/&gt;This award supports education at the undergraduate
and graduate levels. Students will learn computational techniques and concepts
from condensed matter physics and molecular biology. This helps provide well-
trained individuals for the modern workforce with a background that is at once
strong in biology and quantitative physical science. Through the development of
undergraduate and graduate courses in biophysics the base of students with an
interdisciplinary education will be expanded beyond the individuals immediately
involved in the research projects. The project will also yield new algorithms
for the interpretation of quantitative biological data. Algorithms developed in
the course of the research will be accessible to the broader materials research
and scientific communities. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education at the interface between condensed matter
physics and biology. The biological sciences are undergoing a revolutionary
change fueled in part by the emergence of experimental techniques that produce
massive amounts of quantitative biological data that need to be transformed into
understanding of biological systems. This research focuses on RNA-editing which
occurs in organisms as diverse as the Ebola virus and humans. Most genes are
copied into messenger RNA sequences that are in turn translated into proteins.
In organisms exhibiting RNA-editing, special machinery operates to modify the
messenger RNA before it is translated into proteins. This complicates the
identification of genes that result in the creation of specific proteins. It
also raises interesting questions about how the process works and why it is so
reliable. The PI will use statistical physics tools to develop new methods to
predict the location of new genes and of RNA editing sites in the mitochondrial
genome of the slime mold Physarum polycephalum. Beyond applying physical ideas
to biological systems, this interdisciplinary research also advances condensed
matter physics by opening new frontiers of inquiry and by advancing the
statistical physics of disordered systems.&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
education at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Students will learn
computational techniques and concepts from condensed matter physics and
molecular biology. This helps provide well-trained individuals for the modern
workforce with a background that is at once strong in biology and quantitative
physical science. Through the development of undergraduate and graduate courses
in biophysics the base of students with an interdisciplinary education will be
expanded beyond the individuals immediately involved in the research projects.
The project will also yield new algorithms for the interpretation of
quantitative biological data. Algorithms developed in the course of the research
will be accessible to the broader materials research and scientific
communities.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;