* 0404670
* Theories of Order and Dynamics in Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Tom Lubensky, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 360,000.00

This grant supports a broadly based theoretical program that will advance our
knowledge in three distinct areas: liquid crystal elastomers, chiral granular
gases, and systems with dissipative or diffusion coefficients that depend on
dynamical variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystalline elastomers are
materials that have both the elastic properties of rubber and the orientational,
and possibly positional, order of liquid crystals. The strong interplay between
orientational order, which is easily influenced by external fields, and elastic
distortion makes these materials candidates for a variety of interesting
applications from artificial muscles to actuators to stress tunable lasers. The
ideal nematic elastomer is a uniaxial rubber that forms via a symmetry-breaking
phase transition from an isotropic rubber. It is characterized by soft
elasticity in which one of the five elastic constants of an uniaxial solid
vanishes. Laboratory monodomain nematic elastomers are not formed in a process
of spontaneous symmetry breaking; they typically are prepared so that nematic
order is locked in at the time of crosslinking. These systems exhibit semi-soft
elasticity in which stress-strain relations at small strain are characterized by
the five elastic constants of a uniaxial solid but become more like those of
soft elasticity at larger strains. The first major goal of this research is to
improve our understanding of semi-soft elasticity through investigations of
models with an interplay between local bond directions and nematic order and to
develop theories for smectic-C elastomers, the ideal form of which exhibit
spontaneous broken symmetry and an associated soft elasticity in the plane of
the smectic layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rattlebacks are elongated objects that
have a preferred direction of spin on a flat surface. If the surface on which
they sit is subjected to a periodic vertical vibration, they will spin on
average in a single direction. This raises the possibility, recently realized in
experiments at Haverford College, of creating an unusual chiral granular gas
with a homogeneous input of spin angular momentum. The second major project in
this grant is the study of both the mechanisms leading to the preferred sense of
spin of individual grains in the chiral gas and the properties of the gas
itself. Of particular interest is the conversion of spin angular momentum to
center-of-mass vorticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The friction coefficient of a
colloidal particle depends on its distance from a stationary wall or from
another colloidal particle, and the diffusion coefficient of a binary mixture
can depend on the relative density of its components. The dynamical, but not
equilibrium, properties of systems such as these will differ from those of
systems whose dissipative coefficients do not depend on dynamical variables. The
third project of this grant is the study of and development of formalisms to
describe equilibrium systems with dissipative coefficients that depend on
dynamical variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of these projects
is primarily training and education of students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a broadly based
theoretical program that will advance our knowledge in three distinct areas:
liquid crystal elastomers, chiral granular gases, and systems with dissipative
or diffusion coefficients that depend on dynamical variables. The broader impact
of these projects is primarily training and education of students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;