* 0404458
* NIRT:  Nanoscale Electromolecular Lithography (NEL)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Xiang Zhang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,300,000.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, NSF 03-043, category NIRT (Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research
Team). A new nanoscale manufacturing technique - nanoscale electromolecular
lithography (NEL) is designed for the fabrication of nanoscale patterns on self-
assembled molecular resists by using an electric mask. In this project, the
merits of high-speed and scalable top-down engineering techniques will be
combined with high-resolution bottom-up self-assembly processes to create a
practical, reliable, and robust nano-manufacturing technique for general
application. Molecules will be designed and synthesized with specific
recognition elements to direct the formation of low-defect, self-assembled
molecular monolayers into pre-programmed patterns. A planar NEL mask with
nanoscale conductive patterns will be brought into electrical contact with the
molecular resist, and an electric field will be applied locally to the
molecules. The patterns on the masks will be transferred to the molecular resist
by an electrochemical "stamping" process in which the electric field either
cleaves a portion of the molecule from the surface or breaks the crosslinks
between the molecules.

The essence and the recent explosion of nanotechnology research can be traced
directly to advances in the ability to manufacture small nanostructures - as
small as ten thousandth the diameter of a human hair reproducibly, reliably, and
robustly. Although a wide range of nano-manufacturing techniques has been
developed, they all have different intrinsic problems and limitations. This NIRT
project plans to create a practical, reliable, and robust nano-manufacturing
technique by using electric field generated by small patterns on a mask to write
patterns on molecular resists. The advances anticipated from the
interdisciplinary efforts are at the pioneering forefronts of chemistry,
electrochemistry, and engineering. Given the expertise of the team, there is a
plan to apply NEL to the fabrication of nanoscale molecular electric circuits
and nanoscale chemical/bio sensors. The confluence of fundamental studies on a
problem with commercial potential is the perfect avenue to educate students in
state-of-the-art-techniques so that they will become skilled in the advanced
practices of their fields. Additionally, the team will support and expand the
current efforts of UCLA researchers to introduce high school students to
nanotechnology.