* 0405623
* Research in Geometric Group Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Ruth Charney, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2009
* USD 136,204.00

This project involves problems in geometric group theory and spaces of non-
positive curvature with a focus on Artin groups &lt;br/&gt;and Garside groups.
Artin groups span a wide range of groups including braid groups, free groups,
and free abelian groups. &lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project concerns
automorphism groups of right-angled Artin groups. These are finitely generated
groups &lt;br/&gt;whose presentations involve only commutator relations between
generators. By varying the number of commutator relations, &lt;br/&gt;right-
angled Artin groups may be viewed as "interpolating" between free groups and
free abelian groups. The automorphism &lt;br/&gt;groups of free groups have been
the focus of much research in recent years. They have been shown to have much in
common &lt;br/&gt;with linear groups, in particular with the automorphism groups
of free abelian groups. This project aims to put these &lt;br/&gt;results in a
broader context by studying the automorphism group of a general right-angled
Artin group. The key idea is to &lt;br/&gt;construct a contractible space,
analogous to Culler and Vogtmann's "outer space", on which the automorphism
group acts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the project concerns Garside
groups. Garside groups are groups with algorithmic properties similar to
&lt;br/&gt;those of braid groups. A Garside structure on a group gives a very
powerful tool for studying the combinatorial and geometric &lt;br/&gt;properties
of the group. This approach has been used extensively in the study of finite
type Artin groups. While no such &lt;br/&gt;structure exists for infinite type
Artin groups, it appears that something close to a Garside structure may exist
for at &lt;br/&gt;least some of these groups. The project will consider various
generalizations of Garside groups and their
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symmetries of geometric objects have been
studied since ancient times and have played an important role in many areas of
&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and the sciences. They form the model for the abstract
mathematical notion of a "group". Groups arise in nearly &lt;br/&gt;every field
of mathematics. While not all groups occur naturally as symmetry groups, it is
always possible to construct&lt;br/&gt;geometric objects on which a given group
acts as symmetries. In recent years, this interplay between groups and geometry
&lt;br/&gt;has been increasingly exploited to understand various types of
infinite groups. A particularly interesting class of groups &lt;br/&gt;that
lends itself to such techniques are the "braid groups". The n-strand braid
group, as the name suggests, encodes the &lt;br/&gt;different ways that a set of
n strings can be braided. It also describes the different ways that a collection
of n particles&lt;br/&gt; can move around in a plane. Braid groups have
applications to topology, mathematical physics, and cryptography.
&lt;br/&gt;Another fundamental class of groups are the "free groups". These
groups form the foundation for studying algorithmic and &lt;br/&gt;combinatorial
properties of groups in general. In this project we will study a large class of
groups, known as Artin groups, &lt;br/&gt;that includes the braid groups, the
free groups, and many others. The project aims to reach a better understanding
of Artin &lt;br/&gt;groups by studying geometric objects associated with them,
as well as searching for new algorithmic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;