* 0405526
* Collaborative Research:  Systems of Ordinary Differential Equations - Inverse and Non-Self-Adjoint Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Friedrich Gesztesy, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 94,864.00

Abstract: 0405528/0405526 Gesztesy/Clark University of Missouri Columbia and
Rolla&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Systems of Ordinary
Differential Equations - Inverse and Non-Self-Adjoint Problems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research is proposed in two areas of systems of
ordinary&lt;br/&gt;differential equations pertaining to inverse spectral
problems and a&lt;br/&gt;class of non-self-adjoint singular Dirac-type boundary
value&lt;br/&gt;problems. The research problems proposed lead to
important&lt;br/&gt;applications in connection with
completely&lt;br/&gt;integrable nonlinear evolution equations and to
applications in&lt;br/&gt;soliton based optical communication systems. The first
area is&lt;br/&gt;concerned with inverse spectral problems with emphasis
on&lt;br/&gt;characterizing isospectral manifolds for&lt;br/&gt;self-adjoint
matrix-valued Schroedinger and Dirac-type operators with&lt;br/&gt;periodic (and
certain classes of quasi-periodic) coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;The techniques
involved comprise matrix-valued Herglotz functions,&lt;br/&gt;inverse spectral
theory, uniqueness theorems of Borg and&lt;br/&gt;Hochstadt-type, and pencils of
matrices and their factorizations. The&lt;br/&gt;second area is concerned with
spectral theory for a non-self-adjoint&lt;br/&gt;singular boundary value problem
associated with a particular&lt;br/&gt;Dirac-type operator. The latter permits
the existence of&lt;br/&gt;Weyl-Titchmarsh-type solutions for any point in its
resolvent set&lt;br/&gt;under the most general hypothesis of merely local
integrability of&lt;br/&gt;the potential coefficient. This property has not
previously been&lt;br/&gt;observed in non-self-adjoint boundary value problems
and hence makes&lt;br/&gt;this Dirac-type operator a model operator of
particular interest. The&lt;br/&gt;common thread through all the problems
proposed is the use of&lt;br/&gt;(matrix-valued) Weyl-Titchmarsh-type functions
which encode all&lt;br/&gt;spectral information of the underlying Schroedinger
and Dirac-type&lt;br/&gt;systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inverse spectral theory
for self-adjoint Schroedinger and Dirac-type&lt;br/&gt;boundary value problems,
as proposed in the first part of this&lt;br/&gt;proposal, is one of the pillars
of applications of spectral theory to&lt;br/&gt;the applied sciences including
theoretical physics (quantum physics),&lt;br/&gt;geophysics (seismology),
medicine (tomography), etc. As such, it is&lt;br/&gt;an integral part of modern
applied mathematics. In addition, this&lt;br/&gt;first part permits applications
to completely integrable systems,&lt;br/&gt;especially to soliton equations such
as the nonabelian Korteweg-de&lt;br/&gt;Vries and the defocusing nonlinear
Schroedinger hierarchies of&lt;br/&gt;evolution equations. Completely integrable
systems of this type, a&lt;br/&gt;rapidly developing field in pure and applied
mathematics especially&lt;br/&gt;since the second half of the 20th century, have
widespread and&lt;br/&gt;multifaceted applications which include shallow water
wave modelling,&lt;br/&gt;various aspects of nonlinear optics, and problems in
condensed matter&lt;br/&gt;physics. On the other hand, many concrete
applications of completely&lt;br/&gt;integrable systems naturally lead to non-
self-adjoint boundary value&lt;br/&gt;problems. A prime example would be the
area of nonlinear optics as&lt;br/&gt;modelled by the focusing nonlinear
Schroedinger equation. The latter&lt;br/&gt;is intimately connected with a non-
self-adjoint Dirac-type operator,&lt;br/&gt;the principal object of study in the
second part of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;While general spectral theory (and
especially inverse spectral&lt;br/&gt;theory) for such non-self-adjoint Dirac
operators is still in its&lt;br/&gt;infancy, we propose a new model for a
soliton based optical communication&lt;br/&gt;system based upon our proposed
study of a special class of soliton&lt;br/&gt;potentials relative to a periodic
background potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;