* 0405976
* Some Inverse Problems in Elasticity, Financial Markets, and Scattering Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Victor Isakov, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 185,650.00

Abstract: 0405976 Isakov, Wichita State University

Some Inverse Problems in Elasticity, Financial Markets, and Scattering Theory



We consider three important areas of inverse problems, where the main goal is to
study uniqueness, stability, and numerical methods for reconstruction of
coefficients of partial differential equations and systems from additional
boundary data. The work on elasticity theory targets finding elastic parameters
in isotropic and some anisotropic media from dynamical boundary data. We plan to
attack fundamental open questions in case of zero (many boundary data) and
special nonzero initial conditions. A close topic is uniqueness and increased
stability in inverse problems for the Helmholtz equation, with emphasis on some
challenging problems from scattering theory, like uniqueness of the potential
and of an hard obstacle from the data at fixed frequency or at a fixed direction
of an incident wave. The PI expects to use Carleman estimates, microlocal
analysis, and potential theory, and to invent new approproate tools. Another
area of research concerns determination of so-called volatility coefficient in
the Black-Scholes model of option markets from market data. Here the emphasis
will be on localization properties of the inverse problems, on volatility slowly
changing with time, and on more complicated and realistic cases of American and
index options.

The results of research are expected to improve resolution of determination of
interior properties of elastic materials and of interior of the Earth from
noninvasive exterior measurements. The work on inverse option pricing should
generate an effective and valuable tool of evaluation of current state of
economy, especially of financial markets from current data, and hence to predict
economical situation in near future. So the applications are to materials and
manufacturing, environment, and civil infrastructure

