* 0405252
* Propagation of Fronts in Porous Media Combustion
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Peter Gordon, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 10/31/2005
* USD 88,801.00

This research project is focused on mathematical analysis of the propagation and
stability of fronts in a porous medium. The project is motivated by recent
theoretical advances that revealed a number of new effects and regimes in porous
media combustion, such as low-velocity (subsonic) detonation, deflagration to
detonation transitions, and various types of instabilities. This work studies a
model for combustion in porous media consisting of three degenerate parabolic
equations for temperature, concentration of the deficient reactant, and
pressure. The project investigates the long-time behavior of the combustion
fronts, their stability, and bounds on propagation velocity. Stability will be
explored by a combination of numerical and analytical tools. The project also
studies the so-called high activation energy limit, as well as the transition
from slowly propagating deflagration to detonation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Premixed gas combustion is the combustion of gaseous
reactants that are perfectly mixed prior to ignition. The most distinctive
feature of premixed combustion is its ability to assume a self-sustained
reaction front propagating subsonically or supersonically at a well-defined
speed. Combustion fronts constitute a truly fascinating dynamical system,
displaying an amazingly rich variety of phenomena, such as non-uniqueness of
possible propagation regimes, their birth (ignition) and destruction
(extinction), chaotic self-motion and fractal-like growth, and various
hysteretic transitions. The current project is concerned with the mathematical
analysis of combustion front dynamics in a porous medium, involving evaluation
of the propagation velocity, its limits, stability, and the transition from
deflagrative to detonative combustion. The results of the work have potential
application to engineering design of propulsion systems.&lt;br/&gt;