* 0405263
* UMEB:  Mentoring Undergraduate Research in Conservation Biology and Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Steven Johnson, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Alan H. Savitzky
* 07/31/2009
* USD 438,902.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Pamela O'Neil at the University of New Orleans
to develop an undergraduate research program designed to increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in environmental biology. There are
several specific goals of the proposed program. First, we would like to expose
students from underrepresented groups at UNO to a broad range of approaches to
environmental biology so that they are aware of the diversity of opportunities
that are available. Second, we will provide a diversity of role models that the
students will be exposed to in settings that are less formal than students
experience in a classroom. Third, we will provide a stepwise developmental
experience lasting two or more years that is structured to build confidence. The
Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology (UMEB) award will allow us to
meet all 3 goals and to provide a unique research training experience in
environmental biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student experience will include
a first year introductory seminar designed to expose students to a broad range
of possible research experiences, role models, and approaches to doing science
as well as a Research Tools course designed to provide a basic toolbox necessary
for any research experience. The second year of the program students will become
directly involved in an independent research project and will also participate
in weekly group meetings with UMEB advisors, graduate students and undergraduate
researchers. After completing the research year, UMEB participants will present
their results in both oral and written format. An optional third year of the
program will allow exceptional students who wish to continue to do research in
the same area or a different area to be able to continue at an advanced level.
Our ultimate goal is to increase the number of students from under-represented
groups pursuing careers in environmental biology by preparing students for
graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research theme of our UMEB program is
centered on conservation biology. The Biology Department at UNO has a Ph.D.
program in conservation biology and a concentration of faculty who are
conducting research in this or closely related areas. The research expertise of
our mentors includes conservation genetics, conservation ecology, population
biology, ecosystem ecology, physiological ecology, and molecular approaches to
environmental biology. The proposed UMEB program is expected to have clear
broader impacts of training under-represented minorities as well as intellectual
merit in the high quality research that will result. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;