* 0405627
* Structure-Reactivity Correlation in Atom Transfer Radical  Polymerization and Addition Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 464,875.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program support Professor Krzysztof
Matyjaszewski of the Department of Chemistry at Carnegie Mellon University for
research on atom transfer radical polymerization, which is based on the use of
radical polymerization to convert monomer to polymer. The purpose of the
proposed research is to perform a systematic mechanistic investigation into the
transition metal catalyzed atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) and
addition (ATRA).The main goal is to determine the structure of the catalytic and
intermediate species in both ATRP and ATRA, and to build a comprehensive
structure-reactivity relationship for alkyl, (pseudo)halogen, transition metal,
and ligand components of these reactions under different conditions. The ability
of ATRP and ATRA to produce well-controlled products depends heavily on these
kinetic parameters, and therefore their determination is of vital importance in
the development of new and more efficient catalysts. The systematic
investigation of the structures and reactivities of the species involved in ATRA
and ATRP will lead to a greater depth of understanding of these reactions. This
will advance and optimize both synthetic methods, such as the development of
more effective catalysts, and expansion of the range of polymerizable monomers
to alpha-olefins, vinyl acetate and acrylic acid, which will allow new materials
to be produced more efficiently and with greater yields and
selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular Program
supports Professor Krzysztof Matyjaszewski of the Department of Chemistry at
Carnegie Mellon University whose research program has substantial technological
and economic significance. Living radical polymerization can be used to produce
new classes of advanced materials for applications in electronics, fabrication,
and environmental uses. Results from the fundamental studies emerging from this
research will impact advances in many technologies including sensors, which are
important to security issues. This project will also continue to educate and
train students in several technologically significant areas of polymer chemistry
and material science. &lt;br/&gt;