* 0405748
* A Contour Based Monte Carlo Algorithm with Applications to Computational Statistics and Bioinformatics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Faming Liang, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 90,000.00

Simulation from complex systems, such as proteins, neural networks,
and&lt;br/&gt;spin-glasses, is one of the most challenging problems in
scientific&lt;br/&gt;computation. The energy landscape of these systems can be
characterized&lt;br/&gt;by a multitude of local energy minima separated by high
energy &lt;br/&gt;barriers. In simulation from these systems, the conventional
Markov&lt;br/&gt;chain Monte Carlo algorithms, such as the Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm&lt;br/&gt;and the Gibbs sampler, tend to get trapped in one of local
energy&lt;br/&gt;minima indefinitely, rendering the simulation
ineffective.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop an effective
Monte Carlo&lt;br/&gt;algorithm for simulation from complex systems, and to
apply the new&lt;br/&gt;algorithm to some computational problems in statistics
and&lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics, including molecular structure prediction,
phylogeny&lt;br/&gt;estimation, neural network training, combinatorial
optimization,&lt;br/&gt;optimal design, highest posterior density (HPD) interval
construction,&lt;br/&gt;model selection, and others. The preliminary results
show that the&lt;br/&gt;contour Monte Carlo algorithm, which is proposed in this
research,&lt;br/&gt;will potentially play a leading role in stochastic
optimization in&lt;br/&gt;place of other algorithms, such as simulated annealing
and genetic&lt;br/&gt;algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research
algorithms are developed that are potentially useful &lt;br/&gt;in many fields
such as biology, engineering, and the social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;These
algorithms are powerful in identifying best solutions to &lt;br/&gt;optimization
problems in applied sciences. Students, researchers, and &lt;br/&gt;users of
statistics, such as computational biologists and computer &lt;br/&gt;scientists,
will benefit from this research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;