* 0405326
* Inorganic and Organic Thin Film and Interface Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Eugene Irene, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 357,305.00

This project embodies a fundamental materials science study of inorganic and
organic interfaces that have technological significance in
electronics/photonics. Building on results of previous studies that focused on
key microelectronics reactions of oxidation and nitridation of Si and the
organic polymer film poly o-methoxyaniline (POMA) on SiO2 covered Si, this
research is extended to include complex inorganic oxide interfaces that have
relevance for high dielectric constant (K) insulators, and for ferroelectrics
and piezoelectrics, and to combine selected organic films that are p-type
semiconductors with stable n-type organic semiconductors to fabricate and
characterize prototype device structures made from novel interfaces. The
fundamental materials science issue is to understand the nature and extent of
interface reactions and then to assess the impact of the chemical/physical
nature of the interface with resultant interfacial electronic properties as
determined from well-characterized interfaces. The research strategy is to
follow the evolution of interface formation in real time via in situ real-time
ellipsometry as well as other situ real-time characterization methodologies to
provide assessments of chemical composition, structure and optical properties.
Interface sensitive characterization techniques such as spectroscopic immersion
ellipsometry, fractal analysis, and Fowler-Nordheim tunnel current oscillations
will be included. Several interface and thin film preparation processes will be
utilized: thermal, and ion sputtering for inorganic interfaces and chemical and
electrochemical solution methods for organic films. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. The research topic,
specifically interfaces formed with high dielectric constant and ferroelectric
materials, and the emerging field of organic electronic materials is critical to
future progress in nanoscale electronics. An important feature of the project is
the integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. This research activity
provides training of graduate and undergraduate students and post doctorals in
an industrially relevant area of research. The research is collaborative with
participants that include university students from the University of North
Carolina and James Madison University (Prof. B. Augustine with an ROA), national
laboratory collaborator (Dr. O. Auciello at ANL), and a small business owner
(Dr. A. Schultz of Ionwerks Inc.). Participants share their differing
perspectives, students get experience in different professional environments,
and research results can be readily implemented in industry and government.
Students will also be able to participate in research conducted in the new
National Center for Nanomaterials (CNM) in progress at ANL. The PI has
successfully recruited and graduated students from underrepresented groups, and
will continue to do so. It is anticipated that all participating students will
have made presentations at international meetings during their degree time and
will have published several papers in refereed international
journals.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;