* 0405538
* Molecular Spectroscopy of Carbon Nanotubes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Mildred Dresselhaus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/2007
* USD 335,216.00

The objective of this project is to advance the spectroscopy of single wall
carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) in a major way by studying new phenomena in their
discovery phase, by examining controversial and unresolved issues concerning
spectroscopic phenomena associated with the one-dimensionality of carbon
nanotubes, and by developing new capabilities for studying the spectroscopy of
carbon nanotubes. The approach is to focus on four topics: 1) experimentally
elucidate the newly discovered unusual phenomena associated with combination
modes in the resonance Raman spectra in the intermediate frequency range of
600-1100 cm-1 where new turn-on/turn-off phenomena are observed, as the laser
excitation energy is varied, and then explaining the physics behind the newly
observed phenomena; 2) develop a strategy for resolving through experimental
investigation of the two seemingly different interpretations for the fundamental
mechanism responsible for the dominant G-band spectral features in single wall
carbon nanotubes, namely, whether these features are due to first-order
scattering processes or to double resonance processes. According to this
strategy, conditions favorable for the study of the two processes will be
created so that their interrelation can be studied quantitatively; 3)
improvement of the signal-to-noise in Raman spectroscopy measurements at the
single nanotube level by developing techniques for measuring spectra on freely
suspended individual single wall nanotubes. This research is expected to
experimentally resolve phenomena that were previously buried in the noise and
thus to open up new research directions; 4) develop a strategy for gaining an
understanding of the relationship between the singularities in the electronic
density of states as observed in single molecule Raman scattering and in
photoluminescence, by systematically carrying out the two types of studies on
the same individual nanotubes. Measurements on both bundles of SWNTs and on
individual SWNTs will be carried out. At present, the two techniques give
results that appear to differ regarding both the values of the resonant energies
that have been reported and the spread of the ensemble of resonant energies
observed at constant diameter. %%% The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. An
important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students and postdoctoral researchers in a fundamentally
and technologically significant area. The project assists development of
technical, communication, and organizational/management skills in students
through unique educational experiences made possible by a highly collaborative
forefront research environment. The research is expected to have broad impacts
through the training of young men and women leaders in the field, by the wide
dissemination of the findings of this research through invited talks and
publications, and through the preparation of tutorial review articles to
interrelate the work of various researchers in the field, and to identify future
research areas of importance and promise. The principal investigator and her
students will continue to disseminate advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology
to the public through invited talks to general audiences, and through advisory
work for the government, industrial laboratories, universities and professional
societies. ***