* 0405694
* Constructing Optimal Factorial Designs for Multiple Groups of Factors: Theory, Methods and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Yu Michael Zhu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 77,000.00

Fractional factorial designs (FFDs) are among the most popularly used
experimental plans in practice. Most existing theory and methods for FFDs assume
that the factors involved in an experiment are symmetrical. In many
applications, however, this assumption does not hold, because experiments can
involve multiple groups (or types) of factors (MGFs). Different types of factors
have different implications for design and analysis, therefore they need to be
treated differently. Three typical examples are Taguchi's robust parameter
design experiments, Addelman's compromise plans and experiments with both
qualitative and quantitative factors. This project is intended to develop
general theory and methods for constructing optimal designs with MFGs. Based on
the preliminary results on robust parameter design, various trade-off strategies
will be generalized to designs with MFGs and their theoretical properties will
be studied and characterized. Due to the presence of different types of factors,
the aliasing properties of these designs are much complicated. The investigator
will study the letter patterns and the coset patterns so as to propose proper
criteria for the construction of optimal designs. The structure function
approach developed by the investigator earlier will be further extended and used
in this research. The theory and methods for constructing nonregular FFDs with
MGFs will also be investigated and developed. Based on the theory and methods
developed in this project, optimal designs with economical run size will be
constructed and tabulated for experimenters in practice.

Statistical design and analysis of experiments are widely used in scientific
investigation and industrial research and development. The study of experimental
design is aimed at constructing optimal experimental plans that allow
experimenters to collect data and discover knowledge in an economical and
efficient way. This project is motivated by the application of experimental
design methodology for quality improvement in manufacturing industry, especially
the robust parameter design technology. An experiment in robust parameter design
usually involves multiple groups (or types) of factors, which have different
implications in design and analysis. Most existing design theory and methods
assume the symmetry between factors, thus are not directly applicable for robust
parameter design. In general, experiments can include multiple groups of factors
(MGFs), which should be treated differently in order to generate optimal
experimental plans. In this project, the investigator intends to develop general
theory and methods for constructing optimal factorial designs for experiments
with MGFs. The project consists of three major components. The first component
is to investigate the combinatorial and aliasing properties of fractional
factorial designs with MGFs; the second component is to propose various
optimality criteria for the construction of optimal designs with MGFs; the third
component is to theoretically characterize the optimal designs and tabulate them
for experimenters in practice. The project will advance the theory and
methodology of experimental design as well as enhance efficient data collection
and knowledge discovery in scientific investigation, quality improvement and
other applications.