* 0405394
* UHV Studies of Metals Dry-Etching with Beta-Diketones
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Laura Ford, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2009
* USD 201,767.00

This project addresses etching and decomposition reaction pathways of beta-
diketones on copper, aluminum oxide, NiFe, and tungsten surfaces. Etching metals
with beta-diketones is relevant to metal layer removal and for wafer and chamber
cleaning in the electronics industry, as well as other potential applications
such as redispersion of agglomerated, inactive catalyst particles. Some of the
beta-diketones are friendlier to the environment than currently used halogenated
etchants. Additionally, lower temperatures and pressures than in current
processes are used, which decreases migration and diffusion between
microelectronics layers. Copper is used in semiconductor integrated circuits and
in magnetic recording heads, and copper must be etched as well as deposited in
the fabrication of these products. It has been proposed that a detrimental
polymer forms when hexafluoropentanedione decomposes on copper; understanding
the polymer formation mechanism is also part of this project, so that it can be
avoided or minimized. The polymer structure and formation mechanism will be
studied using Auger electron spectroscopy, temperature-programmed desorption
spectroscopy, and reflection/absorption infrared spectroscopy to determine the
polymer bonding and composition. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
fundamental research issues associated with electronic/photonic materials having
technological relevance. Basic understanding and technological advances in
etching processes are beneficial to electronics/photonics, and to the
environment. The project effectively integrates research and education, and
creates an opportunity for the training of graduate and undergraduate students
in materials science areas where there is an established need for a highly
trained workforce. Part of the students' training will be participation in a
Materials Research Group (MRG), an interdisciplinary group formed to allow
graduate students to present their work and to inform other professors of
research going on in other departments. The PI is one of seven professors from
four participating departments: Chemical Engineering, Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Mechanical Engineering, and Physics and Engineering Physics. A
goal of the group is to encourage collaboration between the professors. The
Materials Research Group collectively works toward broad based,
interdisciplinary education and training by exposing students to other
disciplinary research and by providing them the opportunity to practice public
speaking.&lt;br/&gt;***