* 0405884
* Large Scale Geometry and Compactifications of Arithmetic Groups, Symmetric Spaces and Buildings
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Lizhen Ji, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 10/31/2006
* USD 35,000.00

Symmetries have played an important role in sciences and arts&lt;br/&gt;and are
described in terms of group theory. Two important types of&lt;br/&gt;groups are
discrete groups and Lie groups.&lt;br/&gt;Lie groups are closely related to
homogeneous spaces.&lt;br/&gt;An important class of homogeneous spaces consists
of&lt;br/&gt;symmetric spaces, a very distinguished class of special
Riemannian&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. Examples of symmetric spaces include the
Euclidean spaces&lt;br/&gt;and the spheres in them. Another type of symmetric
spaces&lt;br/&gt;is given by hyperbolic spaces, in which there are
infinitely&lt;br/&gt;many nonparallel lines which do not intersect with each
other.&lt;br/&gt;Discrete groups acting on symmetric spaces give rise to
locally&lt;br/&gt;symmetric spaces; for example, surfaces with constant
curvature&lt;br/&gt;are locally symmetric spaces.&lt;br/&gt;The interplay
between the topology, geometry and group theory&lt;br/&gt;of discrete groups,
Lie groups and locally symmetric spaces&lt;br/&gt;has been intensively studied
in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the PI proposes to study
the Novikov conjectures&lt;br/&gt;for arithmetic groups using the large scale
geometry and&lt;br/&gt;compactifications of symmetric spaces of noncompact
type.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, an important invariant of the asymptotic
geometry&lt;br/&gt;is the asymptotic dimension, the finiteness of which is
closely&lt;br/&gt;related to the Novikov conjectures. For a torsion free
arithmetic&lt;br/&gt;subgroup of a semisimple algebraic group,&lt;br/&gt;the
partial Borel-Serre compactification&lt;br/&gt;of the associated symmetric space
is the universal covering&lt;br/&gt;of the classifying space of the arithmetic
group. For applications&lt;br/&gt;to the Novikov conjectures, we need a large
compactification of the&lt;br/&gt;partial Borel-Serre compactification. To study
S-arithmetic subgroups,&lt;br/&gt;a generalization of arithmetic groups, we also
need compactifications&lt;br/&gt;of Bruhat-Tits buildings. Compactifications of
symmetric&lt;br/&gt;spaces and buildings are also important for other purposes.