* 0405578
* Geometry of Conformal and Quasiconformal Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Christopher Bishop, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405578&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Christopher Bishop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI, Christopher
Bishop, will study the geometric properties&lt;br/&gt;of conformal and
quasiconformal mappings, focusing on the&lt;br/&gt;interactions between
conformal structures, hyperbolic geometry,&lt;br/&gt;low dimensional topology
and numerical analysis. For example,&lt;br/&gt;Moore's theorem states that if we
take a certain collection of&lt;br/&gt;sets on the 2-sphere and topologically
collapse them to points&lt;br/&gt;then we obtain a new topological sphere. The
PI will investigate&lt;br/&gt;when the quotient map can be conformal and will
consider a number&lt;br/&gt;of concrete problems from this general perspective,
including&lt;br/&gt;conformal welding, characterizations of John domains,
Koebe's&lt;br/&gt;conjecture, construction of Kleinian groups and other
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;objects. The PI will continue his earlier work on the
geometry&lt;br/&gt;of Kleinian limit sets and the behavior of the dimension as
we&lt;br/&gt;deform the limit set. The PI will also continue his work on
the&lt;br/&gt;connections between computational geometry, hyperbolic
geometry&lt;br/&gt;and conformal mappings, and seek new algorithms which compute
the&lt;br/&gt;Riemann mapping quickly and with rigorous error estimates.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular he will investigate computing conformal maps using
the&lt;br/&gt;medial axis (an object from computational geometry) which
is&lt;br/&gt;closely linked to 3-dimensional hyperbolic geometry via
convex&lt;br/&gt;hulls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformal mappings are important
both for their central role in&lt;br/&gt;numerous mathematical problems (complex
analysis, dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems,...) and in various applications (fluid
flow, brain&lt;br/&gt;mapping, statistical physics, numerical analysis of
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations,...), so we must have a good theoretical
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of these maps and good methods for computing them
in&lt;br/&gt;practice. The proposal deepens our theoretical understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;conformal maps by investigating new connections with other
parts&lt;br/&gt;of mathematics and computer science (point set
topology,&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional hyperbolic geometry, Voronoi diagrams) and
seeks to&lt;br/&gt;use these connections to invent new algorithms for
computing&lt;br/&gt;conformal maps. For example, the medial axis is a widely
studied&lt;br/&gt;object in computer science (it is a description of the shape
on&lt;br/&gt;an object which has numerous applications in pattern
recognition,&lt;br/&gt;robotic motion, biology,...). The PI discovered it can
also be&lt;br/&gt;used to give a rough but fast approximation to conformal
maps.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will seek to improve this method, giving better
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for conformal maps and also developing a better
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the medial axis which will impact its other
applications (for&lt;br/&gt;example, the medial axis can change drastically when
the object&lt;br/&gt;being described changes only a little; this is a
serious&lt;br/&gt;computational problem which can be addressed by thinking of
the&lt;br/&gt;medial axis as an object in hyperbolic geometry instead of
the&lt;br/&gt;usual Euclidean geometry). The connection between the medial
axis&lt;br/&gt;and conformal maps may also lead to new ideas for
studying&lt;br/&gt;applications in three dimensions (where conformal mappings do
not&lt;br/&gt;exist, but maps based on the medial axis still do).
Three&lt;br/&gt;dimensional problems are the most important for applications,
but&lt;br/&gt;our understanding lags far behind the two dimensional case,
so&lt;br/&gt;new two dimensional ideas which generalize to higher
dimensions&lt;br/&gt;are important.&lt;br/&gt;