* 0405088
* Quasiparticle Spectroscopic Studies of the Pairing State and Competing Orders in Hole- and Electron-Doped Cuprate Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Nai-Chang Yeh, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

High-temperature superconducting cuprates are doped Mott insulators with strong
electronic correlation. Depending on the doping level (d) and the sign of the
dopant (hole- or electron-doping) in the CuO(2) planes, the electronic and
structural anisotropies, and disorder, different competing orders can emerge in
the ground state of these cuprates. These competing orders give rise to various
non-universal phenomena that have masked better understanding for the pairing
mechanism of cuprate superconductivity. The primary objective of this project is
to unravel the physical origin of various non-universal phenomena and to
identify truly ubiquitous characteristics among all cuprates. The technical
approach will involve systematic experimental studies of hole- and electron-
doped cuprates of different doping levels (d) and with controlled substitutions
of quantum impurities, using a new homemade variable-temperature high-field-
compatible scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and other auxiliary
characterization tools in the PI's group. In addition, numerical computations of
the quasiparticle local density of states (LDOS) for different model
Hamiltonians will be performed. The proposed research is of significant
educational value because of the range of experimental skills and the depth of
theoretical knowledge required of the participants to accomplish the tasks.
Successful completion of the research can scientifically advance current
understanding of the pairing mechanism of cuprate superconductivity and of the
competing orders in other strongly correlated electronic systems, whereas
technologically the STM instrumentation expertise can benefit research on novel
nano-scale materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical cause for
the occurrence of high-temperature superconductivity (HTS) in the cuprate
superconductors remains a mystery despite substantial research progress since
the discovery of HTS in 1986. The primary reason for the lack of complete
theoretical understanding is due to the variety of low-temperature physical
phases that can exist in different families of cuprate superconductors upon
simple "tuning" of the chemical properties of these materials. This research
project intends to unveil the mystery of HTS by investigating how different
physical phases occur in the cuprates, and to identify the truly ubiquitous
characteristics among all cuprates that are responsible for HTS. The
experimental approach involves systematic studies of different cuprates using a
homemade variable-temperature high-field-compatible scanning tunneling
microscope (STM) and other auxiliary characterization tools in the PI's group at
Caltech. The STM measurements can provide important information about the
cuprates with atomic-scale spatial resolution. In addition to the experiments,
computer modeling will be performed for comparison with experimental data. The
proposed research is of significant educational value because of the range of
experimental skills and the depth of theoretical knowledge required of the
participants to accomplish the tasks. Successful completion of this project can
advance the theoretical understanding and commercial applications of cuprate
superconductors. The STM instrumentation developed for this project can further
benefit the characterization of novel nano-scale structures and devices in the
emerging field of nano-science &amp; technology.&lt;br/&gt;