* 0405906
* Metric Differential Geometry and Mathematical Gravity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Gregory Galloway, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2007
* USD 107,990.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405906&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Gregory J. Galloway&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in
gravitational theory, both theoretical and&lt;br/&gt;empirical, have lead to an
increased interest in the study of&lt;br/&gt;asymptotically anti-de Sitter and
asymptotically de Sitter&lt;br/&gt;spacetimes. In this project, techniques of
Lorentzian and&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian geometry will be used to attack certain
problems&lt;br/&gt;pertaining to such spacetimes, as well as some
problems&lt;br/&gt;concerning new developments in the theory of black holes. One
of&lt;br/&gt;the specific aims of this project is to continue development
of&lt;br/&gt;an approach to establishing positivity of mass for
asymptotically&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic Riemannian manifolds (with spherical
conformal&lt;br/&gt;infinity) which does not require spin assumption. This
approach,&lt;br/&gt;which makes use of the brane action introduced by Witten and
Yau&lt;br/&gt;in their work on the AdS/CFT correspondence, may also be
useful&lt;br/&gt;in settling some positive mass conjectures for
asymptotically&lt;br/&gt;anti-de Sitter spacetimes with toroidal topology at
infinity. The&lt;br/&gt;PI also plans to continue investigations into uniqueness
and&lt;br/&gt;rigidity phenomena, and the development of singularities
in&lt;br/&gt;asymptotically de Sitter spacetimes. The classical definition
of&lt;br/&gt;a black hole, though mathematically elegant, is problematic
in&lt;br/&gt;practice (especially for numerical studies) in that it
requires&lt;br/&gt;knowing the full future evolution of spacetime all the way
to&lt;br/&gt;infinity. As an alternative, Ashtekar and Krishnan
have&lt;br/&gt;introduced a new, fully nonlinear and dynamical, approach to
the&lt;br/&gt;study of black holes, based on the quasi-local notion of
a&lt;br/&gt;dynamical horizon. Another aim of this project is to
investigate&lt;br/&gt;some open problems concerning the occurence, i.e.,
existence,&lt;br/&gt;uniqueness and position of dynamical
horizons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern theories of gravity are geometrical in
nature. The&lt;br/&gt;gravitational field and other fields, black holes and
related&lt;br/&gt;objects, may be described and analyzed using geometric
methods.&lt;br/&gt;In more general terms, this project is concerned with the
study&lt;br/&gt;of certain features of gravity of current scientific
interest&lt;br/&gt;from this geometric point of view, utilizing the tools
of&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian geometry, a mathematical theory of space,
and&lt;br/&gt;Lorentzian geometry, a mathematical theory of spacetime.
These&lt;br/&gt;theories provide a method for studying the relationship
among&lt;br/&gt;three fundamental aspects of the spacetime universe:
curvature&lt;br/&gt;(i.e., the bending of space or spacetime), topology (i.e.,
the&lt;br/&gt;global shape and complexity of space or spacetime) and
causal&lt;br/&gt;structure (i.e., the large scale behavior of light rays
and&lt;br/&gt;light cones).