* 0405859
* Geometry of Mirror Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Eric Zaslow, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 116,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405859&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Eric Zaslow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses geometric
aspects of mirror symmetry. The&lt;br/&gt;PI will study the geometry of the
Strominger-Yau-Zaslow&lt;br/&gt;conjecture by looking at the conjectural picture
of a Calabi-Yau&lt;br/&gt;threefold near the large complex structure limit,
where the&lt;br/&gt;special Lagrangian torus fibration collapses. The
resulting&lt;br/&gt;manifold is a real integer affine manifold with
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;The first project will produce a real Monge-Ampere
metric on an&lt;br/&gt;open ball outside a Y-shaped singular locus, then study
its&lt;br/&gt;monodromy. A knowledge of this region is essential to gaining
a&lt;br/&gt;global understanding of the Calabi-Yau, including the role
of&lt;br/&gt;disc instanton corrections. Related projects are to study
the&lt;br/&gt;geometry of flat or Ricci-flat torus fibrations in Ricci-
flat&lt;br/&gt;manifolds in general, and to study the counting problem
of&lt;br/&gt;special Lagrangian and other calibrated submanifolds by
varying&lt;br/&gt;the metric away from the Ricci flat one. The final project
is&lt;br/&gt;investigate integrable hierarchies underlying the
topological&lt;br/&gt;vertex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies the
mathematics behind the physical&lt;br/&gt;phenomenon of mirror symmetry. Mirror
symmetry is when two&lt;br/&gt;different physical theories give rise to the same
predictions&lt;br/&gt;about nature. Mathematically, there are deep connections
behind&lt;br/&gt;the equivalence, and this project looks at the geometry of
the&lt;br/&gt;equivalence. Understanding the geometry of mirror symmetry
will&lt;br/&gt;lead to a broader comprehension of the structure of
mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;and conceivably physics. For instance, mirror symmetry
aids in&lt;br/&gt;the calculation of topological field theories, which have
been&lt;br/&gt;shown to have computational relevance to the conventional
gauge&lt;br/&gt;theories that underly particle physics. At a more
basic,&lt;br/&gt;mathematical level, understanding the geometry of mirror
symmetry&lt;br/&gt;can lead to a concrete description of the special
structures&lt;br/&gt;conjectured by Calabi to exist in 1957 and proved to exist
by Yau&lt;br/&gt;in 1979. Still, we know very little about this important
aspect&lt;br/&gt;of geometry. The rich interplay of mathematics and physics
has&lt;br/&gt;much to teach us.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;