* 0405105
* Collaborative Research: Generic Properties of Groups, Geometric Invariants and Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Alexei Miasnikov, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2008
* USD 107,998.00

The idea of genericity in geometric group theory was introduced
by&lt;br/&gt;Gromov and Ol'shanskii and is now the subject of very active
research.&lt;br/&gt;Genericity exhibits itself on many different levels in
algebraic,&lt;br/&gt;geometric and algorithmic properties of ``random''
algebraic objects&lt;br/&gt;and in the generic-case behavior of their natural
geometric invariants&lt;br/&gt;and decision problems. As already demonstrated by
the proposers'&lt;br/&gt;work, a generic approach often leads to the discovery
of objects with&lt;br/&gt;genuinely new and interesting properties. For example,
genericity&lt;br/&gt;provides a totally new source of group-theoretic
rigidity,&lt;br/&gt;quite different from the standard source provided by
lattices in&lt;br/&gt;semi-simple Lie groups.&lt;br/&gt;Much of the prior
research on probabilistic aspects of infinite groups &lt;br/&gt;has concentrated
on mostly analytic questions, such as amenability, &lt;br/&gt;asymptotic
properties of random walks, Poisson boundary, and so on.&lt;br/&gt; This project
will focus on understanding the algebraic and algorithmic &lt;br/&gt;properties
of random group-theoretic objects as well as probabilistic &lt;br/&gt;properties
of various traditionally studied geometric invariants of &lt;br/&gt;groups.
Specific topics, where the proposers have already made substantial
&lt;br/&gt;inroads, will include: the isomorphism rigidity of generic groups,
analysis &lt;br/&gt;of ``random'' van Kampen diagrams and generic Dehn
functions, generic subgroup &lt;br/&gt;distortion and generic stretching factors
of automorphisms, and the action of &lt;br/&gt;the outer automorphism group of a
free group on the ``frequency space'' of a &lt;br/&gt;free
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the rapid development of modern computers,
understanding the practical &lt;br/&gt;behavior of the performance of various
algorithms is becoming increasingly &lt;br/&gt;important. Yet most of
theoretical research thus far deals with the worst-case &lt;br/&gt;analysis of
algorithms, which often has little to do with their practical performance.
&lt;br/&gt;On the other hand, in many real-life applications, in particular, to
public key &lt;br/&gt;cryptography, there is a great deal of experimental data
on the practical performance &lt;br/&gt;of algorithms that has not been
adequately explained theoretically. The current project &lt;br/&gt;should
provide a number of new benchmark ideas and theoretical tools for studying and
&lt;br/&gt;explaining probabilistic properties and practical behavior of
algorithms both in group &lt;br/&gt;theory and in the broad field of
computational complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;