* 0405681
* Collaborative Research:     Sufficient Dimension Reduction for High Dimensional Data with Applications in Bioinformatics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Hongyuan Zha, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2007
* USD 268,984.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;proposals: 0405360 and 0405681&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Cook &amp;
Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Dimension Reduction with
application to &lt;br/&gt;bioinformatics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As represented in
the existing literature, sufficient dimension reduction (SDR)
&lt;br/&gt;encompasses model-free methods for linearly reducing the dimension of
the &lt;br/&gt;predictor vector in regression and classification problems
without loss of &lt;br/&gt;information. SDR methodology has a brief but striking
record of success, &lt;br/&gt;although its inferential foundations are
relatively narrow and the restriction &lt;br/&gt;to linear reductions can be
limiting in some applications. The investigators &lt;br/&gt;and their co-authors
expand the inferential foundations of SDR through the &lt;br/&gt;development of
optimal methods within the context of linear reduction and the &lt;br/&gt;study
of new nonlinear reduction methods. The new optimal reduction methods
&lt;br/&gt;permit the investigators to derive model-free tests of conditional
independence, &lt;br/&gt;which are roughly data-analytic equivalents of t-tests
on coefficients in model-&lt;br/&gt;based linear regression. They emphasize
bioinformatics applications in general &lt;br/&gt;and the analysis of data from
high-throughput genomic technologies in
&lt;br/&gt;particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computer revolution has produced
an unprecedented capacity for data &lt;br/&gt;generation, processing and
storage, with the consequence that data reduction is &lt;br/&gt;paramount in
many research areas and business applications. For instance, &lt;br/&gt;genomic
technology can produce measurements for thousands of genes across
&lt;br/&gt;multiple tissue samples, and WalMart makes over 20 million
transactions daily. &lt;br/&gt;The development of diagnostics for breast cancer
based on fine needle aspiration &lt;br/&gt;can involve the study of numerous
measurements on extracted cells across &lt;br/&gt;hundreds of patients. In
response to this proliferation of information, the &lt;br/&gt;investigators and
their colleagues study methods for reducing data to &lt;br/&gt;an essential
core. Their approach is unique because their overarching goal &lt;br/&gt;is
reduction without loss of information on the issues under consideration.
&lt;br/&gt;In the development of diagnostics for breast cancer, this goal
translates &lt;br/&gt;into reducing numerous cell measurements to an index that
can be used to &lt;br/&gt;classify a breast mass as malignant or benign without
loss of information, &lt;br/&gt;allowing the physician to present a more
informed recommendation to the patient.&lt;br/&gt;