* 0405809
* Conference: Systems Microbiology: Beyond Microbial Genomics, to be held in Portland, Oregon on June 2004
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Timothy Donohue, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/28/2005
* USD 15,000.00

The availability of genome sequence for an increasing number of microorganisms
is resulting in a revolution in biology and enabling biologists to study global
responses of microorganisms to a variety of factors, including changing external
environment, signaling molecules, and the lateral transfer of genetic
information from their neighbors. Technologies for measuring global gene
expression and the entire cellular protein&lt;br/&gt;complement&amp;#8212;or
proteome&amp;#8212;in addition to other novel, high-throughput measurements, are
increasingly being applied to sequenced microorganisms as part of functional
genomics research efforts. The results from these technologies, when analyzed
and integrated into computational models, are revealing complex regulatory and
metabolic networks in cells and the functions of previously uncharacterized
genes and signal transduction pathways. As this research evolves and new
technologies are developed, further insights into the function of microbial
populations and communities will be gained and will serve as a basis for
functional predictions from genome sequences. Although these technologies offer
great promise for biology research, there are also important limitations and
opportunities for further developments that must be recognized by end users.This
colloquium, convened by the American Academy of Microbiology (AAM), will pick up
where the 2000 AAM report, &amp;#8220;Microbial Genomes: Blueprints for Life,
&amp;#8221; * left off. The focus of this colloquium will be on how to
capitalize scientifically on the advances in microbial genomics and progress
towards a functional understanding of individual microorganisms and microbial
communities. We plan to convene this colloquium June 4-6, 2004, in Portland,
Oregon. Colloquium participants will discuss where the field is heading and
identify scientific opportunities, challenges, and benefits of this research. An
important aspect will be the identification of resource and technology gaps that
must be addressed in order to advance the field. The results of the colloquium
will be published in a report&amp;#8212; widely disseminated&amp;#8212;that will
be of interest to a diverse audience, including the scientific community,
funding agencies, and educators.A group of 35-40 scientists will be invited to
participate in this colloquium. The American Academy of Microbiology will
provide travel support for the participants, including airfare, ground
transportation, on-site lodging and meals, and other expenses related to
attendance. The funds are being sought from federal agencies, international
groups, foundations, and the corporate sector to offset these expenses.