* 0405238
* Quantum Coherence and Mesoscopic Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Norman Birge, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2008
* USD 390,000.00

This condensed matter physics project deals with "mesoscopic" metallic samples -
i.e. samples with submicron dimensions. These material can display surprising
behavior, particularly in hybrid samples containing different types of materials
- normal metals, superconductors, and ferromagnets. Recent theoretical
predictions challenge our understanding of these materials; contradicting the
long-held view that ferromagnets can not sustain superconducting correlations
over distances longer than a few nanometers. This experimental project will test
that prediction and others concerning electrical transport across
superconductor/ferromagnet and superconductor/normal metal interfaces. In
addition, experiments will probe the transport properties of normal metals when
both disorder and electron-electron interactions are very strong - a regime
poorly understood theoretically. Experimental research in mesoscopic physics
plays an important role in educating the next generation of scientists. Graduate
students involved in this project acquire expertise in modern nanofabrication
techniques used in the semiconductor industry, which are also crucial to the
future development and applications of nanosciences. The students are trained
for careers in industry, academia, and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
metallic samples are fabricated with very small dimensions - in the range of a
micrometer - they exhibit many electrical properties not observed in larger
samples. Some of the novel properties are evident at room temperature, while
others are revealed only at low temperature, when electrons preserve quantum-
mechanical phase coherence over many micrometers. The study of small metallic
samples, called "mesoscopic physics", is a rich discipline and has led to a
deeper understanding of many aspects of solid-state physics. This project
addresses several current problems in mesoscopic physics, including the role of
electron-electron interactions in highly-disordered metals, the complex
interplay between ferromagnetic and superconducting metals in contact with each
other, and the unusual behavior of superconducting/normal metal Josephson
junctions driven far from equilibrium. Experimental research in mesoscopic
physics plays an important role in educating the next generation of scientists.
Graduate students working on these projects acquire expertise in sample
processing techniques used in the microelectronics industry. The physical
principles and experimental techniques developed in this kind of work are
crucial to the future development and applications of nanosciences. The students
and post-doctoral researchers are well trained for careers in industry,
academia, and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;