* 0405532
* Micro- and Nano-Scale Anisotropic Organic Materials via Self-Organization of Lyotropic Chromonic Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Sean Casey, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2008
* USD 432,078.00

This research project aims to explore novel "bottom-up" approaches to generating
micropatterns of anisotropic organic materials by exploiting the
selforganization of chromonic liquid crystals on templates. Ultimately, these
approaches will be extended to the fabrication of nanopatterned anisotropic
organic materials. This research will provide important education and training
to undergraduate and graduate students in materials chemistry. The specific
objectives of this research are: 1) To further our understanding of the
structure-property relationships of ionic aromatic compounds and to strive to
reveal the structural factors governing supramolecular interactions, optical
properties, and phase properties (especially the lyotropic chromonic liquid-
crystalline (LC) phase and the crystalline phase); 2) To design and synthesize
long-wavelength and near infrared (NIR) absorbing compounds that self-organize
into a chromonic LC phase or a crystalline phase; 3) To develop novel approaches
to the micro-and nano-fabrication of functional anisotropic (direction-
dependent) materials by exploiting the supramolecular interactions of the
molecular constitutents, to study the properties of these materials, and to
explore their potential applications. The research will focus on using aromatic
compounds that possess dichroic, fluorescent, and semiconducting properties as
the molecular constituents; 4) To continue with efforts on integrating materials
chemistry into organic chemistry research and education. %%% Society's demand
for diverse and bright colors continues to drive research on chromophore
systems. The design and synthesis of dichroic and fluorescent dyes and the
control of their molecular order in materials is an important and useful
proposition. Many useful materials (e.g., dichroic polarizers) and devices
(e.g., liquid crystal displays) depend on the self-organization of organic
compounds into an ordered crystalline phase or a LC phase at some step in the
manufacturing process or during the functioning of the device. The knowledge
gained from this research could further polarization and display technologies.
In addition to potential uses in the microelectronics field, micropatterned
anisotropic materials may have applications as holographic films, as viewing
angle-dependent optical materials, and in stereoscopic displays. The development
of novel approaches to generating nanopatterns of anisotropic organic materials
may offer new opportunities to the rapidly advancing fields of nanoscience and
nanotechnology. Furthermore, the success of this research will broadly impact
society because of the important uses of long-wavelength dyes and NIR materials
that range from basic science to high technology applications. As new classes of
organic materials highly relevant to developing technologies are rapidly
emerging, there is an increasing demand in both industry and academia for
students trained in various aspects of organic and materials research. This
integrated teaching and research program introduces to students the basic
knowledge and techniques for studying organic materials and provides research
opportunities to both graduate and undergraduate students (including
underrepresented groups) preparing them for a career that may include organic
materials research, and improving their access to a teaching career in science.
Modern scientific instrumentation is also an essential tool for science
education and training. The equipment requested for this research will
strengthen the infrastructure for education and research at the University of
Nevada, Reno.