* 0405143
* Topology, Geometry and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2010
* Clifford Taubes, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 705,192.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405143&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Clifford H. Taubes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of C. H.
Taubes will mostly concentrate in differential&lt;br/&gt;topology, but there are
three mathematical physics projects of&lt;br/&gt;interest as well. The primary
project involves the use of symplectic&lt;br/&gt;geometry tools to investigate
the differential topology of four&lt;br/&gt;dimensional spaces. The long range
goal is to shed light on the&lt;br/&gt;classification for smooth, four
dimensional spaces, this one of the&lt;br/&gt;outstanding open problems in low
dimensional topology. As there is&lt;br/&gt;considerable circumstantial evidence
for a symplectic geometry role in&lt;br/&gt;the story, the immediate plan is to
probe the symplectic geometry&lt;br/&gt;connections to the subject. The first of
the mathematical physics&lt;br/&gt;projects aims to construct an equivariant
Fredholm setting for a Dirac&lt;br/&gt;operator on the loop space of a manifold.
Such a setting would&lt;br/&gt;provide a rigorous framework for various aspects
of string-theoretic&lt;br/&gt;physics. The second mathematical physics project
will study the&lt;br/&gt;minimal energy states for a Hartree-Fock approximation
to the strong&lt;br/&gt;coupling Hamiltonian for quantum chromodynamics. The
third&lt;br/&gt;mathematical physics project is undertaken jointly with a
chemist; it&lt;br/&gt;studies a version of free energy for a DNA molecule in a
salt&lt;br/&gt;solution. The aim here is to predict the behavior of such
molecules&lt;br/&gt;in various biological contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major project probes the possibilities for the large scale&lt;br/&gt;structure
of four dimensional universes. For example, our universe&lt;br/&gt;has four
dimensions, these the usual three dimensions of space plus&lt;br/&gt;time as the
fourth; and astronomers have confirmed Einsteins&lt;br/&gt;prediction that our
universe is curved at large scales. The research&lt;br/&gt;seeks to provide a
complete list of the possible large scale&lt;br/&gt;structures for a four
dimensional universe. As of now, there is no&lt;br/&gt;credible conjectured list
for the possibilities, but there are clues&lt;br/&gt;to its format. There are
three other research topics that are&lt;br/&gt;motivated by questions in
mathematical physics. The first of these&lt;br/&gt;seeks to confirm various
conjectures from unified field theories in&lt;br/&gt;physics for gravity and the
subatomic forces. The second topic&lt;br/&gt;explores techniques for predicting
properties of the strong force that&lt;br/&gt;binds subnuclear quarks as mesons,
neutrons and protons. The third&lt;br/&gt;topic studies equations from physical
chemistry that predict the&lt;br/&gt;behavior of DNA molecules in various
biological contexts. The goal is&lt;br/&gt;to develop tools to simplify the
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;