* 0405913
* Nonparametric Variable Selection in Smoothing Spline ANOVA Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Hao Zhang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 124,936.00

The investigator studies the variable selection problem in nonparametric
smoothing and regression models. In particular, a class of new regularization
methods is developed for simultaneous variable selection and model fitting in
the smoothing spline ANOVA models. One such method is the "cosso", which applies
a novel soft thresholding type operation to the functional components in a
reproducing kernel Hilbert space. In Gaussian regression, the cosso selects the
correct model structure with the probability tending to one under certain mild
conditions. To handle complex heterogeneous datasets with various types of
responses, the investigator further extends the new methods to more complicated
statistical models, such as generalized regression models, support vector
machines, and proportional hazards regression models. Theoretical properties of
the estimators like model consistency and the rate of convergence are
investigated. Efficient numerical algorithms and user-friendly software are
developed for public use.

Variable selection helps to reduce the dimension of model building, to improve
the model accuracy, and to better understand the underlying mechanism that
generates data. This research is motivated by the lack of theoretical work in
nonparametric variable selection and the limits of existing approaches. The
investigator establishes a unified framework for simultaneous variable selection
and model estimation in smoothing spline ANOVA models, and contributes new
theories to related variational methods. This work broadens the traditional
understanding of nonparametric smoothing approaches, and eventually will help to
generate new methods in statistical inference. In practice, high dimensional
large datasets produced in modern sciences such as in medicine and biology,
often with tens or hundreds of variables, demand more sophisticated tools for
dimension reduction and model estimation. The methodology developed in this work
already has successful applications in some real problems, and it will
potentially make a significant impact in various fields.

