* 0405470
* UMEB: Integrating Environmental Biology and Molecular Approaches at the University of Texas at El Paso
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jerry Johnson, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2008
* USD 499,948.00

One of the great strengths in the Department of Biological Sciences at the
University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) is the integration of environmental
biology and molecular techniques. The goal of this UMEB program is to train
under-represented minority students in research that integrates these two
fields. Many of the biology faculty already incorporate molecular biology
techniques in the study of questions in environmental biology. For example, UMEB
scholars can use DNA sequencing to answer questions about rotifer systematics
and snake venom evolution. They can use DNA fingerprinting techniques, such as
AFLP analysis, to assess genetic diversity of rotifers and fish in the Rio
Grande.

The program activities for the UMEB Scholars at UTEP explicitly require training
in both environmental and molecular biology. UMEB Scholars each have two
mentors. One mentor concentrates on training in environmental biology while the
other mentor concentrates on training the student to incorporate molecular
approaches into their study of environmental biology. We believe that the most
successful program for the recruitment and retention of minority students in
environmental biology will include training in molecular biology, as skills in
these areas are often lacking in classically-trained students, but graduate
schools and other employers favor hiring those who can perform newer analyses.
All UMEB research projects involve a substantial amount of fieldwork for
surveying and studying natural populations, but the students also collect
samples of their organisms in order to apply molecular techniques to their own
research projects. In addition, students meet regularly for training in
experimental design, elementary statistics, mechanics of scientific
presentations, preparing for the GRE, identifying appropriate graduate school
mentors, contacting potential mentors and applying to graduate school.

Three cohorts of four students entering their sophomore or junior year will
participate in the 2-year UMEB Scholars program. Over 4 years, NSF will fund 12
students. During their first year the students spend one semester in each of the
two faculty mentors' labs. At the end of the first year, students present their
proposed research and preliminary findings at the UTEP Research Expo, an on-
campus forum for undergraduate research. During the first summer, the students
work on their research full time. The two mentors coordinate with the student
the appropriate balance of field and lab work for the particular project being
conducted. During the second year, the UMEB Scholars continue working on their
research 10-15 hours each week under the joint supervision of their two mentors.
During this year, the students participate in their first national or regional
scientific meeting and travel to a prospective graduate school of the student's
choosing.

UTEP serves El Paso County, a mostly bi-national/bicultural community. The
ethnic composition of the University mirrors the community it serves, with
Hispanics, mostly Mexican-American, accounting for over 71% of the student body.
Additionally, 54.7% of the university population is female. This UMEB program
provides appropriate mentoring through the various program activities including
hands-on research, field trips, workshops, and travel to scientific meetings and
graduate schools. This program is sure to have long-lasting effects on the
scientific careers of the UMEB scholars. . For more information, contact Dr.
Sandra Perez (phone: 915-747-8816; e-mail: sperez@utep.edu) or Dr. William
Mackay (phone 915-747-6991; email wmackay@utep.edu).