* 0405208
* Electric Field Effect in Layered Inorganic and Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Michael Gershenson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2008
* USD 390,000.00

This condensed matter physics project will explore charge transport on the
surface of organic and inorganic layered semiconductors. The objective is to
develop novel techniques for fabrication of field-effect structures based on
single crystals of these materials. The focus is on exploration of the intrinsic
(not limited by the structural disorder) electronic properties, effects of the
molecular packing on the magnitude and anisotropy of the charge carrier
mobility, the mechanism of persistent photoconductivity in organic
semiconductors, and realization of light emission in the ambipolar field-effect
transistors based on transition metal dichalcogenides. The research will
contribute to better understanding of the polaronic transport and electronic and
optical properties of a wide range of organic and inorganic semiconductors. Of
interest are the ultimate limits of the organic transistor performance and the
search for novel materials with a higher mobility of charge carriers.
Implementation of the proposed research fosters training of both undergraduate
and graduate students: The students will enjoy broad exposure to the state-of-
the-art tools of modern solid state and semiconductor research, and the cutting-
edge physics research. The results of this research will be used in a new
undergraduate course "Electronic Processes in Nanostructures", an essential part
of the Rutgers efforts to develop a novel curriculum on nanoscience and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore the
charge transport on the surface of organic and inorganic layered semiconductors,
the fundamental building blocks of the emerging field of "flexible" electronics.
The project takes advantage of the novel techniques for fabrication of the
single crystal field-effect transistors, developed at Rutgers University under
prior NSF support. The focus is on exploration of the intrinsic (not limited by
the structural defects) electronic properties, the effects of molecular packing
on the magnitude and anisotropy of the charge carrier mobility, the mechanism of
persistent photoconductivity in organic semiconductors, and realization of light
emission in the field-effect devices based on layered inorganic semiconductors.
The research will contribute to better understanding of electronic and optical
properties of a wide range of organic and inorganic semiconductors. It will
elucidate the ultimate limits of the organic transistor performance and
facilitate the search for novel materials with a higher mobility of charge
carriers. Implementation of the proposed research fosters training of both
undergraduate and graduate students. The students are exposed to the state-of-
the-art tools of modern solid state and semiconductor research, and can pursue
careers in either academic or industrial environment. The results of this
research will be used in a new undergraduate course "Electronic Processes in
Nanostructures", an essential part of the Rutgers efforts to develop a novel
curriculum on nanoscience and nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;