* 0405576
* RUI:     Magnetic Tunneling and Relaxation in Single Molecule Magnets Examined Using Terahertz Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Mary Parks, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2009
* USD 120,000.00

This project proposes to examine the causes and effects of quantum tunneling of
the magnetic moment in single molecule magnets. Quantum tunneling of the
magnetic moment of Mn12-acetate was first reported in 1996, but its mechanism is
still uncertain. This project will use a time-domain terahertz spectroscopy to
probe a collection of these molecules during the tunneling process in order to
provide a link between the local environment of the molecules and the tunneling
probability. In a separate experiment, the process of relaxation will be
observed through the observation of the THz pulse emitted when the molecules are
suddenly heated above the blocking temperature, and it is anticipated that
superradiance will be observed. This research award supports undergraduate
research both directly through research stipends and indirectly through bringing
this exciting research project to a liberal arts college. The involvement of
undergraduate students in research increases the likelihood that they will
pursue advanced degrees in science and will contribute to our nation's
scientific infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum tunneling is one of the
hallmarks of quantum mechanics; its occurrence in a material guarantees that
this material's properties cannot be explained by classical mechanics alone. In
the twentieth century, the properties of very small quantum mechanical systems
like atoms became fairly well understood. Now physicists are attempting to
understand what happens when quantum mechanics becomes important for larger
systems. This project hopes to expand our understanding of quantum mechanical
tunneling in the material Mn12-acetate, in which clusters of atoms behave as
nanoscale magnets that can tunnel from one orientation to another. Besides being
of fundamental scientific interest, this line of research may also lead to
denser memory storage for computers or even to quantum computers. These possible
future applications make these experiments particularly exciting for
undergraduate physics students. This research award supports undergraduate
research both directly through research stipends and indirectly through bringing
this exciting research project to a liberal arts college. The involvement of
undergraduate students in research increases the likelihood that they will
pursue advanced degrees in science and will contribute to our nation's
scientific infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;