* 0405343
* Center for Nonlinear Analysis: Research and Training in Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Irene Fonseca, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2009
* USD 745,059.00

Proposal: DMS-0405343&lt;br/&gt;PI: Irene Fonseca&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Carnegie-Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Center for Nonlinear Analysis:
Research and Training in Applied
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for
Nonlinear Analysis (CNA), founded in 1991 in the Department of Mathematical
Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University, is a center for research and advanced
training in applied mathematics. The Center target areas are nonlinear analysis,
mechanics, scientific computation, and stochastic analysis. Central issues in
the CNA program are: modeling, analysis and computation to study the behavior of
novel man-made materials, such as shape memory alloys, ferroelectric,
electromagnetic and magnetostrictive (nano)materials, interfaces in
heterogeneous materials, including polycrystals and foams, thin films, and more
recently modeling and simulation areas of systemic and cellular biology.
Multiscale issues are prominent in the challenges of these areas. Many of
today's problems in advanced materials, for example, are related to the large
range of length and time scales inherent in their fabrication and function. The
multiscale aspect further implies that the applications range in dimension from
bulk material through thin films and nanostructured materials. Bridging this
multitude of scales requires examination of interconnected analytical and
computational approaches, and this is where the CNA strength is realized.
Contributions of CNA members to the understanding of these issues are broadly
recognized, and several methods standard in these fields nowadays were initiated
by CNA researchers. CNA accomplishments in these arenas have led to
participation in and the creation of projects with high institutional and cross-
institutional impact, and including the CMU MRSEC (Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center), an ITR, an NIH(pre-NPEBC) grant, a European network
(RTN), and the Center for Computational Finance. This involvement is strongly
exploited in the CNA itself by enhancing and broadening training opportunities
for post-docs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Nonlinear Analysis (CNA),
founded in 1991 in the Department of Mathematical Sciences at Carnegie Mellon
University, is a center for research and advanced training in applied
mathematics. Central areas of activity concern: the behavior of novel man-made
materials, often referred to as 'smart materials,' the role of interfaces in the
behavior of polycrystals and in foams, and a developing focus in cellular and
systemic biology. The Center seeks to identify and develop cutting-edge
applications of mathematical sciences, to promote collaborations between applied
mathematicians and allied scientists, and to respond to mathematical challenges
in science and engineering. Its special focus is materials and manufacturing,
nanotechnology, and biotechnology. There are also environmental concerns. The
Center will maintain its scientific leadership in these areas and its position
as a worldwide asset in the training of young scientists at the interface
between mathematics and science and engineering. The CNA is more than the sum of
its parts. Combined expertise in nonlinear analysis and computation, the wealth
of interdisciplinary activity and collaboration worldwide, and especially across
Carnegie Mellon research units, renders this one of the strongest groups in
applied mathematics in the US and on the globe. The CNA serves as a vehicle to
exploit these scientific resources with its training of postdoctoral fellows,
its visitors program, summer schools and conferences. Funding is dedicated
exclusively to the promotion of these training
missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;