* 0405352
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing a Status Theory of Collection Action
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Michael Macy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 7,450.00

The "collective action problem" describes situations like those found in fund-
raising drives and charities where all group members profit more by withholding
contribution to the public good, opting instead to "free-ride" on the
contributions of others. If all act in their material self-interest, however, no
public goods are produced and everyone is worse off. I am investigating this
dilemma in part because it poses the fundamental social question of "Why
society?" Why do individuals come together in groups when they can profit more
by not contributing to group endeavors while still taking their share of the
public good? I plan to test a theory wherein status, an individual's standing in
a group based on prestige, honor, and deference, serves as an incentive for
collective action contributions. The status theory of collective action asserts
that 1) Individuals contribute to collective action in part to gain status in
the group because being held in high regard by others is a valued reward, 2)
Contribution improves an individual's status standing in the group by increasing
her apparent group motivation, 3) Group members adjust their impressions of each
other's status standing without experiencing costs, 4) As the costs of
contribution increase so do status rewards since self-sacrificing behavior is
evidence of high group motivation. The proposed research also challenges
traditional rational choice assumptions that incentives for contributions to
collective action must be material and administered at cost. Two proposed
laboratory experiments test hypotheses formally derived from the theory. Results
of the studies will be presented at professional meetings. The broader impacts
of the project include the training of several undergraduate research
assistants, development of software that will be used as a teaching instrument,
and support for the University's graduate program. Further, the
representativeness of a democracy is contingent on collective action success by
interest groups; successful mobilization is especially critical for the
improvement of the conditions of traditionally underrepresented minorities. To
that end, the proposed research suggests novel strategies for mobilizing
collective action outside the laboratory that can be deduced from the theory and
provides theoretical explanations of some existing strategies.