* 0405873
* Monge-Ampere Equations and Geometric Structures on Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* John Loftin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 107,973.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405873&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: John Loftin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A geometric structure on a
manifold is a set of restricted&lt;br/&gt;coordinate charts and gluing
functions. There are often partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations which behave
well with respect to these&lt;br/&gt;gluing functions, and in turn these PDEs
can be used to study the&lt;br/&gt;geometric structure. Dr. Loftin will continue
to apply the&lt;br/&gt;theory of Monge-Ampere equations to manifolds with
geometric&lt;br/&gt;structure. In particular, the relationship between
Goldman's&lt;br/&gt;Fenchel-Nielsen type coordinates on the deformation space
of&lt;br/&gt;convex real projective surfaces and the holomorphic
coordinates&lt;br/&gt;introduced by Loftin will be further studied. Together
with Eric&lt;br/&gt;Zaslow and S.T. Yau, Dr. Loftin will study parabolic
affine&lt;br/&gt;sphere metrics on certain affine manifolds with
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;These metrics are degenerate real slices of the Calabi-
Yau&lt;br/&gt;metrics. Yau, Zaslow, and Loftin will follow the conjecture
of&lt;br/&gt;Strominger-Yau-Zaslow to relate these metrics to a larger
program&lt;br/&gt;arising from string theory of understanding mirror symmetry
of&lt;br/&gt;Calabi-Yau manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monge-Ampere equations
have an illustrious history in&lt;br/&gt;differential geometry. Yau's celebrated
theorem constructed&lt;br/&gt;important notions of distance on a large class of
spaces&lt;br/&gt;(so-called Calabi-Yau manifolds) by solving a Monge-
Ampere&lt;br/&gt;equation. Dr. Loftin will study Monge-Ampere equations on
other&lt;br/&gt;spaces. Some of these spaces are useful in the study of
string&lt;br/&gt;theory, a physical theory which proposes a unification of all
the&lt;br/&gt;forces in nature. In particular, there are singular Calabi-
Yau&lt;br/&gt;spaces which Dr. Loftin, together with Yau and Zaslow, will
study&lt;br/&gt;in order to shed light on the physics of string theory.
Also,&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Loftin will put also into practice curricular extensions
in&lt;br/&gt;teaching precalculus. These extensions were developed in
a&lt;br/&gt;program involving other faculty and high school teachers,
in&lt;br/&gt;July, 2003, associated with Columbia University's VIGRE
program.&lt;br/&gt;He will also continue to develop similar curricular
extensions.&lt;br/&gt;