* 0405151
* UMEB: Howard University Environmental Biology Scholars
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Michael Paul, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan H. Savitzky
* 12/31/2009
* USD 523,036.00

The Howard University Environmental Biology Scholars (HU-EBS) Project is
designed to engage minority undergraduates in environmental biology research
projects that are creative, intellectually challenging and of high scientific
merit. Faculty members mentor students in projects that span the full range of
ecological interactions from populations to ecosystems. The faculty mentors
involved in this project provide specific expertise in animal, plant and
microbial systems as well as terrestrial and aquatic habitats including field,
forest, bog and stream sites. We provide year-round research mentoring, and help
students tackle the difficult transition from undergraduate study to graduate
school. We foster a collaborative learning environment to encourage students to
participate in the community of science and to learn from each other. One
recruiting tool we use to stimulate interest in our research program is a Field
Biology Immersion Course at Mountain Lake Biological Station in southern VA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students are engaged in an ecological
research project under the direction of a faculty mentor for two years. Students
and mentors meet monthly in an HU-EBS Research Forum to present research
proposals, share data and discuss journal articles. During the Research Forum,
students develop skills in presenting research and learn about graduate school
programs, scholarships and internships. Students also participate in a Minority
Environmental Professionals Seminar Series where they meet with minority role
models of success in environmental research and policy. All students are
expected to present their results at national or regional scientific meetings,
and to submit manuscripts for publication. For students who have completed at
least two years of research in our program, we facilitate additional research
opportunities at field stations, LTER and REU sites, OTS programs, and at other
environmental biology facilities (museums, research cruises, etc). Finally, we
work closely with students to help them identify graduate programs in ecology
and complete the application process.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through the HU-EBS
project, we hope to significantly increase the pool of minority undergraduates
that are highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate study in
environmental biology. The faculty mentors participating in the HU-EBS Project
have extensive experience in mentoring African American students in
environmental biology research. We have learned that strong and consistent
mentoring is critical to nurturing the "flame of interest" in a career choice
such as environmental biology that is non-traditional for our students. For more
information, contact Mary McKenna (email: mmckenna@howard.edu ; phone:
202-806-6103)&lt;br/&gt;