* 0405100
* Phytoliths in the Flora of Ecuador: Establishing Vegetation Signatures and a Key to Diagnostics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Deborah Pearsall, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 95,513.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Deborah M. Pearsall and colleagues
at the University of Missouri will continue basic research into the nature of
phytolith production in the flora of Ecuador. Over the past 30 years,
phytoliths-microscopic silica bodies produced in plant tissues-have contributed
to our understanding of human-landscape interactions in the New World tropics.
Phytoliths extracted from naturally accumulating sediments, such as those that
build up in lakes, provide a detailed record of past vegetation, and the impact
on vegetation of human activities such as cutting of forests for agriculture.
Phytoliths recovered from prehistoric villages and ancient agricultural fields
provide equally valuable information on human uses of plants for foods, and in
ritual and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful tapping of the wealth of
information provided by these durable plant microfossils is dependent on
discovering phytoliths that can be used to identify key wild species and
economic plants. Advances in this area were made in the first phase of the
project (August 1997 to December 2000). Forest species critical for interpreting
vegetation change and stability in tropical lowland settings were found to
produce distinctive phytoliths, and new approaches for identifying crops such as
corn were developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new project builds on these
advances. First, Pearsall and student assistants will study phytolith production
in plants remaining from the original project, and add all new diagnostic
phytoliths to the University of Missouri database. Work will then begin on
establishing phytolith vegetation "signatures" for plant communities in Ecuador,
from Pacific coast to the Amazon, and along the coast from the dry forests of
the south to the humid northern lowlands. Two colleagues will join Pearsall for
this effort, Dr. Robert Benfer, an expert in multivariate statistical analysis,
and Dr. Robin Kennedy, botanist and ecologist. The research team will analyze
patterns of diagnostic phytoliths recovered from comparative soil samples from
across Ecuador, and develop descriptive and statistical ways of identifying
vegetation types (dry tropical forest, evergreen forest, etc.) from the
combinations of phytoliths in the soil. The final stage of the project focuses
on making the primary results, new phytolith types and vegetation signatures,
accessible and useable by other researchers. An interactive, web-based
identification aid to phytoliths produced by New World tropical plant species
will be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phytolith analysis is a young discipline in
archaeology (modern studies date to the 1970s), and as such much basic research
remains to be accomplished. This study will advance our knowledge of phytolith
production in diverse plant families and vegetation types. The intellectual
merit of the project also lays in future applications of the results of the
research, for example, to questions of the origins and evolution of agriculture
in the New World, and the nature and sustainability of tropical forest
agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the study are that
researchers working in regions throughout the New World tropics will find the
phytolith vegetation signatures, database of diagnostic phytoliths, and
prototype key useful. Web-based dissemination of results will broaden the access
of researchers and students based in Ecuador and other Latin American nations to
advances in phytolith research methods and approaches. &lt;br/&gt;