* 0405587
* Concentration and Related Probabilistic Phenomena in High Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Sergey Bobkov, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 10/31/2007
* USD 132,582.00

0405587 &lt;br/&gt;Bobkov&lt;br/&gt; This project deals with several challenging
problems about high dimensions, mainly of probabilistic content, that have been
encountered in the last decade. These include the problem of characterization of
probability distributions satisfying dimension free concentration properties and
related Sobolev-type inequalities, the KLS-conjecture on the dominating role of
linear functionals with respect to logarithmically concave measures, the problem
of existence and asymptotic normality of typical distributions in randomized
models of summation. The PI also plans to address new aspects of the
concentration phenomenon of product measures under additional symmetry
hypotheses. As closely related, part of this activity is devoted to finite
dimensional de Finetti representations for permutation invariant probability
measures on product spaces and their applications to quantifying the rate of
dependence of elements in long finite exchangeable sequences. A separate part is
devoted to analysis of random walks on discrete structures and focuses on
developing techniques based on suitable modified forms of logarithmic Sobolev
inequalities. &lt;br/&gt; The study of concentration phenomena is motivated, in
particular, by classical problems of probability and statistics about general
global properties of smooth functionals of stochastic processes. Concentration
tools are also of great importance in asymptotic convex geometry where one
explores the role of the dimension of high-dimensional convex objects. This area
of research has become rather rich and proved to be useful due to the universal
character of applications; on the other hand, it has accumulated a number of
fundamental open questions attracting many investigators. The proposed research
is aimed to push forward the study of multidimensional phenomena and to explore
their connections with important effects related to the weak dependence in a
broad sense. &lt;br/&gt;