* 0405132
* Nonsmooth methods in optimal control theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Peter Wolenski, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 184,047.00

The main thrust of this research is to study problem formulations in optimal
control theory for which the extant mathematical tools are not adequately
developed. The approach relies on methods of nonsmooth analysis, which is an
extension of classical calculus that systematically handles derivative-like
properties of functions that may not be differentiable in the usual sense. Its
development was largely motivated by problems in optimization, where inequality
constraints and min/max operations are ubiquitous, but which do not preserve
classical differentiability. This project investigates four related problem
areas. (1) Fully convex control, which is on the one hand quite special since it
requires convexity assumptions in the state and velocity. But on the other hand,
it is a natural generalization of the linear-quadratic regulator, which is the
workhorse of optimal control in applications. Problems with state constraints,
impulse trajectories, and infinite horizon will be studied from this viewpoint.
(2) One-sided Lipschitz dynamics, where the data may have non-Lipschitz behavior
but only in a dissipative manner. Such structure in the dynamics is present in
the modeling of dry friction. (3) Time-delay problems. (4) Impulsive systems, in
which the states evolve according to two time scales and can jump over short
time intervals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reflect the desirability of certain
behaviors of engineered systems in preference to others, aspects of optimization
are often included in mathematical models, and dynamic optimization problems
arise. Optimal control theory offers deep insight into the nature of these
problems. Because the world appears to have many more nonsmooth characteristics
than previously imagined, new theoretical challenges in optimal control have
emerged. The development of nonsmooth analysis was largely motivated by these
considerations, and now consists of a substantial body of results that is being
increasingly utilized by engineers. This research project will broaden the range
of application of nonsmooth analytic tools, and the results will allow control
engineers to employ mathematical models that are more accurate and realistic
than those in current use.&lt;br/&gt;