* 0405605
* Dynamics of Moduli Spaces and Surface Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* William Goldman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 196,655.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns the classification of geometric structures
on&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, the geometry of their moduli spaces, and dynamical
systems&lt;br/&gt;on moduli spaces arising from automorphisms of surfaces. For
example,&lt;br/&gt;complete affine 3-manifolds behave similarly to hyperbolic
Riemann&lt;br/&gt;surfaces. For a large class of examples, the deformation space
has&lt;br/&gt;recently been shown to be a bundle of convex cones over
the&lt;br/&gt;deformation space of hyperbolic surfaces. One aspect of the
project is&lt;br/&gt;the classification and dynamical study of such manifolds,
and their&lt;br/&gt;conformal and constant curvature generalizations. Another
aspect of&lt;br/&gt;this project deals with dynamical systems arising from
the&lt;br/&gt;classification of geometric structures on surfaces. The action of
the&lt;br/&gt;mapping class group on the character variety is a dynamical
system&lt;br/&gt;associated to the fundamental group of the surface and the
geometry&lt;br/&gt;associated to a Lie group. These moduli spaces support
invariant&lt;br/&gt;symplectic structures, as well as finer structures depending
on a&lt;br/&gt;Riemann surface with the given fundamental group. How do
these&lt;br/&gt;structures change as the Riemann surface varies? How do the
geometry&lt;br/&gt;of these structures influence the dynamics of their
topological&lt;br/&gt;symmetries of the surface? How does dynamical complexity
of the&lt;br/&gt;mapping class group action accompany topological complexity of
the&lt;br/&gt;moduli space?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions lie at the
interface between geometry and topology,&lt;br/&gt;unified through the notion of
symmetry. While geometry involves&lt;br/&gt;metric quantitative relationships,
topology concerns the loose&lt;br/&gt;qualitative organization of ``points'' in
abstract ``spaces.''&lt;br/&gt;Geometry relates to topology through their
respective symmetries,&lt;br/&gt;which can be studied algebraically through the
techniques of group&lt;br/&gt;theory. These questions are natural for
experimental investigation.&lt;br/&gt;The Experimental Geometry Lab at the
University of Maryland provides&lt;br/&gt;interested students opportunities for
mathematical experimentation in&lt;br/&gt;a stimulating environment. Its goal is
the dissemination and&lt;br/&gt;promotion of mathematics, related to the
projects described above.&lt;br/&gt;The Lab will continue to be a center for
Undergraduate Research&lt;br/&gt;Experiences, outreach presentations, and
interactive projects at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;