* 0405803
* A Micro-Local and Fourier-Analytical Approach to Some Non-Linear Problems in Fluid Mechanics and Elasticity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Anna Mazzucato, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2008
* USD 111,280.00

Project Abstract: 0405803 A Mazzucato, Pennsylvania State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Micro-Local and Fourier-Analytical Approach to
Some Non-Linear Problems in Fluid Mechanics and Elasticity
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator A. L. Mazzucato will address
several questions in the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical investigation of fluid flows and
elasticity using methods&lt;br/&gt;from Fourier and micro-local analysis. Micro-
local analysis seeks to&lt;br/&gt;identify points and directions along which a
solution to partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations looses regularity, by
localizing it in both space and frequency. Modern techniques in Fourier analysis
consist in&lt;br/&gt;decomposing a signal by testing it against a given set of
waves or&lt;br/&gt;wave-forms at different length scales, so that relevant
information can be extracted accurately and efficiently. Turbulent flows, for
example, &lt;br/&gt;exhibits a complex behavior at both large and small scales.
The coupling between different scales is often due to the non-linearity of the
underlying equations. The investigator will concentrate on the following
problems. She will study dissipation of enstrophy, the squared vorticity, for
the two-dimensional Euler equations, which model inviscid fluid flow, by
considering transport by irregular vector fields. Understanding
how&lt;br/&gt;enstrophy is dissipated is important for two-dimensional
turbulence. &lt;br/&gt;She will analyze certain weak solutions to the Navier-
Stokes&lt;br/&gt;equations, which describe the motion of viscous fluids, with
globally&lt;br/&gt;infinite energy by using generalized energy inequalities.
Allowing for weaker control at infinity could in turn lead to refined estimates
on the local behavior of solutions. She will investigate existence of mild
solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations by semi-group methods in polyhedral
domains, which are domains of particular interest in numerical simulations.
Finally, the investigator will continue studying the inverse problem of unique
identification of elastic properties by dynamic&lt;br/&gt;surface measurements,
exploiting the covariance of the elasticity&lt;br/&gt;equations under coordinate
changes. The determination of elastic&lt;br/&gt;parameters has significant
applications in medical imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project
stresses the inter-disciplinary nature of the analysis of partial differential
equations, which mathematically model physical phenomena. Theoretical tools
developed to discern subtle properties of these equations have been successfully
employed in real-life problems. Micro-local analysis studies how singularities
are propagated by differential equations. Changes in material properties cause
singularities to form in waves and can hence be determined when direct
measurement is not possible, as in seismology, oil exploration, and medical
diagnostics. Fourier analysis examines the content of a signal at a given
frequency or length scale. Understanding crucial aspects of turbulent flows,
for&lt;br/&gt;example concentration and dissipation of energy and vorticity,
at&lt;br/&gt;different scales has an impact in disciplines ranging from
aerodynamics, to meteorology, to human physiology. The need for numerical
simulation and design has underlined the role of complex geometries, where a
refined mathematical analysis is often necessary for a qualitative
understanding. &lt;br/&gt;With this project the investigator also aims at
strengthening her&lt;br/&gt;collaborative effort with other female researchers
both in the United&lt;br/&gt;States and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;