* 0405646
* Singular Deformations in Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Scott Spector, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 110,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0405646&lt;br/&gt;PI: Scott J Spector&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Southern Illinois University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Singular Deformations in
Mechanics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigator will analyze singular solutions to certain systems of partial
differential equations as well as singular minimizers to the corresponding
energy. The problems involve: existence of singular solutions to parabolic
systems; existence of minimizers with singularities for problems in the calculus
of variations; regularity, fine properties, and the asymptotic behavior of
singular minimizers; and, the determination of whether known singular solutions
to a quasilinear elliptic system are indeed minimizers of the corresponding
problem in the calculus of variations. The motivation for these problems lies in
the mechanics of solids. Mathematical models for elastomers, glass, glassy
polymers, thin films, and ductile metals yield singular deformations that are
used to predict the failure of such materials under the application of external
forces. The failures of interest are those due to the formation and growth of
microscopic holes as well as the subsequent coalescence of such holes to form
cracks in a material. When external forces are applied to an elastomer these
holes become visible, grow in size, and then combine to break the material.
Particular problems of interest are: the initiation and dynamic growth of a
solitary hole; the manner in which holes combine to form cracks; the optimal
location for hole formation; and, the manner in which a change in temperature
can cause the formation of such holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research area of
this grant is the mathematical analysis of equations that arise in Materials
Science. The focus of the investigation is certain significant material failures
in solids. The goal is the prediction of the formation and growth of voids and
holes in materials that are crucial to the automotive and defense industries. If
one wants to understand the reasons that materials fail then one must have
recourse to mathematical models of the material. Experiments on certain rubbery
polymers, called elastomers, have shown that when one pulls on an elastomer
small holes appear in the material. These holes then grow in size and combine to
form cracks. A similar phenomenon has been observed in optical fibers.
Catastrophic failure, due to a series of holes that cascade down the core of the
fiber, can occur when excessive power is applied. These holes seriously degrade
the ability of the fiber to transmit information. In this grant, the principal
investigator will uncover the mechanisms that cause the creation and growth of
holes in polymers and glasses by examining systems of partial differential
equations from the theory of elasticity and
viscoelasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;