* 0405345
* RUI: Physico-Chemical Characterization and Processing of Nanocomposite Polymers for Microfluidic Applications.
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Brian Augustine, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2008
* USD 230,000.00

Hybrid polymer-inorganic materials represent an important development in the
polymer&lt;br/&gt;materials field due to the ability to potentially tailor the
physical properties of these materials&lt;br/&gt;with varying chemical
composition and percentage of the inorganic component. This Research
at&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) proposal addresses several areas
of intellectual merit. The&lt;br/&gt;primary technical objective of this study
is to understand the fundamental physicochemical&lt;br/&gt;surface properties of
polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS)-based
nanocomposite&lt;br/&gt;polymer materials when modified by oxidizing or reducing
plasma environments, and their longterm&lt;br/&gt;stability at elevated
temperatures or with ultraviolet light exposure. A second objective is
to&lt;br/&gt;determine whether plasma-modified POSS-based polymers can be used
as a coating material for&lt;br/&gt;improved polymer microfluidic devices.
Plasma control of the spatial and chemical composition&lt;br/&gt;of the POSS-
based polymer surface will be achieved using a remote plasma treatment tool
and&lt;br/&gt;the properties will be studied using a combination of surface
analysis techniques including x-ray&lt;br/&gt;photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),
atomic and lateral force microscopy (AFM/LFM), scanning&lt;br/&gt;electron
microscopy (SEM), and contact angle measurements. Test designs for PMMA-
based&lt;br/&gt;microfluidic devices have been fabricated, and POSS-based thin
films will be deposited onto&lt;br/&gt;these to determine the change in
electroosmotic flow (EOF) characteristics using plasma
surface&lt;br/&gt;modification. Spatial control of the surface will be
accomplished through a microfabricated&lt;br/&gt;shadow mask allowing for a
hydrophilic / hydrophobic gradient to be patterned into
the&lt;br/&gt;microfluidic channel. EOF and fluid flow measurements will be made
in collaboration with the&lt;br/&gt;University of Virginia to determine whether
fluid flow can be controlled through a spatially&lt;br/&gt;modulated surface
within a microfluidic structure. A further objective is to design and
develop&lt;br/&gt;an integrated detection methodology for microfluidic devices
using ultraviolet-visible absorption&lt;br/&gt;spectroscopy taking advantage of
the lower absorption edge of PMMA compared to the glass&lt;br/&gt;substrates
typically used in microfluidic devices.&lt;br/&gt;A final objective related to
the broader impacts of this proposal is the scientific training
of&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate research students and high school science teachers in
a highly interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research environment. This project will
involve the training of six to ten undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;researchers and three
high school chemistry, physics or biology teachers over the duration of
the&lt;br/&gt;program. In both cases, this project will introduce undergraduate
chemistry and physics students&lt;br/&gt;and secondary school teachers to the
materials science issues of structure-property relationships.&lt;br/&gt;Both
students and teachers will be exposed to surface analytical techniques, vacuum
science,&lt;br/&gt;polymer materials characterization and processing, and
microfluidic technology and science. The&lt;br/&gt;participants in this program
will also interact with graduate students and post-
doctoral&lt;br/&gt;researchers at the University of Virginia through direct
laboratory exposure in order to&lt;br/&gt;experience research at a research
institution. These activities help serve to broadly impact
the&lt;br/&gt;pipeline of future scientists from the high school through the
graduate level.