* 0405729
* Topology of Algebraic Varieties and Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Anatoly Libgober, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2008
* USD 164,596.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405729&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Anatoly S. Libgober&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal studies
several topics in the topology of algebraic&lt;br/&gt;varieties and singularity
theory. The author plans to consider&lt;br/&gt;the vertex operator algebras
attached to possibly singular&lt;br/&gt;algebraic varieties. Vertex operator
algebras were attached to&lt;br/&gt;non singular varieties by Malikov,
Schechtman and Vaintrob and to&lt;br/&gt;orbifolds by Frenkel and Szczesny.
L.Borisov and author's work on&lt;br/&gt;elliptic genera suggests that one may
expect such algebras for&lt;br/&gt;varieties with Gorenstein log terminal
singularities. These&lt;br/&gt;vertex operator algebras will provide new
invariants of algebraic&lt;br/&gt;varieties which role should be investigated.
These new algebras&lt;br/&gt;should provide further clarification of McKay
correspondence&lt;br/&gt;between the group actions and singularities. The author
plans to&lt;br/&gt;study new Chern class type invariants for singular
varieties&lt;br/&gt;which are suggested by the joint work with L.Borisov.
Secondly,&lt;br/&gt;the author works on finding connections between the
conformal&lt;br/&gt;field theory and others approaches to mirror symmetry and,
as&lt;br/&gt;part of this, he plans to study the relationship between
elliptic&lt;br/&gt;genera and other invariants of vertex operatror algebras
attached&lt;br/&gt;to manifolds and homological mirror symmetry. Thirdly the
author&lt;br/&gt;proposes to study connection between the elliptic genera
and&lt;br/&gt;isolated singularities and possible applications to
Herling's&lt;br/&gt;conjecture on properties of spectra of isolated
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;Final part deals with problems about the topology of
the&lt;br/&gt;complements, the Alexander type invariants introduced by
the&lt;br/&gt;author and the connections with the invariants introduced
in&lt;br/&gt;previous parts of the proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work on this
project will clarify new mathematical structures&lt;br/&gt;which appeared
recently in theoretical physics and in particular&lt;br/&gt;in string theory. It
fits into ongoing process of restructuring&lt;br/&gt;the scope of mathematical
problems and methods for their&lt;br/&gt;solutions. The puropose of this
research is to find applications&lt;br/&gt;of the new structures which emerged
in theoretical physics to a&lt;br/&gt;wider range of previously unsolved
problems and to expand&lt;br/&gt;connections between mathematics and physics. It
will bring new&lt;br/&gt;methods into areas of mathematics such as singularity
theory&lt;br/&gt;which already proved to be important link between
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and science and engineering. Work on this
project&lt;br/&gt;will help to upgrade the instructions at UIC on graduate
and&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate level to the level fully representing frontiers
of&lt;br/&gt;contemporary mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;