* 0405712
* Topology and Sweep-Out Combinatorics Near Dimension Three
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Martin Scharlemann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2008
* USD 189,769.00

The proposer's recent research has centered on knot theory and the theory of
3-manifolds, particularly Heegaard splittings of 3-manifolds and related notion
of unknotting tunnels. The main approach might humorously be called neo-
classical, for it focuses on the behavior of surfaces contained in the
3-manifolds (a classical approach) but in a more sophisticated way. For example,
in combinatorial arguments on surface intersections, graph-theoretic lines of
argument (on the arcs of intersection) have proven to be almost magically
effective in distilling geometric information; in Gabai's theory of sutured
3-manifolds, intersection with a `parameterizing surface is the chief mechanism
for transmitting information from the end of the hierarchy back to the
beginning; the minimax principle usually called ``thin position" exploits the
intersection between a stationary surface and a moving surface to understand the
topology of the entire manfold. Comparing intersections between two sets of
moving surfaces (using the tools of Cerf theory) can be even more effective as
in, for example, the Gordon-Luecke solution to the knot complement conjecture or
the proposer's work with Rubinstein on explicit bounds for Heegaard
stabilization. The problems addressed in this proposal have been chosen not
solely for their intrinsic interest but also because the hope is that techniques
developed in their solution would point the way to the solution of grander
problems and, more generally, give insight to the general structure of knotting
phenomena (broadly construed) and the structure of 3-manifolds, particularly
structure that is on the edge of and interacts with natural questions about
4-manifolds. An underlying theme of this proposal is that there is much to be
learned about knot theory and the theory of 3-manifolds via a geometric approach
that is more flexible than differential geometry but more structured than simple
combinatorics. This medium ground is characterized by a use of thin position
arguments, in which sweep-outs of 3-space by level planes or sweep-outs of
3-manifolds by Heegaard surfaces can reveal structure that might be difficult to
find by other techniques.



One of the most basic observations about the world around us, apparent almost
from our birth, is that it is 3-dimensional. So it is of interest to understand
objects with this property: anyone living in the object would see their world as
3-dimensional. Such objects are called 3-manifolds, and the broad goal of this
research proposal is to increase our understanding of them. Three-manifolds
support interesting phenomena. One of these phenomena is knotting, in which a
simple object like a garden-hose (or a string of DNA) can be maneuvered so that
its positioning in space is quite complex. More generally, objects like chemical
molecules can be put in a 3-manifold in extraordinarily complex ways if one
thinks of their parts as made of rubber which can be knotted and interweaved.
Tools which are being developed to understand 3-manifolds help us understand
knotting and, conversely, understanding knotting helps us understand
3-manifolds. One success of this ongoing research program is the proposer's
solution (with Abigail Thompson) of the graph-planarity problem: There is a
simple criterion, algorithmic in execution, which determines whether a knotted
graph in 3-space (e. g. a chemical molecule) can be isotoped to lie in a plane,
and so in fact is unknotted.