* 0405551
* Current problems in nonlinear dynamics: Macroscopic modeling of microscopic interactions and instability of coherent structures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Joceline Lega, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 152,889.00

Abstract: DMS-0405551 J Lega, University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
problems in nonlinear dynamics: Macroscopic modeling of microscopic interactions
and instability of coherent structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A current challenge
in the modeling of many complex systems is to&lt;br/&gt;develop comprehensive
descriptions that cover all levels of&lt;br/&gt;interactions, from the
microscopic to the macroscopic. The first&lt;br/&gt;topic of the proposed
research falls into this category, with the&lt;br/&gt;additional complexity of
dealing with a system made of living&lt;br/&gt;organisms. The PI and a
collaborator have recently developed a&lt;br/&gt;hydrodynamic model describing
the dynamics and growth of bacterial&lt;br/&gt;colonies at a macroscopic level.
The PI will now investigate the&lt;br/&gt;microscopic dynamics of interacting
bacteria. Numerical&lt;br/&gt;simulations of "live" interacting particles will
be developed, on&lt;br/&gt;which coarse-graining will be applied to obtain a
description at&lt;br/&gt;the macroscopic level. The search will be for a set of
collision&lt;br/&gt;rules that can reproduce and explain the collective
behaviors that&lt;br/&gt;have recently been observed in dense colonies of
bacteria. This&lt;br/&gt;study will also lay the ground for the future
development of&lt;br/&gt;kinetic models of collections of living organisms. The
second&lt;br/&gt;topic of the proposed research concerns the stability of
coherent&lt;br/&gt;structures. The kink-anti-kink profile of a bacterial colony,
the&lt;br/&gt;local deformations of an elastic filament, or the ultra-
short&lt;br/&gt;pulses propagating in an optical fiber, are all examples
of&lt;br/&gt;coherent structures. Such objects are often described as
special&lt;br/&gt;solutions of one or more model partial differential equations,
and&lt;br/&gt;modern analytical techniques have been developed to address
the&lt;br/&gt;question of their stability. The PI will combine such
techniques&lt;br/&gt;with numerical calculations and asymptotic expansions, in
order to&lt;br/&gt;obtain stability and instability results for coherent
structures&lt;br/&gt;observed in nonlinear optics and in reaction-diffusion
equations&lt;br/&gt;with nonlinear diffusion. The tools and methods that will
be&lt;br/&gt;developed in such a study are general enough to be applied
to&lt;br/&gt;other evolutionary partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical modeling is nowadays playing an
important and growing&lt;br/&gt;role in the life and physical sciences. In
particular, models that&lt;br/&gt;are based on our vision of how various
building blocks of a&lt;br/&gt;complex system interact with one another, and
which translate this&lt;br/&gt;vision into mathematical terms, can be used to
test our theories&lt;br/&gt;and make sure our understanding is built on solid
ground. The main&lt;br/&gt;challenge we face with such an approach is that our
intuition&lt;br/&gt;often feels more at ease at the microscopic - or the
building&lt;br/&gt;block - level, even though we live in a macroscopic world.
All of&lt;br/&gt;the difficulty lies in bridging the gap between these two
worlds.&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this work deals with such a problem: the
goal is&lt;br/&gt;to understand how microscopic interactions between bacteria
may&lt;br/&gt;lead to collective, macroscopic behaviors, as observed in
some&lt;br/&gt;experiments. Such phenomena will be modeled in the case
of&lt;br/&gt;laboratory grown colonies of bacteria, but similar
principles&lt;br/&gt;could be applied to the formation and dynamics of biofilms,
which&lt;br/&gt;have many engineering and medical applications. The second part
of&lt;br/&gt;the work concerns general methods for the analysis of
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;models which involve nonlinear partial differential
equations. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, the stability of solutions of some models
relevant to&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear optics and population dynamics will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;