* 0405349
* US-Austria Cooperative Research:  Fast Solvers for Computational Pharmacy, Life Sciences, Mathematics, Physics, and Environmental Modeling
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Robert Lodder, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2009
* USD 57,174.00

0405349&lt;br/&gt;Douglas&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance research in
computational science on state-of-the-art high performance computers, clusters,
and intercontinental GRID computing environments. We will extend parallel
methods to solve very large-scale problems in computational neurology, science,
and engineering using hardware-assisted algorithms. The applications to be
investigated include computational neurology, imaging and noninvasive blood flow
analysis, ocean modeling, and general computational fluid dynamics. We will
develop better algorithms, including ones for algebraic multigrid, parallel
methods, for solution of partial differential equations, saddle point problems,
eigencomponents, optimization methods, and hardware-assisted methods. The new
algorithms will be incorporated into the applications in order to demonstrate
usefulness besides just creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
solidify broad based collaborations between faculties at three universities: one
U.S. (University of Kentucky) and two Austrian (Johannes Kepler Universitat Linz
and the Karl-Franzens- Universitat Graz). The collaboration will expose a number
of U.S. graduate students to international research opportunities, including
minority or Appalachian students. Typical University of Kentucky students do not
have much experience with top-fliight, internationally oriented universities and
are at a serious disadvantage upon graduation. This project will give the
students an edge they cannot hope for by just staying on campus. The experience
they will receive from this project will be similar to doing a postdoctoral
fellowship before graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will vastly
broaden the horizons of University of Kentucky students, who typically only see
local researchers or one-day visitors whose schedules do not include more than
an hour to talk to students. While visitors sometimes motivate students, there
is no replacement for actually working for an extended time with the same
visitors and their own research groups. The U.S. members will also teach short
courses and participate in active seminar series in Austria during the summer
months. Both faculties will personally benefit from exposure to a larger and
diverse audience for their research skills and will be able to disseminate
results to a much wider audience.&lt;br/&gt;