* 0405456
* Computational Study of Transition Metal Phosphate Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Natalie Holzwarth, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2008
* USD 143,000.00

This award supports computational and theoretical research and education focused
on crystalline transition metal phosphate materials, such as LiFePO4 and related
materials. These materials display a wide range of interesting physical and
chemical properties that are not well understood. In addition to being of
fundamental scientific interest, these materials are also of technological
interest with potential use in secondary batteries and as catalysts. The PI
plans a systematic computational study of the structural, magnetic and
electronic properties of these materials. The aim, in part, is to understand how
to control the structural, magnetic, and electric current carrying properties of
these materials. The PI will develop reliable first-principles computational
tools with an aim to accurately calculate properties of narrow d-band materials.
This will involve developing techniques beyond standard density-functional-
theory-based methods and new methods for analyzing electronic correlations.
Models will be developed in order to understand thermal properties, such as
lattice vibrations, phase transformations, and ionic diffusion. This modest
award supports graduate level education in the area of electronic structure
theory for two students. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
computational and theoretical research and education focused on crystalline
transition metal phosphate materials, such as LiFePO4 and related materials.
These materials display a wide range of interesting physical and chemical
properties that are not well understood. In addition to being of fundamental
scientific interest, these materials are also of technological interest with
potential use in secondary batteries and as catalysts. The PI plans a systematic
computational study of the structural, magnetic and electronic properties of
these materials. The aim, in part, is to understand how to control the
structural, magnetic, and electric current carrying properties of these
materials. The PI aims to develop new computational methods that will be needed
to accurately simulate materials in which electrons derived from atomic
d-orbitals play an important role in determining materials properties. Such
materials display a wide range of interesting properties that have often proven
difficult to understand and even more difficult to reliably predict. Apart from
discovering new fundamental physics, this quest may also help guide the
discovery of new materials for new technologies. This modest award supports
graduate level education in the area of electronic structure theory for two
students. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;