* 0405851
* Nanoscale Physics of Nitride Semiconductor Heterostructures for Optical and Electronic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Edward Yu, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 365,552.00

This project aims at a detailed investigation of structural and electronic
properties of Group III-nitride semiconductor heterostructures employing
scanning probe measurement techniques to characterize electronic properties of
nitride semiconductor epitaxial layers with spatial resolution at the submicron
to nanometer scale. Included in this effort will be the development and
implementation of unique new experimental capabilities for characterization of
electronic structure of defects with both nanoscale spatial resolution and
resolution in energy enabled by spectrally resolved optical excitation. Efforts
in state-of-the-art nanoscale materials characterization will be complemented by
a variety of "macroscopic" electrical and optical measurements to enable
correlations to be established among nanoscale material properties, electrical
and optical behavior at macroscopic length scales, and device performance. This
approach is expected to establish a sound basis for development of clear,
effective, and well-informed strategies for improvement in material quality and
optimization of device performance. Particular emphasis will be placed on
investigation of issues relevant to the performance of nitride semiconductor-
based optoelectronic devices, to be facilitated by a collaboration with
researchers at EMCORE Corporation. Research outcomes expected are relevant to
applications that include high-density data storage, displays, solid-state
lighting, and communications infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having
high potential technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new understanding and
capabilities in electronic and photonic devices. An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. In addition to
education of graduate students and researchers in areas of scientific and
technological importance, undergraduate students will be afforded opportunities
to become involved in state-of-the-art research in electronic materials and
nanoscale science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;