* 0405814
* Geometric Group Theory and Surface Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Michael Handel, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2007
* USD 111,552.00

The proposal divides into three projects in the related fields of two
&lt;br/&gt;dimensional dynamical systems and geometric group theory. The first
is a &lt;br/&gt;collaboration with John Franks to study smooth group actions on
surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;One goal is to understand when an action by an abelian
group must have a &lt;br/&gt;global fixed point. Another is to prove that
certain lattices have &lt;br/&gt;essentially no non-trivial actions on the two
dimensional sphere. The &lt;br/&gt;second project is joint work with Benson
Farb. One part of this project &lt;br/&gt;is to study lifts of the mapping class
group of a surface to the &lt;br/&gt;diffeomorphism group of that surface. The
third project continues joint &lt;br/&gt;work with Lee Mosher. The action of the
mapping class group on &lt;br/&gt;Teichmuller space is paralleled by the action
of the outer automorphism &lt;br/&gt;group on Outer Space. The goal of this
collaboration is to formulate an &lt;br/&gt;analogue in Outer Space of
Teichmuller geodesics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The mapping class group of a
surface, the diffeomorphism group of a &lt;br/&gt;surface and the outer
automorphism group of the free group are related in &lt;br/&gt;fundamental ways.
Classification theorems for elements of the mapping &lt;br/&gt;class group yield
information about the algebraic properties of subgroups &lt;br/&gt;of the
diffeomorphism group and so yield restrictions on the kinds of &lt;br/&gt;groups
that can act on surfaces and on the ways in which groups can act. &lt;br/&gt;One
of the main motivations for studying the outer automorphism group is
&lt;br/&gt;its very close connection to mapping class groups. One part of the
&lt;br/&gt;proposal focuses on finding global fixed points of actions; i.e.
points &lt;br/&gt;that are stationary for every diffeomorphism associated to the
group. &lt;br/&gt;Another is to understand actions of the mapping class group of
a surface &lt;br/&gt;on that surface. To understand the geometry of a group one
must &lt;br/&gt;understand its geodesics; i.e. what the shortest paths are
between any two &lt;br/&gt;points. The geodesics of the mapping class group have
been well &lt;br/&gt;understood for some time. A third goal of the project is to
generalize &lt;br/&gt;from what is known about the geodesics of the mapping
class group to &lt;br/&gt;identify and study geodesics for the outer
automorphism group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;