* 0405921
* Mathematical Analysis of Parametrically Excited Hamiltonian Systems with Applications in Quantum Physics, Nonlinear Optics and Wave Propagation in Random Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Eduard-Wilhelm Kirr, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 01/31/2006
* USD 93,121.00

The PI will study the long time behavior of solutions of &lt;br/&gt;dispersive
partial differential equations under time dependent &lt;br/&gt;perturbations.
The focus will be on the Linear and Nonlinear Schroedinger &lt;br/&gt;Equation
in the regimes in which it supports bound states (periodic &lt;br/&gt;in time,
localized in space solutions). The perturbation is expected to
&lt;br/&gt;redistribute the energy among the bound state and transfer part of it
to &lt;br/&gt;radiation. A rigorous description of this process will be sought.
For this &lt;br/&gt;purpose the PI will develop novel mathematical techniques
for studying the &lt;br/&gt;evolution of both the radiation field and the bound
states. The tools are &lt;br/&gt;expected to generalize to other dispersive
equations like Klein-Gordon, &lt;br/&gt;Sine-Gordon and Korteweg - de
Vries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Schroedinger Equation is a well established
model for a variety of &lt;br/&gt;physical phenomena and engineering processes.
For example, dispersion &lt;br/&gt;managed optical fibers used in high bit rate
telecommunications consist of &lt;br/&gt;concatenated pieces of fiber with
different material properties. As the &lt;br/&gt;light pulses pass through them
they suffer two main transformations. On &lt;br/&gt;one hand they are kept from
spreading out which is desirable. On the other &lt;br/&gt;hand they loose energy
to radiation. Striking the right balance between &lt;br/&gt;the two effects is a
design problem to which the PI plans to contribute. &lt;br/&gt;The second
example is related to the new ideas on generating matter waves &lt;br/&gt;out of
particles in a special phase (Bose-Einstein Condensates) by
&lt;br/&gt;controlled variation of their environment. The stability and long
time &lt;br/&gt;behavior of these waves is not well understood and will be
investigated in &lt;br/&gt;the project. The third example concerns radar
detection through &lt;br/&gt;fluctuating media. On one hand, due to the random
fluctuations, the signal &lt;br/&gt;reflected by the target that reaches the
detector tends to contain more &lt;br/&gt;information compared to a signal that
propagates through a stationary &lt;br/&gt;medium. On the other hand, the same
fluctuations tend to radiate out of &lt;br/&gt;the environment both the direct
and reflected signal. A better qualitative &lt;br/&gt;and quantitative
understanding of the second phenomena is one of the goals &lt;br/&gt;of this
project.