* 0405439
* Non-compact, random billiard systems; Quantum large deviations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Marco Lenci, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 83,073.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Lenci&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project consists of
three parts: Part I deals with&lt;br/&gt;billiards on non-compact tables, as
models for hyperbolic dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems with an infinite invariant
measure. The plan is to extend&lt;br/&gt;to these dynamical systems certain
important results available for compact &lt;br/&gt;billiards, including a
suitable version of Pesin's Theory. This will require &lt;br/&gt;the rewriting
of some notions of ergodic theory for the case of a &lt;br/&gt;non-probability
measure. Part II concerns random billiards; more precisely, &lt;br/&gt;billiards
with a random table (changing after each collision), a quenched
&lt;br/&gt;random table (selected once and for all from a random ensemble), or a
random &lt;br/&gt;law of reflection (in a fixed table). In the first two cases
there is a &lt;br/&gt;physical invariant measure, and the PI will study its
ergodic properties &lt;br/&gt;(including Lyapunov exponents and the like) for a
typical realization of the &lt;br/&gt;random process. In the third case an
equilibrium measure can be shown to &lt;br/&gt;exist, and its asymptotic
properties will be investigated, together with the &lt;br/&gt;natural question
of the stochastic stability at the zero-noise limit. &lt;br/&gt;Similar
perturbative questions are considered for the other systems as well.
&lt;br/&gt;Part III, in the realm of equilibrium statistical mechanics,
considers the &lt;br/&gt;question of quantum large deviations. In a
collaborative project, the PI &lt;br/&gt;sets out to initiate a theory of large
deviations for a noncommutative &lt;br/&gt;quasi-local algebra on a
d-dimensional lattice. Of primary interest is the &lt;br/&gt;convergence of the
moment-generating function for an extensive observable, &lt;br/&gt;and the
smoothness and physical significance of its
limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Billiards are a class of dynamical systems that has
been most&lt;br/&gt;extensively studied. This is so for a two-fold reason: On
one hand,&lt;br/&gt;mathematically, they are relatively treatable, with their
geometric&lt;br/&gt;features often giving hints on how to prove a certain
sought&lt;br/&gt;result. On the other hand, from the point of view of physics,
they are&lt;br/&gt;fairly realistic models that have been applied to a variety
of fields,&lt;br/&gt;from statistical mechanics to optics to scattering theory.
Therefore the &lt;br/&gt;drive is natural to expand this class to cover new
areas where it could have &lt;br/&gt;a remarkable impact: the family of open
systems (every system with unbounded &lt;br/&gt;dynamics belongs to this
category) and of random systems (which tries to &lt;br/&gt;justify when, and
why, deterministic predictions still make sense in a noisy &lt;br/&gt;world). As
for Part III, the theory of large deviations in statistical &lt;br/&gt;mechanics
gives a theoretical understanding of the fact that large systems,
&lt;br/&gt;which are deeply random from the observer's standpoint, yield
nonetheless &lt;br/&gt;very accurate deterministic measurements. Although large
deviations for &lt;br/&gt;classical systems have been the subject of massive and
very successful &lt;br/&gt;research, a counterpart of quantum system (which
should rightfully be even &lt;br/&gt;more fundamental) is conspicuously missing
at the moment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;