* 0405637
* High Dimensional Mixture Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Bruce Lindsay, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2010
* USD 564,000.00

The purpose of this project is the development of theory, statistical
&lt;br/&gt;methodology, and computational&lt;br/&gt;methods for use in mixture
models in high dimensional data. In the &lt;br/&gt;theoretical portion, the
investigator&lt;br/&gt;enhances the potential statistical applications of these
models by &lt;br/&gt;examining their topographical structure and their
relationship to other &lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional methods such as local linear
regression and&lt;br/&gt;hierarchical trees. New kernel densities are being
constructed by the use &lt;br/&gt;of the idea of&lt;br/&gt;diffusion processes.
New methods to assess the important aspects of &lt;br/&gt;identifiability in
these models&lt;br/&gt;are under development. In addition to these basic
theoretical developments, &lt;br/&gt;the investigator is creating a set of
methods designed to fit diffusion &lt;br/&gt;mixture models, and to assess their
fit, in high dimensions. A key part of &lt;br/&gt;this methodological
development is occuring in computational enhancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
statistics community is faced with a great challenge by modern science,
&lt;br/&gt;and that is to&lt;br/&gt;develop new tools for scientific inference
in the aftermath of the data &lt;br/&gt;revolution. Modern data is potentially
high in dimension, and massive in &lt;br/&gt;the number of collected units. The
probability models called mixture models &lt;br/&gt;have had a long history of
use in describing heterogeneity in data samples. &lt;br/&gt;They are extremely
flexible, and provide a compact picture of the key &lt;br/&gt;features of the
data structure. Unfortunately, limited theoretical &lt;br/&gt;developments in
this difficult area have held back their use in high &lt;br/&gt;dimensional
problems. This research project targets a number of the key
&lt;br/&gt;difficulties remaining in this area, including the integration of
this &lt;br/&gt;methodology with other existing ones, the expansion&lt;br/&gt;of
this methodology into new data types, and a better understanding of this
&lt;br/&gt;model's structure in&lt;br/&gt;very high dimensions. The methods that
arise from these developments are &lt;br/&gt;being turned into computational
packages so that they can be used by
&lt;br/&gt;scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;