* 0405212
* Non--Perturbative Interaction Effects in Disordered and Granular Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Alex Kamenev, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2009
* USD 231,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education in the area of strongly
correlated electron materials. Electron-electron interactions have a dramatic
effect on transport and thermodynamic properties of disordered systems. The
effect is especially pronounced in systems with reduced dimensionality. While
perturbative effects (taking place at relatively weak disorder and high
temperature) are rather well understood, strongly disordered or low-temperature
systems continue to be intellectually challenging for both experimentalists and
theoreticians. &lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to address the twin problem of strong
disorder and strong correlation with non-perturbative methods of quantum field
theory. Instanton approaches have been fruitful for the study of the Coulomb
blockade in quantum dots. In the first phase of the work, the PI will extend his
Keldysh nonlinear sigma model approach to study granular arrays consisting of a
large number of strongly connected dots (grains). The developed techniques will
then be applied to generic disordered systems. The goal of the research is to
describe reliably low-temperature properties of strongly disordered metals,
including an apparent glassy behavior recently observed in
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the award are primarily educational.
Undergraduate students (including those participating in the NSF sponsored REU
and summer-student programs) will be involved in the research activities. The
project will also involve at least one full-time graduate student, who is
expected to actively participate in directing undergraduate research. The upper
level solid-state courses will directly benefit from the results of the research
activity. This award will also facilitate interactions with the industry
(seminars and possibly mini-courses are planned to be given for industrial
researchers) as well as international collaboration with scientists from
Germany, Israel, Japan and Russia. Results of the work will be disseminated
broadly in scientific publications, national and international conferences and
their proceedings. An additional venue of dissemination will be through graduate
summer-schools, such as Les-Houches.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education to tackle the challenging problem of
disordered materials with strongly correlated electrons. Correlations in the
motion of electrons arise from strong interactions between electrons. While
understanding strongly correlated materials with a regular arrangement of atoms
is a challenging problem in and of itself, the combination of strong correlation
and a disordered configuration of atoms is a very difficult problem. The PI will
use advanced methods of theoretical condensed matter physics to attack this
problem starting from a consideration of granular systems. Experiments have
revealed interesting and poorly understood phenomena in disordered and strongly
correlated systems. The understanding of these may provide the key to
understanding apparent experimental observations of a metallic state thought not
to occur in disordered two-dimensional systems and an apparent glassy behavior
recently observed in a number of experiments. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the
award are primarily educational. Undergraduate students (including those
participating in the NSF sponsored REU and summer-student programs) will be
involved in the research activities. The project will also involve at least one
full-time graduate student, who is expected to actively participate in directing
undergraduate research. The upper level solid-state courses will directly
benefit from the results of the research activity. This award will also
facilitate interactions with the industry (seminars and possibly mini-courses
are planned to be given for industrial researchers) as well as international
collaboration with scientists from Germany, Israel, Japan and Russia. Results of
the work will be disseminated broadly in scientific publications, national and
international conferences and their proceedings. An additional venue of
dissemination will be through graduate summer-schools, such as Les-
Houches.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;