* 0405682
* Mesoscopic Phase Modulations in Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Sang-Wook Cheong, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2008
* USD 390,000.00

Chemically complex oxides and other materials are being investigated not only
for the interesting physical phenomena they exhibit but also with a view to
incorporating them in devices to perform desired functions. Such functional,
complex materials with various coupled physical degrees of freedom have proven
to be conducive to mesoscopic phase modulations. Scientific understanding of the
interrelationship between these modulations and macroscopic physical properties
is of prime importance for controlling the technological functionality of
complex materials. This project is focused on the synthesis of a variety of
novel systems and collaborative experiments for the study of their physical
properties. The specific topics include the nanoscale self-organization of spin
clusters in frustrated antiferromagnets, multiscale ferromagnetic domain
structures in manganites and the dynamic reordering of charge carriers in mixed-
valent oxides. The possible correlation of charge density waves and vortices in
Bi superconductors and the physics of ferroelectric relaxors will be also
studied. The proposed activities will further strengthen the role of research at
all levels of education by employing (underrepresented) high school students
(through, e.g., the Liberty Science Center, New Jersey), undergraduate students,
graduate students as well as postdocs. Research results from this project will
be used for enriching graduate materials physics course.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence of many small, mesocopic regions of distinct
electronic or magnetic structures in novel materials may lead to entirely
different macroscopic properties. The proposed research is aimed at the
understanding of the interrelationship between these mesoscopic phase
modulations and macroscopic physical properties in several materials. This
understanding can be the decisive factor that will make the use of complex
materials to perform desired functions in emerging technologies possible. The
project involves synthesis and characterization efforts using a variety of
techniques and skills available through an established, collaborative inter-
institutional and international team of researchers. The proposed study will
further strengthen the role of research at all levels of education by employing
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. For example, high school
students will be involved in the proposed research through the Partners in
Science program (organized by the Liberty Science Center, NJ) and a summer
workshop for the underrepresented high school students in the Newark area.
&lt;br/&gt;