* 0405034
* RUI:  Investigation of the Properties and Reactivities of 1,2-Diazetine Dioxides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Gary Breton, Berry College
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 113,401.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professors Gary W. Breton of Berry College will seek to expand our knowledge of
the diazetine dioxides, a very specific class of compounds that was discovered
in 1971. They received attention in only a few good papers until the discovery
that nitric oxide was of great physiological importance and that diazetine
dioxides liberate this simple gas. Professor Breton is proposing a more detailed
investigation of their chemistry. Experiments and computations to determine the
mechanism of decomposition of 1,2-diazetine dioxides will be carried out. These
compounds are potenially interesting precursors to nitric oxide under
physiological conditions. Different compounds with varying degrees of strain
will be prepared and the rates and thermodynamic parameters for the
decomposition will be determined and the products characterized. The mechanism
of NO extrusion from diazetine dioxide will be studied in conjunction with the
effect of strain energy on the rate of NO loss from the 4-membered heterocycles.
The results should be a much better understanding of this reaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports
Professors Gary W. Breton of Berry College who will undertake a well-designed
project that has a strong focus on kinetics and mechanism. The project will
provide students with challenges that will present several levels of increasing
difficulty. The project is well planned and will likely produce broadly
interesting results that will provide for the students involved a sophisticated
initiation into modern chemical research. Nitric oxide has important
physiological properties, and an ability to tune the production rates from the
precursors synthesized could have useful medical implication.&lt;br/&gt;