* 0405867
* RUI:    Noncommutative Geometry:     Curvature and Rigidity of Noncompact Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Stanley Chang, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2008
* USD 94,463.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405867&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Stanley S. Chang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main projects funded by
this award explore the existence&lt;br/&gt;problem for Riemannian metrics of
positive scalar curvature on&lt;br/&gt;noncompact manifolds. The work of Gromov
and Lawson on the&lt;br/&gt;compact case of this problem has stimulated
important parts of&lt;br/&gt;the development of noncommutative geometry and
controlled&lt;br/&gt;topology and these projects are formulated within the
context of&lt;br/&gt;the stable Gromov-Lawson-Rosenberg conjecture. The
principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator and collaborators aim to construct an
appropriate&lt;br/&gt;assembly map in the noncompact case, to test that theory
in&lt;br/&gt;natural examples, and to study with the generalized Roe
algebra&lt;br/&gt;the coarse quasi-isometry type of manifolds that do
admit&lt;br/&gt;complete metrics of positive scalar curvature.
Noncompact&lt;br/&gt;manifolds obtained by deleting submanifolds from larger
compact&lt;br/&gt;manifolds and non-Galois or irregular covering spaces of
compact&lt;br/&gt;manifolds are promising sources of examples for study,
and&lt;br/&gt;noncompact manifolds of finite asymptotic dimension will
receive&lt;br/&gt;particular attention. Other directions of investigation
include&lt;br/&gt;the zero-in-the-spectrum conjecture and expander
graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noncommutative geometry is an approach to the study
of geometric&lt;br/&gt;objects through algebras of natural functions and
operators. For&lt;br/&gt;example, much of the geometry of a sphere is captured
in&lt;br/&gt;solutions to equations that model vibration, and by
the&lt;br/&gt;differential operators that appear in those equations.
Round&lt;br/&gt;spheres are examples of manifolds of positive curvature, the
flat&lt;br/&gt;plane has curvature zero, and the saddle point in a mountain
pass&lt;br/&gt;is a model for space of negative curvature. Mathematicians
have&lt;br/&gt;found a number of tests that must be passed by any space
that&lt;br/&gt;would be a candidate to carry a geometry of positive
curvature,&lt;br/&gt;and these projects will advance that effort. Another line
of&lt;br/&gt;work described in the proposal concerns expander graphs,
which&lt;br/&gt;were originally introduced in computer science as models of
large&lt;br/&gt;networks with good communication properties but have also
turned&lt;br/&gt;out to be a source of potential counterexamples for
geometric&lt;br/&gt;questions. These will be the subject of seminars
involving&lt;br/&gt;students and faculty from Wellesley College and
nearby&lt;br/&gt;institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;