* 0405742
* New Mechanisms in Epitaxial Crystal Growth:  The Role of Incorporated Defects Revealed By In-Situ X-ray Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Paul Miceli, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2008
* USD 289,919.00

Understanding the fundamental mechanisms of epitaxial crystal growth is of great
interest, both because the growth kinetics is a window to atomic-scale processes
and because of the desire to control and exploit growth behavior in order to
create novel nanoscale materials. This individual investigator award supports a
project to investigate new mechanisms of epitaxial growth where vacancies and
stacking faults that are incorporated at the growing surface influence the
surface morphology. Conventional experimental surface tools, such as scanning-
probe techniques (STM, AFM) or electron and atom scattering, are sensitive only
to the surface and, therefore, have overlooked the role of incorporated defects,
which are subsequently buried below the surface. This project exploits the
simultaneous surface and subsurface sensitivity of x-ray scattering using bright
x-ray beams from the Advanced Photon Source. The objective is to understand the
mechanisms of defect incorporation and how these defects are related to the
evolving surface morphology. Because vacancies and stacking faults begin their
incorporation locally at the surface, such systems are amenable to theoretical
description and, thus, these experimental studies provide an essential
intellectual foundation to explore more complex defect systems. Collaborations
with theoretical and experimental groups will help achieve a comprehensive
understanding that could not otherwise be achieved by a single technique or
research group. The project involves graduate students, postdoctoral researchers
as well as undergraduates, thereby leading to the integration of research and
education though training and mentoring. Their educational experience is
significantly enhanced through collaborative research, which strengthens
communication skills, and by direct experience with a state-of-the-art x-ray
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With new device technologies moving towards
significantly smaller length-scales, the need for fundamental science to explore
how atoms move and arrange themselves on surfaces is becoming imperative for
understanding how materials grow. Although there has been significant recent
progress towards understanding some of the mechanisms that dictate atomic
assemblies on surfaces, the role of defects (meaning atoms that do not occupy
expected positions) has been overlooked. Because defects can be initially
incorporated at the surface and then become buried below it, conventional
experimental tools which are sensitive only to the surface cannot see the
defects. This individual investigator award supports research that will utilize
a beam of x-rays from the Advanced Photon Source, which is the brightest source
of x-rays in the United States, to interrogate both the surface and the
subsurface structure as atoms are deposited onto a surface. The objective of the
project is to understand the mechanism by which defects are incorporated and how
the defect incorporation is related to the evolving atomic-scale features on the
surface. It is expected that these experimental studies will yield essential new
insight to growth mechanisms and, thus, provide a comprehensive framework for
understanding how materials grow at surfaces. The project will train and mentor
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers as well as undergraduate
students. Extensive collaborative work with other research groups will both
strengthen the objectives of this project as well as help the development of the
students' communication skills. Their research activities at the Advanced Photon
Source will enhance their educational experience while these students will
become part of a national resource of future scientists who can utilize these
new state-of-the-art facilities. &lt;br/&gt;