* 0405978
* Inverse Problems and Their Applications:  Deterministic and Statistical Methods for Variable Local Regularization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Patricia Lamm, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2008
* USD 233,008.00

Abstract: 0405978 P Lamm, Michigan State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inverse
Problems and their Applications: Deterministic and Statistical Methods for
Variable Local Regularization &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
the principal investigator plans to develop&lt;br/&gt;theoretically-sound
methods for the practical selection of variable&lt;br/&gt;regularization
parameters as part of local regularization methods for&lt;br/&gt;inverse
problems. The PI first proposes to undertake a deterministic&lt;br/&gt;approach
to the problem of variable parameter selection via the&lt;br/&gt;coordination of
local discrepancy principles and under the assumption&lt;br/&gt;that some local
information about data error-level is available.&lt;br/&gt;Parts of this work
will entail wavelet-based approximations used in&lt;br/&gt;conjunction with the
local regularization ideas. In addition, the PI&lt;br/&gt;plans to study a
statistical parameter estimation idea currently being&lt;br/&gt;tested by
researchers working on the problem of detecting ozone levels&lt;br/&gt;in the
atmosphere, and to give these ideas the theoretical basis they&lt;br/&gt;are
currently lacking. There is hope that powerful new methods for&lt;br/&gt;the
selection of variable local regularization parameters, methods
not&lt;br/&gt;requiring information about local noise-levels in the data,
will&lt;br/&gt;emerge from this work. As part of the project the PI plans to
apply&lt;br/&gt;this new class of methods to the ozone detection
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inverse problems occur widely in many
applications, including problems&lt;br/&gt;of biomedical imaging (CT scans and
X-rays), image reconstruction&lt;br/&gt;(from satellites or other sources), the
detection of ozone levels in&lt;br/&gt;the atmosphere, and geophysical
exploration. While classical methods&lt;br/&gt;exist for for solving such
problems, classical methods are often very&lt;br/&gt;inefficient and lead to
overly expensive solution techniques. A&lt;br/&gt;second disadvantage of
classical solution methods can be seen in&lt;br/&gt;imaging applications where
reconstructed images may have blurred edges&lt;br/&gt;and inadequately detailed
features. The PI has been working to&lt;br/&gt;address these difficulties with
the development of new solution&lt;br/&gt;methods based on the ideas of local
regularization. The use of these&lt;br/&gt;newer methods can lead to a
significant decrease in cost for the&lt;br/&gt;solution of a wide class of
practical inverse problems, with improved&lt;br/&gt;resolution of detailed
features of solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;