* 0405622
* Geometric PDE's and Monge-Kantorovich Theory in Problems of Optics and Differential Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Vladimir Oliker, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2008
* USD 107,997.00

&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0405622&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Vladimir Oliker, Emory
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Geometric PDE's and Monge-Kantorovich
Theory in Problems of&lt;br/&gt;Optics and Differential
Geometry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
work is the development of geometric&lt;br/&gt;methods for solving nonlinear
partial differential equations (PDE's)&lt;br/&gt;arising in problems involving
maps with controlled Jacobian&lt;br/&gt;determinant. Many problems in
differential geometry, optics,&lt;br/&gt;and other areas of mathematics and
engineering are in&lt;br/&gt;this class. Recently discovered deep connections
between such equations&lt;br/&gt;and Monge-Kantorovich optimal mass transfer
theory in Euclidean space&lt;br/&gt;and on manifolds will also be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;Among the topics that will be considered are the
following.&lt;br/&gt;(1) Development of geometrical and analytic techniques for
solving &lt;br/&gt;problems requiring determination of reflecting and refracting
&lt;br/&gt;interfaces with capabilities to transform
intensity&lt;br/&gt;distributions in a prescribed manner. &lt;br/&gt;(2)
Investigation of geometric problems involving hypersurfaces &lt;br/&gt;with
prescribed curvature functions and geometric inequalities &lt;br/&gt;with
emphasis on variational methods, especially,&lt;br/&gt;those connected with
Monge-Kantorovich theory; applications &lt;br/&gt;of these variational methods
to problems in convexity, &lt;br/&gt;in particular, to the Minkowski problem
and&lt;br/&gt;its various generalizations, will be studied as a part of this
program.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Development of geometrically motivated, provably
convergent and &lt;br/&gt;efficient multi-scale numerical methods for solving
nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;second order PDE's arising in reflector/refractor problems
of optics &lt;br/&gt;and in geometric problems involving curvature functions and
maps with &lt;br/&gt;controlled volume. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear partial
differentials equations expressing energy conservation &lt;br/&gt;laws as a
constraint on the Jacobian of a map describing a physical&lt;br/&gt;phenomenon
are very common in science and engineering. For example,&lt;br/&gt;in optics
such equations arise naturally in problems&lt;br/&gt;requiring determination of
interfaces with prescribed&lt;br/&gt;refractive and/or reflective properties; in
astrophysics these equations&lt;br/&gt;have to be solved when the shape of
targets in the solar&lt;br/&gt;system must be determined from indirect and
limited set of measurements;&lt;br/&gt;in weather prediction models based on
quasi- and semi-geostrophic&lt;br/&gt;approximations of atmospheric motion such
equations describe&lt;br/&gt;energy conservation laws; in computer science the
same type of&lt;br/&gt;equations arise in problems connected with radiosity
estimates.&lt;br/&gt;Typically, the theoretical analysis and numerical solution
of&lt;br/&gt;these equations is very difficult because of their highly
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;structure. Fortunately, the geometric content common to all
these problems&lt;br/&gt;provides important insights leading to effective
methods for their&lt;br/&gt;investigation and numerical solution. Development of
such methods&lt;br/&gt;is the main goal of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;