* 0405477
* Metal Sulfide Semiconductor Nanowires and "Wired" Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Reginald Penner, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2007
* USD 285,167.00

This project addresses two types of nanostructured systems based on metal
sulfides (CdS, PbS, Cu2S, and Ag2S): 1)Arrays of ultra-long (&gt; 500 um) metal
sulfide nanowires and 2)Wired metal sulfide nanoparticles linked by metal
nanowire connecting segments. The approach to the synthesis of these systems
relies on Electrochemical Step Edge Decoration, a technique developed by the PI
over the past two years. The synthesis and characterization (both structural and
chemical) of these structures will be carried out as Phase 1 of the project. In
Phase 2 electrical conduction, photoconductivity, and electroluminescence of
these materials will be investigated by transferring the nanowires from HOPG
(Highly Ordered Pyrolytic Graphite) surfaces onto glass substrates and
evaporating metal contacts onto the ends of the transferred wire arrays. Recent
work has demonstrated feasibility of the approach. Fundamental understanding is
sought of how the bulk electronic structure of metal sulfide semiconductors is
manifested in the optical and electrical properties of polycrystalline 1-D
wires. The ultra-long wires to be synthesized in this study will make possible
direct electrical measurements of conduction in wire arrays with the possibility
of electrical excitation of luminescence in these systems. Broader understanding
and fundamental insights into the properties of polycrystalline 1-D
semiconductor nanowires are anticipated outcomes from these studies.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in a
topical area of electronic materials with high technological relevance. An
important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, with
emphasis on integration of research and education involving university and high
school students. The PI has established outreach activities to students at
University High School near the UCI campus. An educational objective of this
proposal is to broaden this outreach program to include an additional 1-2 high-
school students a year from high schools with a high concentration of
economically disadvantaged students within the Newport Mesa and Santa Ana
Unified School Districts. It is planned to identify prospective candidates for
research by interfacing with the NSF-funded Faculty Outreach Collaborations
Uniting Scientists, Students and Schools, or FOCUS! Program at UCI. Each student
works as an apprentice with a senior graduate student during the summer until
they cultivate the research skills necessary to embark on an independent
research project. This project will take place during the balance of the summer,
and possibly extend into the school year on weekends and after school. Research
projects will be tailored to the abilities and interests of the students. A
sample project may involve the synthesis of one type of semiconductor nanowire,
and the characterization of these wires using scanning electron microscopy and
EDX (Energy Dispersive X-ray Analysis) elemental analysis.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;