* 0405262
* MARGINS Post-doctoral Fellowship - Jennifer Garrison: Time-scales and mechanisms of differentiation of mafic parents to rhyodacite in Central America
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Mark Reagan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2007
* USD 163,017.00

Abstract (0425262) - Reagan&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to perform geochemical
analyses on silicic igneous rocks, primarily rhyolites and rhyodacites, from
young volcanic complexes (less than 20,000 years old) in El Salvador and
Nicaragua to determine how the voluminous magmas capable of caldera-producing
eruptions are generated and over what time-scales they evolve. Ilopango, Apoyo,
and Apoyeque calderas were chosen for this study based on age and range of
volumes to provide a better understanding of emplacement times for subduction
zone-related magmas in the area. These sites are within the Central America
focus site of the NSF-funded MARGINS Seismogenic Zone and Subduction Factory
initiatives, whose purposes are to answer questions about the growth and
evolution of the lithosphere and provide information to evaluate and perhaps
mitigate hazards associated with subduction zone volcanism. The focused
attention of these and other institutional initiatives on the Central American
volcanic arc has led to a number of ongoing and complementary petrological and
volcanological investigations.&lt;br/&gt; Whole rock samples and mineral
separates from these volcanic complexes will be analyzed for U, Th, and Ra
nuclide abundances, Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf and O isotopes, with the intent of determining
quantitatively the time-scales of rhyodacite production and accumulation. To
help constrain source ages, zircons from the lavas will be analyzed on the
CAMECA ion probe at UCLA. Data from the study will then be combined with major
and trace element data from another laboratory and published data for more mafic
volcanic rocks from the area to understand timescales and differentiation of
magmas in subduction zone-related volcanic systems &lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts
of this work include support of a promising female scientist and training her in
the set-up and use of clean lab and mass spectrometry facilities, use of an NSF-
funded shared-user ion probe facility at UCLA, and enabling collaboration
between institutions that do not normally work together (University of Iowa,
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, US Geological Survey, and Michigan State).
Societal implications include expanding our knowledge of volcanic eruption
timing and caldera formation, which may ultimately help devise strategies for
volcanic hazard prediction and
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;