* 0405985
* Smooth Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Sheldon Newhouse, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 10/31/2006
* USD 35,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We propose to study the dynamics of smooth
diffeomorphisms of low&lt;br/&gt; dimensional manifolds. A significant theme
here is the study of the&lt;br/&gt; abundance of homoclinic tangencies and its
effects. It has been&lt;br/&gt; known for some time that homoclinic tangencies
produce interesting&lt;br/&gt; phenomena. They form an obstruction to structural
stability, and have&lt;br/&gt; a profound influence on bifurcations phenomena.
While most of the&lt;br/&gt; information we have about homoclinic tangencies may
be considered&lt;br/&gt; negative in regard to our ability to understand the
underlying&lt;br/&gt; dynamics, recently we obtained a positive result:
generically they&lt;br/&gt; lead to topologically transitive sets of maximal
Hausdorff&lt;br/&gt; dimension. One part of the current proposal involves
understanding&lt;br/&gt; the relation between these maximal dimension sets and
Lebesgue&lt;br/&gt; asymptotic measures. These are measures obtained by taking
weak&lt;br/&gt; limits of the averages of the iterates of measures which
are&lt;br/&gt; absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure. Recently
we&lt;br/&gt; have shown that in many dissipative cases SRB measures on
surfaces&lt;br/&gt; only exist on uniformly hyperbolic attractors. We wish to
extend&lt;br/&gt; this to area preserving cases and to make progress on the
conjecture&lt;br/&gt; that generically in highly smooth systems a non-Anosov
area preserving&lt;br/&gt; diffeomorphism of a surface has metric entropy zero.
Another&lt;br/&gt; question we will consider is whether the Henon family
&lt;br/&gt; has no SRB measure for a residual set of&lt;br/&gt; parameters. It
is a celebrated result of Benedicks-Carleson&lt;br/&gt; and Benedicks-Young that
SRB measures exist for a positive Lebesgue&lt;br/&gt; measure set of parameters.
In addition to the above, we will study&lt;br/&gt; various questions on the
existence of symbolic extensions in smooth&lt;br/&gt; systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We propose to study aspects of the orbit
structure of non-linear&lt;br/&gt; smooth dynamical systems. Our particular
emphasis will be on three&lt;br/&gt; dimensional systems whose orbits return
infinitely often to an&lt;br/&gt; embedded transverse surface. These systems
occur in models which&lt;br/&gt; arise in many fields of science from Biology to
Physics and even&lt;br/&gt; Economics. For instance, they include the problems
of general forced&lt;br/&gt; oscillations and the Newtoninan motion of three
bodies in a plane.&lt;br/&gt; Considering the so-called first return map to the
embedded surface&lt;br/&gt; we are led to study the iterations of smooth
transformations&lt;br/&gt; (mappings) of a surface to itself. There are special
motions called&lt;br/&gt; homoclinic motions (first discovered and named by
Poincare in the&lt;br/&gt; three body problem) which are known to produce a
rich, interesting,&lt;br/&gt; and complicated orbit structure. In particular,
typical homoclinic&lt;br/&gt; motions imply the existence of infinitely many
unstable periodic&lt;br/&gt; orbits and other orbits which behave in an erratic
and unpredictable&lt;br/&gt; way. It is now known that in many cases such
systems can be studied&lt;br/&gt; by comparing them to statistical objects such
as the random flipping&lt;br/&gt; of a weighted coin. This gives rise to so-
called "symbolic models"&lt;br/&gt; whose orbit structure can be understood. Our
research concerns the&lt;br/&gt; types of symbolic systems which can occur in
modeling various smooth&lt;br/&gt; systems. including the estimation of certain
numerical quantities&lt;br/&gt; called "entropy" and "dimension" which can be
used to quantify&lt;br/&gt; different levels of complicated
motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;