* 0405216
* Topics in Set-theoretic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Gary Gruenhage, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 141,556.00

The principle investigator will explore open problems in several areas
of&lt;br/&gt;set-theoretic topology. Convergence properties have
important&lt;br/&gt;implications in a number of fields, yet are not well-
understood. For&lt;br/&gt;example, it is not known if it is consistent that a
space which is&lt;br/&gt;Frechet-Urysohn for finite sets must be first-
countable. Settling this&lt;br/&gt;question is likely to lead to a solution of
Malychin's well-known problem&lt;br/&gt;whether it is consistent that separable
Frechet-Urysohn topological groups&lt;br/&gt;must be metrizable. Two other
themes of this proposal involve function&lt;br/&gt;spaces with the compact-open
topology. Settling one of them would solve a&lt;br/&gt;40 year old problem of J.
Ceder, and settling the other would yield a&lt;br/&gt;useful way of determining
when these function spaces are Baire spaces.&lt;br/&gt;Another goal of this
proposal is to apply Balogh's magnificent technique&lt;br/&gt;for constructing
ZFC examples , which he used to settle several&lt;br/&gt;long-standing
conjectures, to other problems, and in the process attempt&lt;br/&gt;to simplify
and codify the technique to make it easier to use. Finally,&lt;br/&gt;there have
been a number of recent advances on the D-space property, a&lt;br/&gt;property
with interesting but not well-understood relationships with&lt;br/&gt;covering
properties, which indicate that the time may be ripe for settling&lt;br/&gt;the
D-space questions of van Douwen that have stumped researchers for
more&lt;br/&gt;than 20 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Set theory and general
topology are fundamental mathematical disciplines,&lt;br/&gt;with common
historical roots, and they serve as essential tools in many&lt;br/&gt;areas of
mathematics. General topology provides a framework for the study&lt;br/&gt;of
shapes, from ordinary shapes in real three-dimensional space to
much&lt;br/&gt;more abstract shapes and structures. For example, continuous
real-valued&lt;br/&gt;functions are a staple of mathematics, and hence the
topological structure&lt;br/&gt;of spaces of continuous functions, which is one
of the topics that this&lt;br/&gt;proposal centers on, has important
implications in many fields. The&lt;br/&gt;same can be said about the notion of
sequential convergence and its&lt;br/&gt;variants, another topic of this
proposal. The principle investigator's&lt;br/&gt;proposed problems lie within
the scope of what has been a fruitful&lt;br/&gt;interaction between general
topology and set theory, an interaction&lt;br/&gt;spurred by dramatic advances
in set theory and logic in the last forty&lt;br/&gt;years or so and the
realization that many long-standing questions in the&lt;br/&gt;general topology
of abstract spaces rest on complicated set-theoretic&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics.
Solutions to the proposed problems would deepen our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of
the fundamental topological properties to be explored,&lt;br/&gt;and would
likely require new set-theoretical and topological
techniques&lt;br/&gt;applicable to a variety of other problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;