* 0405419
* U.S.- Chile Cooperative Research:   Anthropogenic Influences on the Environmental Dissemination of Bacteria and Bacterial Genes
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Randall Singer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2006
* USD 58,528.00

0405419&lt;br/&gt;Singer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Chile award will provide
support for Dr. Randall Singer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, to
collaborate with Dr. Gerardo E. Gonzalez-Rocha, Universidad de Concepcion in
Chile. Partial support for this project comes from the Biocomplexity in the
Environment (BE) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will work on
anthropogenic influences on the environmental dissemination of bacteria and
bacterial genes. The focus of this project is on the ecological processes by
which E. coli disperse into complex natural environments. They will also look at
factors that are hypothesized to increase the diversity, antimicrobial
resistance, and virulence of these bacteria. Through an ecosystem-based study in
a rural environment, they will assess the relationships among specific
anthropogenic changes, other environmental and sociological parameters, and
changes in the diversity, resistance and virulence of E. coli.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity will increase our understanding of how
anthropogenic environmental changes facilitate the emergence of novel pathogens
in a relevant and important ecological setting. It will aid in the development
of methods for linking microbiological, epidemiological and ecological data into
a dissemination/dispersal model. &lt;br/&gt;