* 0405156
* Compensatory Roles of Electrostatics and Depletion Force on the Aggregation of Filamentous Viruses and Protein Filaments
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Jay Tang, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2007
* USD 298,302.00

The physical mechanisms of aggregation are relevant to a broad range of material
applications such as the processing of food, paper, petroleum products,
cosmetics, and drugs. Underpinning a variety of aggregation phenomena are two
fundamental physical mechanisms, namely solution electrostatics and the
depletion effect. This project seeks to quantitatively define the compensatory
roles of electrostatics and the depletion force on aggregation of protein
filaments and filamentous viruses. The selection of well-characterized
biopolymers for the study of physical properties brings out a synergy in
scientific inquiry across two traditionally separate disciplines. A combination
of experimental techniques will be utilized, including optical microscopy, light
scattering, atomic force microscopy, and small angle X-ray scattering. A
successful completion of the project will lead to practical applications such as
methods for the manipulation of protein and virus aggregates, separation of
biomolecules, and potential treatment of human diseases. The educational part of
this project is a biological physics initiative with both classroom teaching and
lab training. The project provides graduate and undergraduate students with
valuable experience in multidisciplinary techniques at the interface of physics
and biochemistry. A special commitment is made to encourage underrepresented
students in the learning and research activities.

Aggregation phenomena occur in a broad range of materials such as liquid food,
petroleum products, cosmetics, and drugs. Underpinning these phenomena are two
fundamental physical mechanisms: (1) the electrostatic interactions between ions
and charged molecules, and (2) the constant bombardment and sorting of numerous
molecules in solution described as the entropic effect in thermodynamic terms.
This project seeks to quantitatively define the compensatory roles of these two
major effects on the aggregation of protein filaments and filamentous viruses.
The selection of well-characterized biopolymers for the study of physical
properties brings out a synergy in scientific inquiry across two traditionally
separate disciplines. A combination of experimental techniques will be utilized,
including optical microscopy, light scattering, atomic force microscopy, and
small angle X-ray scattering. A successful completion of the project will lead
to practical applications such as methods for the manipulation of protein and
virus aggregates, separation of biomolecules, and potential treatment of human
diseases. The educational part of this project is a biological physics
initiative with both classroom teaching and lab training. The project provides
graduate and undergraduate students with valuable experience in
multidisciplinary techniques at the interface of physics and biochemistry. A
special commitment is made to encourage underrepresented students in the
learning and research activities.