* 0405382
* SGER: Team-Based, Challenge Learning in Chemical Engineering with Atypical Students
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Douglas Behrend, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 03/31/2006
* USD 78,714.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will investigated techniques
for accommodating vision impaired in chemical engineering majors. The objectives
of the study are &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. To understand how team based,
challenge learning occurs when a vision impaired &lt;br/&gt; student is included
in a group. &lt;br/&gt;2. To determine in what manner a visually impaired
student contributes to the &lt;br/&gt; overall design process and the developing
communication skills within the team. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Students will
accomplish the tasks typical of a chemical engineering design course
(debottlenecking and grass roots design). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
will yield insights into the process by which a vision atypical student
functions within a design team on open ended problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software adaptations, communication media, and knowledge
gained will be broadly disseminated to engineering faculty. The PI will also
demonstrate how three outcomes deemed necessary by the Accreditation Board for
Engineering and Technology (ABET) are achieved with atypical vision students,
namely function in multidisciplinary teams develop and use effective written and
oral communication skills and use the techniques, skills and modern engineering
tools necessary for engineering practice. This study will also encourage other
atypical students to consider an engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;