* 0405217
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Ferroelectric Thin Films and  Applications to Tunable Microwave Components
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Guru Subramanyam, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/2006
* USD 15,128.00

0405217&lt;br/&gt;Subramanyam&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Guru Subrmanyam and
students from University of Dayton in a collaboration with Spartak Gevorgian of
the Department of Microelectronics at the Chalmers University of Technology in
Gothenburg, Sweden. The collaboration will make significant contributions to the
field of Ferroelectric thin-films and Applications in Tunable Microwave
Components. The goal is to develop tunable Electromagnetic Bandgap structures
(EBGs) and frequency selective surfaces (FSS) with development focused on Si
monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMIC) compatible designs and
processes. Strontium titanate and barium strontium titanate ferroelectric thin-
films with low microwave loss and dielectric tunability at room temperature will
be used in this work. The research will also focus on creating ferroelectric
tunable planar two-dimensional artificial lattices for electromagnetic bandgap
structures as well as frequency selective surfaces. Through the dielectric
tunability of the ferroelectric thin-films, one can obtain frequency tunability
with the possibility of tuning the center frequencies of the stop- bands
(bandgaps) and the pass-bands. The US group has already demonstrated a tunable
one- dimensional EBG that offers stop-band frequency tunability. The current
work will extend this concept to 2D and potentially 3D EBGs resulting in
superior rejection bands and tunability. EBGs and FSS have proven to enhance the
bandwidth of low antennas as well as improve their gain. With the possibility of
frequency tunability, will come improved performance of low profile antennas
such as microstrip patches, and improved spatial filtering properties of tunable
FSS. Si MMIC compatible designs will allow easier integration of these circuits
into MICs, and MMICs. The collaboration with the Swedish group. In addition,
graduate and undergraduate students from the University of Dayton will be
actively involved in the proposed research, working in conjunction with post-
doctoral and graduate students from Chalmers University. &lt;br/&gt;