* 0405954
* Complexity and Variational Problems in Riemannian Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Alexander Nabutovsky, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 115,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405954&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Alexander Nabutovsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Firstly, we are going to
study the length of a shortest closed&lt;br/&gt;geodesic and a shortest closed
geodesic net on a compact Riemannian&lt;br/&gt;manifold. Secondly, we will also
study possible topologies of closed&lt;br/&gt;geodesic nets on surfaces.
Thirdly, we will try to resolve the&lt;br/&gt;following problem posed by M.
Gromov: Is it true that all closed&lt;br/&gt;geodesic nets on a compact surface
always form a dense subset?&lt;br/&gt;Fourthly, we will be interested in
curvature-free bounds for the&lt;br/&gt;smallest area of a non-trivial minimal
surface in a closed Riemannian&lt;br/&gt;manifold. In another direction we will
be studying Morse landscapes of&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian functionals and functionals
on spaces of&lt;br/&gt;submanifolds. Earlier we developed methods based on
recursion theory&lt;br/&gt;that enable one to prove that Morse landscape of many
interesting&lt;br/&gt;functionals on these spaces are extremely complicated. Now
we will try&lt;br/&gt;to develop methods yielding quantitative information about
graphs of&lt;br/&gt;these functionals and to extend our approach to a wider
class of&lt;br/&gt;functionals that includes Sobolev norms of various
curvatures&lt;br/&gt;normalized by a power of volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
one studies the geometry of the round sphere one naturally&lt;br/&gt;notices the
equator, meridians and other ``big" circles on it. These&lt;br/&gt;curves are
examples of closed geodesics. Now let us deform the sphere&lt;br/&gt;so that it
is not round. Remarkably, there still will be closed&lt;br/&gt;geodesics on this
surface, and the shortest of them will not be too&lt;br/&gt;long. We would like
to know how exactly its length is related to the&lt;br/&gt;area and the diameter
of the deformed surface. We will also study&lt;br/&gt;similar questions for
Riemannian manifolds that are higher dimensional&lt;br/&gt;generalizations of
surfaces. On the other hand note that the round&lt;br/&gt;sphere has the nicer
shape than all deformed spheres. It is less clear&lt;br/&gt;what is the nicest
shape of the torus (the ``pretzel"). We are going&lt;br/&gt;to investigate what
happens in higher dimensions where typically there&lt;br/&gt;are infinitely many
competing ``nice" shapes and a lot depends on what&lt;br/&gt;exactly do we mean
by ``nice".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;