* 0405918
* "The Theodore Y.-T. Wu Symposium on Engineering Mechanics" to be held in Vancouver, Canada on June 20-25, 2004.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Daniel Valentine, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 04/30/2005
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0405918&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: D. T.
VALENTINE&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: CLARKSON UNIVERSITY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUPPORT OF THE THEODORE Y-T WU SYMPOSIUM ON ENGINEERING
MECHANICS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial funding is provided for the "The Theodore
Y-T Wu Symposium on Engineering Mechanics" in Vancouver, Canada on June 20-25,
2004. Funds will enable support of the participants including the honored guest,
young researchers, graduate students, undergraduate students, keynote speaker,
and leaders in applied mechanics and engineering science. Funds will also offset
costs associated with preparation of the primary outcome of this symposium,
i.e., the book of key contributions to be titled Reflection and Outlook of
Engineering Mechanics: In Honor of Theodore Y.-T. Wu. The symposium is co-
sponsored by the Ocean Engineering Committee of the Ocean, Offshore and Arctic
Engineering Division of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) and
the Fluids Technical Committee of the Engineering Mechanics Division of the
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is the exchange of ideas at the forefront of
applied mechanics. The book to be published will be a collection of original
research papers that will help the scientific community and, in particular,
graduate students and young researchers pursue research in this important field
of engineering or applied science. The broader impact of this project is the
wide dissemination of ideas via an affordable book and via the impact made by
the experience of attending this symposium, particularly the impact on young
researchers and students. NSF funding is expected to enable participation of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jointly funded by the
Fluid Dynamics &amp; Hydraulics (CTS) and Solid Mechanics and Material
Engineering (CMS) Programs.&lt;br/&gt;