* 0405150
* RUI:    Percolation Model
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Yu Zhang, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2007
* USD 64,287.00

0405150&lt;br/&gt;Zhang&lt;br/&gt; Percolative models form a very active
subfield of probability theory. They have drawn much of their inspiration and
motivation from physics, biology and computer science. They have also been used
heavily in physics, biology, industry, and computer science. This project
focuses on the following percolation questions: &lt;br/&gt;General percolation
model: &lt;br/&gt;(a) The power laws and scaling relations. &lt;br/&gt;(b) The
central limit theorems for the incipient infinite cluster. &lt;br/&gt;(c)
Percolation on arbitrary words. &lt;br/&gt;(d) On the infinite differentiability
of the right edge in oriented percolation. &lt;br/&gt;First passage percolation:
&lt;br/&gt;(a) Non-differentiability of the time constant. &lt;br/&gt;(b) The
large deviations. &lt;br/&gt;The research makes use of probability theorems
(martingale, Markov chains, CLT theorem, correlation inequalities), graph
theorems (duality, lattice surfaces, planarity), combinatorics (partition
lattice, renormalization) and functional analysis (complex variables).
&lt;br/&gt; The project has a broad impact on research, education and
dissemination to advance scientific and technological understanding in the
following ways: First, percolation theory is one of most important subjects in
mathematics. In fact, issues and open questions in percolation theory are easy
to state, but whose solutions are apparently difficult and require innovative
methods. Furthermore, percolation theory is also directly applicable in biology,
industry, and computer science. Zhang presents six traditional problems in this
field and proposed new methods to solve them. Second, the proposal promotes
teaching experiences for Zhang's undergraduate students in areas of engineering,
computer science and mathematics. It also offers an opportunity for the students
to conduct research activities on percolation problems. Moreover, the proposal
also enhances scientific and technological understanding. Since percolation
theory involves numerical computations and simulations, technological advances
in computing science are required. &lt;br/&gt;