* 0405914
* Collaborative Research:  Tracking Statistics and Inference for Indirect Measurements
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Daniel Jeske, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 104,989.00

Classification and clustering are two fundamental data mining tools for
discovering useful patterns. Given that there is generally no perfect
classification or clustering procedures, it is crucial to correct or account for
the classification error in any subsequent inference which is derived from the
classification outcomes. The research in this proposal is developing inference
procedures that incorporate the error associated with classification rates, and
consequently is improving the robustness of decision-making processes that are
based on classification and clustering mechanisms. A particular example is the
development of tracking statistics in process control applications that correct
for errors in defect classifications. Another example is the development of
misclassification rate estimates without the usual assumption that a gold
standard exists. The research is enabling a wider use of data mining and
knowledge discovery techniques by removing stringent requirements on data
quality levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many decision-making processes use inputs
that are the result of statistical analyses of grouping subjects according to
their similarities. Classification and clustering techniques are two important
such grouping methods. The validity of the decision-making rests on the accuracy
of the grouping outcomes. Nowadays, classification and clustering algorithms
make use of large databases that are often low in data quality, and consequently
introduce biases in the classification and clustering outcomes. The goal of this
research is to develop inference methodologies that adjust for inherent noise in
the outputs of classification and clustering algorithms, and thereby improve the
accuracy of subsequent decision-making. The results of this research should
benefit many areas of applications, which include the analysis of micro-array
gene expression data, machine learning, information retrieval, risk analysis,
computer-aided diagnostics, and pattern recognition. &lt;br/&gt;