* 0405409
* UMEB:   Diversity &amp; Excellence in Environmental Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Lori Stevens, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Diana Anderson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 438,000.00

NSF funding will establish an Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology
(UMEB) program in the Department of Biology at the University of Vermont. The
Biology Department has developed a program integrating spatial statistics and
environmental biology that enhances minority opportunities in environmental
biology. The program is based on the principle that all members of a community
benefit from diversity, targeting the department as the center of
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual summer field research projects,
spanning diverse topics including plant-animal interactions, environmental
physiology, host-parasite interactions, molecular ecology, phylogenetics and
community structure, will have spatial variation as a common theme. The program
reaches early in the pipeline, recruiting eight high school seniors and pairing
them with a faculty mentor for their undergraduate education. For four years,
students will be involved with research going on in their faculty mentor's lab.
The program includes training in problem oriented computer modeling,
introductory statistics, population genetics and a capstone spatial statistics
course. Students will have a semester colloquium devoted to developing peer
reviewed research proposals, followed by a summer field research project. The
capstone course is devoted to statistical analysis of their own dataset.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training initiative adopts the Minority Opportunities
through School Transformation (MOST) program. MOST was developed to transform
sociology curricula with the aim of creating a general model of change that
would work in a variety of institutional settings and could transfer to other
disciplines. Program evaluation is designed to facilitate comparison with
sociology MOST programs, as well as examine the efficacy of the program in other
disciplines. Dissemination of program efforts and evaluation will be done
through the internet (http://www.uvm.edu/~biology/?Page=Otherlinks/umeb.html),
presentations at meetings and publication. For more information, contact Dr.
Lori Stevens at lori.stevens@uvm.edu&lt;br/&gt;