* 0405915
* Statistical Mechanics and the Probability Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Kenneth Alexander, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2008
* USD 273,071.00

0405915&lt;br/&gt;Alexander&lt;br/&gt; Probability models from statistical
mechanics are a framework for studying how small-scale randomness produces
global-scale phenomena, such as phase transitions, which are essentially
nonrandom. Alexander proposes to investigate the following aspects of the
subject. (1) Pinning and depinning of lattice polymers and interfaces due to
potentials existing in lower-dimensional subspaces of the lattice. Particular
emphasis will be placed on the disordered case, in which the potential varies
randomly with location. Competition between a potential in a subspace and random
potentials in the bulk will also be considered. (2) Models in which certain
features of the freezing of solutions can be rigorously derived from a local
interaction. (3) The Ising model, conditioned, by fixing an excess of the
minority spin, so as to exhibit the formation of a large droplet, with emphasis
on the critical size of this excess and the width of the droplet-formation
"transition" as this critical size threshold is crossed. (4) Moving interfaces,
e.g. between phases of the Ising model, which may "hang up" at locations where a
weakened interaction reduces the energetic cost of the interface, resulting in
an energy barrier which must be crossed. (5) Eigenvalues of the covariance
matrix of the two-dimensional Potts model and their relation to decay rates of
certain probabilities in the FK model. (6) Potts models in which the external
field(s) and the boundary condition are opposed to each other. &lt;br/&gt; With
regard to intellectual merit, this work is part of an ongoing effort by
mathematicians and physicists to understand various systems in the natural world
in which nonrandom global-scale phenomena reflect aspects of small-scale
randomness. Examples include (i) magnetic properties of materials; (ii) waves
traveling through irregular materials, such as seismic waves through the earth's
crust; (iii) impurities in semiconductors; (iv) denaturation of DNA; and (v)
percolation of liquid through a porous material, such as water or oil through
underground rock. It has long been understood that many qualitative aspects of
the relation between small-scale randomness and macroscopic properties,
including critical phenomena, do not depend too closely on the particular system
being studied. One can therefore gain insight into real-world phenomena by
studying abstract systems not intended to model specifically magnets, or porous
rock, or any other particular part of the physical world. The systems need only
exhibit parallel features, such as clustering and critical phenomena. Some of
the systems, which Alexander will investigate--percolation, random cluster
models, Ising and Potts models, and other spin systems--are examples of such
abstract systems. Other systems, which Alexander will investigate, are somewhat
more closely based on specific physical systems, such as polymers, DNA
molecules, and solutions.&lt;br/&gt;