* 0405939
* Integral Affine Structures and Calabi-Yau Metric Degenerations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Ilia Zharkov, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2007
* USD 108,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405939&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Ilia Zharkov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research lies in
the subject of mirror symmetry, of&lt;br/&gt;which there are several
mathematical interpretations. The&lt;br/&gt;investigator will address a possible
link between two of them --&lt;br/&gt;the homological mirror symmetry of
Kontsevich and the duality of&lt;br/&gt;Strominger-Yau-Zaslow torus fibrations
-- by studying the&lt;br/&gt;limiting metric behavior of maximally degenerating
families of&lt;br/&gt;Calabi-Yau manifolds. The main objective of this research
is to&lt;br/&gt;prove the metric collapse conjecture for the toric Calabi-
Yau&lt;br/&gt;families. The key ingredient here is to understand the
behavior&lt;br/&gt;at the discriminant. Another direction is to study the
Kaehler&lt;br/&gt;affine structures on the limiting space. Finally, the
tropical&lt;br/&gt;geometry approach is proposed for the limiting counting
of&lt;br/&gt;holomorphic curves and understanding the degeneration of
the&lt;br/&gt;Fukaya side of the homological mirror
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years there has been a remarkable
renaissance in the&lt;br/&gt;interaction between mathematics and physics. After
a long period&lt;br/&gt;during which mathematicians and physicists pursued
seemingly&lt;br/&gt;independent paths, their interests have now converged in
a&lt;br/&gt;striking manner. Deep connections have been established
between&lt;br/&gt;quantum field theory and string theory on one side and
topology,&lt;br/&gt;algebraic and differential geometry on the other.
Mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry is considered by many to be the mostly responsible
for&lt;br/&gt;bridging the gap between the two fields created in
previous&lt;br/&gt;decades. On a broader scale, as physicists nowadays believe
that&lt;br/&gt;a Calabi-Yau 3-fold together with 3+1 Minkowski space
constitute&lt;br/&gt;the space-time of 10-dimensional string theory, a
better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of these manifolds will help to uncover
mysteries&lt;br/&gt;of the Universe.&lt;br/&gt;