* 0405038
* Time Series Analysis and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* David Stoffer, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 444,935.00

The focus of this research is on a number of topics relating to applications of
time series analysis. The motivation for the first project is the analysis of
DNA sequences. One important task is to translate the information stored in the
protein-coding sequences (CDS) of the DNA. A common problem in analyzing long
DNA sequence data is in identifying CDS that are dispersed throughout the
sequence and separated by regions of noncoding. It is well known that DNA
sequences are heterogeneous, and even within short subsequences of DNA, one
encounters local behavior. In this proposal, the interest is in extending the
spectral envelope methodology to capture the local behavior of such sequences.
To address this problem of local behavior in categorical-valued time series,
local spectral envelope with estimation via mixtures of smoothing splines will
be explored. It is the hope that this methodology will help emphasize any
periodic feature that exists in a categorical sequence of virtually any length
in a quick and automated fashion. Projects such as the human genome project have
produced large amounts of data. It is believed the methods will prove to be
useful in the analysis of the vast quantities of data being produced by various
genome projects. Another primary objective of this proposal is to explore
spatio-temporal modeling by developing models similar to the STARMAX model. The
goal is to develop a general methodology, but the research will be governed by
obtaining solutions to difficult problems in biosurveillance, such as monitoring
bioterrorism, and in medicine, such as the analysis of concurrent EEG-fMRI
recordings. Although data is being collected in real-time by various
organizations such as the CDC, data analytic tools that support both temporal
and spatial data analysis and visualization are sorely lacking. At the present
time, most analysis is accomplished by dropping (either by ignoring or by
aggregating) either time or space. EEG has been a key tool in the study of the
brain for decades. However, despite its multiple clinical and research uses,
such as in epilepsy, little is yet known about the underlying generators of EEG
activity in humans. Functional MRI (fMRI) recorded in concert with EEG may
provide a method for localizing and identifying these sources. By using the EEG
signal as a reference for fMRI maps, concurrent EEG-fMRI opens a new avenue for
investigating specific brain function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
research is on a number of topics relating to applications of data collected in
time, in space, or in sequence. The motivation for the first project is the
analysis of DNA sequences. One important task is to translate the information
stored in the protein-coding sequences of the DNA. Projects such as the human
genome project have produced large amounts of data. It is believed the methods
will prove to be useful in the analysis of the vast quantities of data being
produced by various genome projects. Another primary objective of this proposal
is to explore spatio-temporal modeling by developing new statistical models. The
goal is to develop a general methodology, but the research will be governed by
obtaining solutions to difficult problems in biosurveillance, such as monitoring
bioterrorism, and in medicine, such as the analysis of concurrent EEG-fMRI
recordings. Although data is being collected in real-time by various
organizations such as the CDC, data analytic tools that support both temporal
and spatial data analysis and visualization are sorely lacking. At the present
time, most analysis is accomplished by dropping (either by ignoring or by
aggregating) either time or space. EEG has been a key tool in the study of the
brain for decades. However, despite its multiple clinical and research uses,
such as in epilepsy, little is yet known about the underlying generators of EEG
activity in humans. Functional MRI (fMRI) recorded in concert with EEG may
provide a method for localizing and identifying these sources. By using the EEG
signal as a reference for fMRI maps, concurrent EEG-fMRI opens a new avenue for
investigating specific brain function. &lt;br/&gt;