* 0405491
* Groups and Group Actions in Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Nathan Dunfield, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2007
* USD 257,821.00

Our project will study the role of monotonicity in low dimensional
&lt;br/&gt;geometry and topology, in the context of a number of specific
problems. &lt;br/&gt;Firstly, we will study actions of (topologically natural)
groups &lt;br/&gt;on 1-dimensional manifolds, especially actions on the line and
the circle, &lt;br/&gt;but also on non-Hausdorff 1-manifolds. Such actions are
closely related &lt;br/&gt;to the theory of foliations and laminations in
dimension 3. Our tools &lt;br/&gt;will include the theory of foliations and
laminations, recent results &lt;br/&gt;in gauge theory, computational tools, and
constructions of new topological &lt;br/&gt;objects associated to such actions.
We will also study the question of existence&lt;br/&gt;and classification of
such actions when one passes to finite index&lt;br/&gt;subgroups, in analogy
with the Virtual Haken conjecture. Related to&lt;br/&gt;this, we will
investigate the problem of whether a random 3-manifold&lt;br/&gt;group has a
faithful action on the line. Finally, we will expand the&lt;br/&gt;range of
these techniques from dimension 3 to dimension 4 by
studying&lt;br/&gt;4-manifolds with pairs of transverse 2-dimensional
foliations. By &lt;br/&gt;varying the analytic quality of these foliations, we
hope to arrive&lt;br/&gt;at a different point of view on some of the mysterious
geometric&lt;br/&gt;inequalities arising from gauge theory. We will do this by
exploiting&lt;br/&gt;old and new results about bounded cohomological properties
of groups&lt;br/&gt;acting on the plane with good analytic
qualities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monotonicity is an important principle in
analysis, geometry and topology.&lt;br/&gt;The best known examples are
essentially 1-dimensional in origin;&lt;br/&gt;monotonicity lets one define such
objects as the real numbers in terms&lt;br/&gt;of the order structure of its
elements. More generally, such order&lt;br/&gt;structures provide a bridge from
geometric problems to algebraic language,&lt;br/&gt;and permit one to perform
experiments and construct certificates with&lt;br/&gt;the use of computers.
Monotonicity becomes increasingly hard to apply&lt;br/&gt;as dimension goes up;
consequently it is most powerful when used in&lt;br/&gt;the context of certain
dynamical systems which reduce the study of the&lt;br/&gt;manifold to two
complementary problems of smaller dimension: the study&lt;br/&gt;of the orbits
of the system, and the study of the parameter space of&lt;br/&gt;the orbits.
&lt;br/&gt;