* 0405203
* Magnetism and Dynamics in Atomic Clusters
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Louis Bloomfield, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2008
* USD 330,000.00

Aggregates of between 2 and 1000 atoms make an excellent laboratory in which to
study the static and dynamic properties of finite-systems. Among the most
intriguing of those properties are magnetic order, which is extremely sensitive
to structure and bonding, and the crossover behaviors that are analogous to bulk
phase transitions, particularly the melting and freezing transitions. This
individual investigator award supports two experimental projects in such
clusters. The first project will explore the evolution of magnetism and magnetic
properties with size in clusters of a wide range of materials, including those
that are, in the bulk, ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, and nonmagnetic. The
reduced dimensionalities of these systems and their high surface-to-volume
ratios favor enhanced magnetic ordering and unusual couplings between their
magnetic and spatial structures. The experiments to be performed will use
magnetic deflection to measure effective magnetizations in the clusters and, in
concert with theoretical models, to understand the magnetic characteristics of
these particles. The second project will examine the time evolution of isolated,
thermally excited clusters as they undergo spontaneous thermal isomerization.
The experiments will be performed using pump-probe techniques with picosecond
and femtosecond laser pulses to follow the structural and energetic evolutions
of such clusters. In addition to watching the crossover from the low temperature
solid-like phase to a liquid-like phase at high temperatures, these experiments
will explore the roles of classical and quantum dynamics in describing the shape
changing process. Both experiments involve cutting edge vacuum, electronic,
laser, and optical technology and will prepare the graduate students taking part
in this research for either academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic
clusters offer a conceptual bridge between the worlds of individual atoms and
those of bulk materials. Consisting of between 2 and 1000 atoms, these tiny
particles represent a middle ground in which to study the growth of bulk
behaviors out of the simpler behaviors of atoms and molecules. Issues to explore
with increasing particle size include both basic properties (e.g. magnetism) and
phase transitions (e.g. melting and freezing). As technology pushes toward ever
smaller dimensions, a clear understanding of such tiny systems is becoming a
practical necessity. This individual investigator award supports two
experimental projects that address this middle ground. The first project will
explore the evolution of magnetism and magnetic properties with size in clusters
of both the traditional magnetic metals (iron, cobalt, nickel) and the more
unusual elements (rare earths, chromium, rhodium). With most of their atoms on
their surfaces, these clusters are often unusually magnetic and have exotic
thermal and structural characteristics. The experiments to be undertaken will
measure the magnetic and thermal properties of a wide range of clusters and seek
to identify systems with conceptually and/or technologically important magnetic
characteristics. The second project will examine the time evolution of clusters
that contain enough thermal energy to change their shapes even in the isolation
of vacuum. Neither truly solid nor truly liquid, these shape-changing systems
offer insight into the complexities of ultra-small systems in thermal
environments. The experiments to be performed will use ultrafast laser pulses to
watch the clusters change shape in real time and will look for both the familiar
classical features of melting and freezing and the less familiar quantum
features common in the atomic-scale world. Of particular interest is the
surprising ease with which tiny particles rearrange thermally, a factor that
inevitably shortens the short life spans of many tiny technological structures.
Both efforts will involve cutting edge experimental techniques and will provide
the students involved with skills and training that will prove useful in either
academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;