* 0405850
* On Elastic Complex Fluids with Complex Microstructure
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Chun Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 254,982.00

The goal of this project is to study the rheological and hydrodynamic behavior
of elastic complex fluids. We are particularly interested in those due to the
effects of the fluid microstructures. A unified energetic variational approach,
taking into account the competition of the kinetic and the internal elastic
energies, is employed to explore the special coupling between the transport of
the elastic variables and the induced elastic stresses. We will focus on several
problems: 1) free interface motions in the mixtures of different materials; 2)
singularity motions and configurations in liquid crystal flows; 3) other elastic
complex fluids, including multiscale models of polymeric materials, electro-
kinetic fluids and viscoelastic materials. This project will incorporate
theories of partial differential equations, calculus of variations, asymptotic
analysis, and numerical techniques. It covers both static and time dependent
evolution problems arising from different materials. We are interested in
molecule configurations; flow patterns; phase transitions; defect dynamics; and
the mechanical and rheological properties of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex fluids comprise a large class of soft
materials, such as polymeric solutions, liquid crystal solutions, pulmonary
surfactant solutions, electro-rheological fluids, magneto-rheological fluids and
blood suspensions. The physical properties are determined by the interplay of
entropic and structural intermolecular elastic forces and interfacial
interactions. These materials exhibit many intricate rheological and
hydrodynamic features that are very important to biological and industrial
processes. Applications include the treatment of airway closure disease by
surfactant injection; polymer additives for inkjet printers; fuel injection;
fire extinguishers; magneto-rheological damping of structural vibrations;
medical micro-fluidic diagnostic devices; and deformation and transport of blood
cells. There are many important mathematical problems in the modeling and
analysis of complex fluids. The complexity of the systems requires new
mathematical methods and in many cases, new concepts. The research of this
project is designed to enhance and contribute to this important link between
analysis and the understanding of challenging physical problems.&lt;br/&gt;