* 0405675
* Collaborative Research:     Bayesian ANOVA for Microarrays
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Hemant Ishwaran, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2008
* USD 118,120.00

DNA microarrays can provide insight into genetic changes
occurring&lt;br/&gt;during stagewise progression of diseases like cancer.
Accurate&lt;br/&gt;identification of these changes has significant therapeutic
and&lt;br/&gt;diagnostic implications. Statistical analysis of such data is
however&lt;br/&gt;challenging due to the sheer volume of information. With
new&lt;br/&gt;microarray technology it is possible to measure expressions on
nearly&lt;br/&gt;60,000 transcripts for each sample of tissue analyzed. To
properly&lt;br/&gt;understand the evolution of a progressive disease, expression
values&lt;br/&gt;are collected over all possible biological stages, thus the
number of&lt;br/&gt;parameters in such problems can be in the hundreds of
thousands, or&lt;br/&gt;even millions. The high dimensionality presents
theoretical problems&lt;br/&gt;to standard ANOVA-based extensions of two-sample
Z-tests, a popular&lt;br/&gt;method for detecting differentially expressed genes
in two groups.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, standard approaches that focus on
controlling false&lt;br/&gt;detection rates primarily apply to simpler
experimental designs;&lt;br/&gt;moreover these approaches tend to be
conservative and are expected to&lt;br/&gt;be worse in multigroup settings. This
work introduces a new&lt;br/&gt;methodology called Bayesian ANOVA for
Microarrays (BAM) for reliably&lt;br/&gt;detecting differentially expressed
genes in complex experimental&lt;br/&gt;settings. The method rests on a high
dimensional variable selection&lt;br/&gt;method that exploits a rescaled spike
and slab hierarchical model.&lt;br/&gt;BAM is shown to be risk optimal in terms
of the total number of&lt;br/&gt;misclassified genes. The exact mechanisms for
this risk optimality&lt;br/&gt;are theoretically delineated as a selective
shrinkage effect. Theory&lt;br/&gt;guides development of graphical devices for
adaptive optimal gene&lt;br/&gt;selection. A large multistage colon cancer
microarray repository&lt;br/&gt;collected at the Ireland Cancer Center of Case
Western Reserve&lt;br/&gt;University serves as a testbed for the methods. In
parallel to this&lt;br/&gt;is the development of JAVA-based software for
implementing BAM.&lt;br/&gt;Software uses a menu driven GUI and includes a
minimal number of&lt;br/&gt;user-specified tuning parameters, thus making it
user friendly for use&lt;br/&gt;by other molecular biology
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA microarrays allow for high throughput
analysis of potential&lt;br/&gt;genetic determinants of diseases like cancer. It
is now typical to&lt;br/&gt;have expression on nearly 60,000 transcripts for
each sample of tissue&lt;br/&gt;analyzed. This information can potentially
provide information about&lt;br/&gt;which genes are involved in stagewise
development of cancer as well as&lt;br/&gt;indicate novel therapeutic and
diagnostic targets. However,&lt;br/&gt;statistical inferences to identify
interesting genes is challenging&lt;br/&gt;due to the large number of
statistical tests that are run. Standard&lt;br/&gt;approaches employ ANOVA test
statistics and are prone to high false&lt;br/&gt;detections. False detection
rate control methods tend to be overly&lt;br/&gt;conservative and do not extend
naturally to more complex multistage&lt;br/&gt;experimental designs. This work
introduces a new methodology called&lt;br/&gt;Bayesian ANOVA for Microarrays
(BAM) which reliably detects&lt;br/&gt;differentially expressed genes in
multigroup experimental design&lt;br/&gt;settings. The method employs a special
hierarchical model that&lt;br/&gt;imparts an oracle like behaviour for gene
selection --- that is,&lt;br/&gt;ultimately, only those truly differentially
expressing genes are&lt;br/&gt;selected. The reasons for this behaviour are
theoretically delineated&lt;br/&gt;in this research, and the theory guides the
development of novel&lt;br/&gt;graphical devices for adaptively optimal gene
selection in real&lt;br/&gt;microarray datasets. A large multistage colon cancer
microarray&lt;br/&gt;repository collected at the Ireland Cancer Center of Case
Western&lt;br/&gt;Reserve University serves as a testbed for the methods and
also&lt;br/&gt;provides a tremendous opportunity to understand the colon
cancer&lt;br/&gt;disease process, a topic which is of great medical importance.
While&lt;br/&gt;colon cancer has a well defined evolution defined by clinical
stage,&lt;br/&gt;very little is known about its molecular evolution. In parallel
to&lt;br/&gt;this, is the development of JAVA-based software using a menu
driven&lt;br/&gt;GUI having a minimal number of user-specified tuning
parameters, thus&lt;br/&gt;making it feasible to port the software to molecular
biology&lt;br/&gt;laboratories for active use in analysis of other disease
processes and&lt;br/&gt;potentially other high throughput sources of
data.&lt;br/&gt;