* 0405157
* US-Italy Cooperative Research: Scalability and Energy Efficiency in Wireless Ad Hoc Network Protocols
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2009
* Douglas Blough, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Graham Harrison
* 05/31/2009
* USD 35,945.00

0405157&lt;br/&gt;Blough&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award provides
support for Douglas Blough of the Georgia Institute of Technology to work with
Paolo Santi of Italy's National Research Council's (CNR) Institute for
Informatics and Telematics.. The primary goal of their research is to
investigate the scalability and energy efficiency of wireless ad hoc networks.
In order to realize the ful potential of ad hoc networks, it is necessary to
overcome current limitations in the areas of scalability and energy usage. The
researchers plan to develop, evaluate, and compare new design approaches,
protocols and algorithms that enable very-large-scale and energy-efficient
wireless adhoc networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two laboratories have
complementary capabilities. The US laboratory will be responsible for continuing
development of the wireless portion of the GTNetS simulation environment. The
GTNetS simulator has the capability to efficiently model and simulate networks
of up to 100,000 wireless nodes on a single computer. Analytical evaluations of
the new approaches will be carried out at the CNR institute. The development of
new algorithms and protocols, and design and implementation of simulation-based
experiments will be done jointly by both institutions. The results of the
research are expected to be applicable to the deployment of thousands of simple
wireless sensor devices to monitor conditions of their environment. &lt;br/&gt;