* 0405069
* Organizational Informatics: Interdisciplinary Work and Agents of Change
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Karen Baker, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 03/31/2006
* USD 85,000.00

Just as energy was a dominant factor for activity and change in the twentieth
century, so information and infrastructure appear as change agents of the
twenty-first century along with the participant roles associated with them.
Growing interdisciplinary practices and changing work roles influence data and
information delivery in a range of organizational scenarios from the research
institution to a project community such as the Long-Term Ecological Research
(LTER) Network. A growing understanding of the influence of sociotechnical
factors prompts this project's response to the challenges of understanding the
interdependencies of information and infrastructure in support of science. The
field of information science in all its varied forms (bioinformatics,
ecoinformatics, social informatics, ocean informatics, organizational
informatics) addresses questions of data management, organizational scaling, and
interdisciplinary bridging relevant to infrastructure design. The Palmer LTER
Antarctic marine site research team with information management embedded within
local institutions as well as within the LTER community provides a unique
opportunity to begin thinking broadly about questions of 'how to
infrastructure'. This project addresses the issue of establishing cross
discipline communications and fulfilling the NSF cyberinfrastructure goals that
call for social scientists working constructively with scientists and
technologists. The aim of this project is contribute findings to ongoing
dialogues about sociotechnical issues within the partnered communities. This
proposal addresses infrastructure design by broadening the technical research
perspective in collaboration with ongoing research programs at multiple levels.
The approach integrates a theoretical exploration of interdisciplinary grounded
in ethnographic analysis with developing procedures for formative evaluations of
cyberinfrastructure development using ethnographic methods developed in the
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Participatory Design communities.
Conceptual frameworks will broaden to include assessment issues as they are
developing within social informatics and scientific collaboratory research
today. This work will enrich the development of Palmer LTER information
management design strategies with respect to metadata and databases as well as
the associated education outreach programs. In terms of broader impacts, this
collaborative effort serves as a unique bridge for information science, social
science, and ocean science in support of scientific research over the long-term.
There is growing work on understanding failed information system deployments and
in expanding technology interface dialogues beyond the computer supported
cooperative work applied within the medical and business domains. Given trends
toward automation and integration within the scientific arena with the recent
focus on building scientific ontologies and interoperable systems, this proposal
considers both existing and new work practices as well as works to identify and
articulate transition mechanisms pertinent across multiple fields. Research into
sociotechnical issues is critical today given the scientific trends to scale up
infrastructure, information systems, and scientific partnerships.