* 0405425
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Studies of Seismic Velocity Structure and Attenuation in Northwestern Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Diane Doser, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/2007
* USD 15,798.00

0405425&lt;br/&gt;Doser, Diane I. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award
will support Dr. Diane Doser of the University of Texas at El Paso in a research
collaboration with Dr. Roberto Ortega and Dr. Mario Gonzalez, both of the Centro
de Investigacion Cientifica de Educacion Superior de Ensenada (CICESE) in La
Paz, Mexico. The researchers intend to use earthquakes occurring within the Gulf
of California as seismic sources to study the crustal structure of northwestern
Mexico, with emphasis on the Sierra Madre Occidental (SMO), Sonora Basin and
Range, Southern Rio Grande rifts, and Central Plateau tectonic provinces.
Waveform data recorded by the NARS-Baja broadband network will be used to
determine the locations and source parameters of the events. They then will use
waveform data from broadband stations within northern Mexico, southern Arizona,
southern New Mexico and west Texas for studies of crustal and upper mantle
structure. Analysis techniques will include P- and S-wave travel-time analysis,
regional waveform modeling of Pnl and surface wave trains, and surface wave
dispersion studies. In addition, the researchers will focus on crustal
attenuation studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will aid in
understanding the tectonic evolution of southwestern North America south of the
United States border and the present tectonic activity of the region. Although
the area is not as seismically active as parts of southern California or
southern/central Mexico, historical earthquakes of magnitude 6.5 to 7.5 have
occurred in the region. Thus the attenuation and crustal structure information
obtained in this study can be used in future seismic hazard assessment and
strong ground motion studies. The study will combine the expertise of the U.S.
investigator in seismotectonics and the lithospheric structure of the western
United States with the expertise in studies of Baja California seismicity and
waveform modeling techniques of her Mexican counterparts. &lt;br/&gt;