* 0405242
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Metal-Containing Dendrimer-Modified Electrodes - Detection and  Quantification of Organic Species in Aqueous Solution
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* George Newkome, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2007
* USD 41,580.00

0405242&lt;br/&gt;Newkome&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award
will support Dr. George Newkome of the University of Akron in a research
collaboration with Dr. Luis A. Godinez of the Centro de Investigacion y
Desarrollo Tecnologico en Electroquimica (CIDETEQ) in Queretaro, Mexico. The
researchers will integrate dendritic chemistry with the more mature areas of
porphyrin and monolayer technology to explore new avenues and concepts for
constructing and using electroanalytical devices. Specifically, they will
incorporate synthetic dendritic technologies and protocols into the surface
modification of organic analytic sensing devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses an important problem, namely, the convenient and simple
analysis of organic materials in dilute aqueous environments. The melding of
supramolecular synthesis with surface modification and electrochemical
characterization may offer advantages that can not be realized by more
conventional modification and is expected to lead to new building blocks and
methodologies for material and device engineering. The U.S. group will be
primarily responsible for the design and synthesis of branched building blocks
and dendrimers as well as their integration into porphyrin chemistry. The
Mexican group will be primarily responsible for monolayer and device fabrication
and testing. Both groups will be responsible for device evolution and
enhancement.&lt;br/&gt;