* 0405066
* Stability and Existence of Nonlinear Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2011
* Walter Strauss, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2011
* USD 228,423.00

ABSTRACT: 0405066

Walter Strauss, Brown University

Stability and existence of nonlinear waves

The purpose of this project is to study mathematical models of nonlinear waves
that occur in the most fundamental theories of fluids, of plasmas, of
semiconductors and of other branches of physical science. In particular, the
mathematical construction of exact periodic and solitary traveling water waves
with vorticity will be proven, both with and without surface tension. Stability
and instability phenomena will be investigated for motions of ideal fluids and
physical plasmas. Electric and magnetic effects on the stability of charged
particles will be studied in the context of the kinetic theory of plasmas.
Stability problems for a variety of other kinds of waves will also be explored.
Energy conserving waves of marginal stability, which occur in many of these
scientific theories, will be emphasized. Methods of mathematical analysis are
the primary tool employed in the investigations. The rigorous mathematics makes
it feasible to make stable numerical computations and to understand the
qualitative features of the nonlinear waves.

Nonlinear waves are encountered everywhere in the natural world. In this
project we study several kinds of such nonlinear waves that are well described
by mathematics, but where the mathematical equations are extremely difficult to
solve. One of our objectives is to study water waves that may occur in the
ocean, and to understand how they can form eddies or whirlpools and how they can
become turbulent. The knowledge of specific kinds of solutions to the
mathematical equations has an impact on our fundamental understanding of ocean
waves and currents. Another objective is to study semiconducting materials from
which computing devices are manufactured. We will analyze the basic equations
that describe how the electrons can move inside and at the edges of the
material. A third objective is to understand the behavior of charged particles
in the vicinity of the earth's magnetic field, which affect satellite
communications and the health of astronauts. A fourth objective of the project
is the training of graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows
in the precise mathematical analysis of applied scientific problems such as
nonlinear waves.

