* 0405606
* Lie Groups and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* John Millson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2008
* USD 129,729.00

&lt;br/&gt; Millson and his collaborators will continue to explore the
connections &lt;br/&gt;between the problems of constructing triangles in
symmetric spaces and &lt;br/&gt;Euclidean buildings and problems in algebra of
interest to representation &lt;br/&gt;theorists. They are especially interested
in the relations between the &lt;br/&gt;structure constants of the spherical
Hecke ring of a split p-adic group G and &lt;br/&gt;those of the representation
ring of the Langlands dual group. The two rings &lt;br/&gt;are isomorphic and
have natural bases parametrized by the same semigroup &lt;br/&gt;S (the set of
dominant coweights of G). However the isomorphism between &lt;br/&gt;the two
rings (the Satake transform) does not carry one natural basis to the
&lt;br/&gt;other. The change of basis matrix is triangular and was computed by
&lt;br/&gt;Lusztig. Thus it is a natural problem to compare the structure
constants &lt;br/&gt;for the same parameter values in S. One of the main
theorems obtained by &lt;br/&gt;Kapovich, Leeb and Millson is that if a
structure constant for the &lt;br/&gt;representation ring of the Langlands' dual
group does not vanish then the &lt;br/&gt;corresponding (ie for the same
parameter values) structure constant &lt;br/&gt;of the Hecke ring does not
vanish. The converse is true for GL(n) &lt;br/&gt;(by classical work of Hall,
Green and Klein) but is false for other groups. &lt;br/&gt;One of the main
problems Millson intends to work on is the converse problem &lt;br/&gt;for
general G i.e if the structure constant for the Hecke ring is nonzero
&lt;br/&gt;what can be said about the corresponding structure constant (or
related &lt;br/&gt;structure constants) for the representation
ring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Millson's work began with one of the
first theorems of high-school&lt;br/&gt;geometry - the theorem that three
positive real numbers a,b,c are the &lt;br/&gt;side-lengths of a triangle in the
plane if and only if they satisfy the&lt;br/&gt;"triangle inequalities", that
is, each of a,b,c is less than or equal&lt;br/&gt;the sum of the other two. It
is a natural problem to try to give conditions &lt;br/&gt;on three isometry
classes of geodesic segments in any homogeneous geometry &lt;br/&gt;that are
necessary and sufficient in order that one can assemble them into&lt;br/&gt;a
triangle. In the case of Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries a
geodesic&lt;br/&gt;segment is determined up to isometry by its length and three
geodesic&lt;br/&gt;segments can be assembled into a triangle if and only if the
three lengths&lt;br/&gt;satisfy the above triangle inequalities. However for
many examples (e.g the &lt;br/&gt;noncompact symmetric spaces of rank r larger
than 1) geodesic segments are &lt;br/&gt;parametrized up to isometry by elements
in a simplicial cone of dimension r. &lt;br/&gt;One should think of a point in
this cone as a "vector-valued length". It is a &lt;br/&gt;remarkable fact that
there is a system of homogeneous linear inequalities in&lt;br/&gt;a triple of
such length vectors that give necessary and sufficient &lt;br/&gt;conditions for
assembling three segments with these lengths into a triangle.&lt;br/&gt;Millson
and his collaborators call these inequalities the
"generalized&lt;br/&gt;triangle inequalities". It is even more remarkable that
the generalized&lt;br/&gt;triangle inequalities give conditions that are
necessary in order that&lt;br/&gt;certain fundamental algebra problems in the
theory of algebraic groups&lt;br/&gt;can be solved. These conditions are almost
sufficient as will be made&lt;br/&gt;clear in future work of Millson and his
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;