* 0405318
* Collaborative Research:  Restricted Plasticity of Canopy Stomatal Conductance: A Conceptual Basis for Simpler Spatial Models of Forest Transpiration
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Eric Kruger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 09/30/2007
* USD 47,215.00

0405318 Kruger

It is clear from recent reports by the water and carbon groups associated with
the United States Global Change Research Program that accurate predictions of
canopy stomatal conductance in forested systems are critical for the
understanding of land surface - atmosphere fluxes and how they are affected by
climate and land use changes. Indeed, land use changes are producing more
fragmented landscapes and these are not readily represented in current land
surface models. Current forest flux models were developed under the paradigm of
research in which uniform forest stands are identified, flux measurements are
made in the centers of these stands, and then what is learned here is
extrapolated to the entire stand and beyond. This approach is neither necessary
nor justified given the spatial complexity of vegetative communities. This
project seeks to develop a conceptual model of forest transpiration that
embraces the inherent spatial variability of stomatal control while retaining a
tractable measure of generalizability that is the hallmark of empirical models
of stomatal conductance. Our conceptual model is based on the idea that canopy
stomatal conductance is regulated primarily by water potential when water fluxes
are high and of significant hydrologic import. We propose that species
plasticity in canopy stomatal conductance, which determines its spatial
variability and challenge for quantifying, follows a linear relationship that is
keyed off of an easily quantifiable reference conductance 0405318 Kruger

It is clear from recent reports by the water and carbon groups associated with
the United States Global Change Research Program that accurate predictions of
canopy stomatal conductance in forested systems are critical for the
understanding of land surface - atmosphere fluxes and how they are affected by
climate and land use changes. Indeed, land use changes are producing more
fragmented landscapes and these are not readily represented in current land
surface models. Current forest flux models were developed under the paradigm of
research in which uniform forest stands are identified, flux measurements are
made in the centers of these stands, and then what is learned here is
extrapolated to the entire stand and beyond. This approach is neither necessary
nor justified given the spatial complexity of vegetative communities. This
project seeks to develop a conceptual model of forest transpiration that
embraces the inherent spatial variability of stomatal control while retaining a
tractable measure of generalizability that is the hallmark of empirical models
of stomatal conductance. Our conceptual model is based on the idea that canopy
stomatal conductance is regulated primarily by water potential when water fluxes
are high and of significant hydrologic import. We propose that species
plasticity in canopy stomatal conductance, which determines its spatial
variability and challenge for quantifying, follows a linear relationship that is
keyed off of an easily quantifiable reference conductance.