* 0405042
* Portable X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometry: A New Tool for Provenance-Based Research in Archaeology
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Robert Speakman, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 21,550.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael D. Glascock and his team
at the University of Missouri-Columbia will purchase the components necessary to
assemble a portable X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer. This state-of-the-art
instrument will use a miniature X-ray tube and a high-precision,
thermoelectrically-cooled detector. Routine non-destructive analysis of
archaeological materials for provenance determination will be possible on
samples larger than 1 cm in diameter. When used with a specially-designed
collimator, the potential of analyzing smaller samples will also be
investigated. The portable XRF will permit rapid, low-cost, multi-elemental
characterizations of archaeological materials outside the traditional laboratory
setting. Given the instrument's relatively small size and the fact that
radiation is produced only when the instrument is operating, this equipment can
be transported without government permits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the
research questions in archaeology are concerned with the movement of materials
through trade and exchange. Elemental characterization data offer a means of
determining the origins of archaeological materials providing information to
investigate different models of exchange. Greater access to reliable low-cost
methods of chemical analysis is desirable and with the success of this research
will be possible in the future. As a first step in implementing this instrument
for widespread use in archaeology, we will develop analytical protocols for
characterizing obsidian, pottery, pigments, synthetic glasses, and sediments.
After calibration and development of analytical protocols and standards, we
anticipate using the portable XRF to analyze artifacts in museums, in
classrooms, and at archaeological sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the portable XRF will be to make chemistry-based provenance
determinations a more routine part of archaeological research. By bringing the
analytical equipment to the archaeologist, to the museum curator, or even to the
general public, the portable XRF will provide greater opportunities for teaching
archaeological science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;