* 0405502
* Study of Multiband Effects in MgB2 by Controlling Intraband and Interband Scattering in Epitaxial Films
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Qi Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 04/30/2010
* USD 337,000.00

The recently discovered superconductivity in magnesium-diboride (MgB2) not only
shows the highest superconducting transition temperature of 39 K among the
conventional superconductors, but also unique multiband behaviors which
distinguish it from conventional BCS superconductors. The interplay between
intra- and inter-band coupling and scattering has been proposed to result in
many rich and unusual properties. A collaborative group at Penn State has
developed a Hybrid Physical-Chemical Vapor Deposition (HPCVD) technique that has
produced the cleanest MgB2 thin films reported so far. It also provides a
possibility to systematically change intra and interband scattering in the
samples. This individual investigator award supports studies of a variety of
superconducting and normal state transport properties of MgB2 based thin films
with various degrees of coupling and scattering rates. Through collective
measurements, the project can ultimately reveal how the presence of two bands
changes the superconducting and normal state behaviors in different
temperatures, currents, and magnetic fields when the intra and interband
scattering rates are systematically varied. This project will have significant
impact on understanding the effect of multi-band on physical properties,
especially on superconducting properties. It may also lead to an optimized path
to large critical field and critical current, which are very significant for
potential applications in high field magnet and electric power. The project
provides a broad education and training opportunities for graduate students and
undergraduate students, especially for undergraduate students from colleges
without substantial research infrastructures and high school science teachers
through summer research programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, a new
superconductor, magnesium-diboride (MgB2), has been discovered which has the
highest superconducting transition temperature (the temperature where the
electrical resistance of a material becomes zero) of 39 K among metals.
Electrons in a material group themselves into bands. In most conductors and
superconductors only the electrons in one band contribute to the conducting and
superconducting properties of the material. However, MgB2 has a unique electron
band structure in which electrons from multiple bands contribute to these
properties. The interplay of electrons scattering within and between bands has
been proposed to result in many rich and unusual properties. A collaborative
group at Penn State has developed a technique that has produced the cleanest
MgB2 thin films reported so far. This technique also provides the possibility of
systematically changing the interactions of electrons within and between the
bands in the samples. This award supports studies of a variety of
superconducting and normal state properties of different MgB2 based thin films.
Through various measurements, the project can ultimately reveal how the presence
of two bands changes the superconducting and normal state behaviors. The
research may also lead to finding an optimized path to obtain materials that
remain superconducting in large magnetic fields and capable of carrying a large
current, which are very significant for potential applications in high field
magnet and electric power. The project provides a broad education and training
opportunities for graduate students and undergraduate students, especially for
undergraduate students from colleges without substantial research
infrastructures and high school science teachers through summer research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;