* 0405619
* Experimental Investigations of Sheared Granular Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2007
* Sidney Nagel, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 02/28/2007
* USD 120,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT -
0405619&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular materials are large aggregates
of macroscopic, individually solid particles, or "grains". Understanding and
controlling their properties is of tremendous importance for industrial
processes across a wide range of fields from agriculture to civil and chemical
engineering to materials science. One of the most remarkable behaviors of
granular matter is the transition from a jammed to an unjammed state under an
applied shear stress. At this transition granular materials change character
from solid- to fluid-like and exhibit characteristic properties such as the
formation of shear bands. This also is an experimentally and theoretically
challenging regime for which the current level of understanding is far less
developed than for other phase transitions such as those occurring in ordinary
fluids or solids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. In addition to the
industrial, economic value associated with proper control of particulate matter,
the study of granular materials provides insights into fundamental scientific
issues. A series of experiments in granular media has been designed to
investigate the nature of the transition from static packing to a flowing
regime. Emphasis is placed on studying the formation of shear bands and
techniques that make it possible to measure some of the most important physical
quantities that were previously inaccessible to experiment. In particular,
direct measurements of the time-evolving forces and stresses within shear bands
will be made using a newly developed optical force-visualization apparatus.
&lt;br/&gt;A new type of linear, parallel plate shear cell is introduced that
can measure the onset and evolution of structure and viscosity within a shear
band from its initial transient behavior to it final steady-state character.
Finally, a modified split-bottom Couette-type shear cell with wide and tunable
shear band will be used to test some of the most important current theories
concerning the applicability of effective temperatures and determine the
importance of fluctuations generic to these systems. These studies will help
provide an experimental underpinning for some of the key ideas that have so far
only been tested in theory or simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The experimental research on sheared granular materials will be closely
integrated with a multi-faceted set of education and outreach activities. It
includes the active participation of a diverse group of high-school interns and
undergraduates in the research, a close collaboration with two science museums
to develop hands-on activities, and the development of a new course on granular
materials. In addition, we plan an interdisciplinary workshop on granular matter
and the jamming transition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;