* 0405472
* Isotopically Controlled Semiconductors:    Diffusion and Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Eugene Haller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2009
* USD 360,000.00

This project addresses (1) the physics of atomic diffusion in crystalline thin
film multilayer structures and (2) the properties of nano-particles composed of
isotopically controlled semiconductors. Self-diffusion (i.e., isotope inter-
diffusion) and dopant diffusion will be studied directly and simultaneously for
the first time in strained and relaxed silicon-germanium (SiGe) multi-layer
structures. The studies are designed to reveal the physics underlying the
various diffusion mechanisms. The expected results will expand the fundamental
solid-state knowledge base, may lead to the discovery of new diffusion
processes, and will be of direct use to the designers of future SiGe electronic
devices. The proposal further addresses the properties of isotopically pure
germanium nano-crystals. Selective Neutron Transmutation Doping (NTD) will be
used to form acceptors (70Ge) or donors (74Ge). The NTD process looks promising
because it occurs at temperatures sufficiently low for the newly formed dopant
atoms to remain inside the nanocrystal. Choice of the isotopic composition also
allows selection of isotopes with or without nuclear spin. Semiconductors with
controlled nuclear spin distribution are of great current interest to the
rapidly emerging field of "spintronics." The proposed research offers graduate
and undergraduate students training in cutting-edge research in several fields
of science and technology.

This project addresses (1) the study of diffusion in crystalline thin film
multilayer structures and (2) the properties of nano-particles composed of
enriched isotopes of the semiconductor elements silicon and germanium. Atom
self-diffusion and dopant diffusion are used in several of the key processes
used to fabricate modern semiconductor devices ("chips"). The present studies
are designed to reveal the atomic-level diffusion mechanisms in mixtures of
silicon and germanium. The results will expand the fundamental solid-state
knowledge base, and may lead to the discovery of new diffusion processes. The
latter will be of direct use to the designers of future very high-speed
electronic devices. The proposal further addresses the properties of
isotopically pure germanium nano-crystals that have been doped using selective
nuclear techniques. Choice of the isotopic composition also allows selection of
isotopes with nuclear spin that are of great current interest to the rapidly
emerging field of "spintronics." The proposed research offers graduate and
undergraduate students training in cutting-edge research in several fields of
science and technology.

