* 0405573
* U.S.- Chile Program:  Workshop on Origin of El Laco Iron-Oxide Deposit; San Pedro de Atacama, Chile; November 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* H. Richard Naslund, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

0405573&lt;br/&gt;Naslund&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. H. Richard Naslund, State
University of New York, Binghamton, along with Dr. Fernando Henriquez,
University of Santiago, will hold a workshop and field excursion to the volcano
in El Laco, Chile in the Fall of 2004. Support comes from the Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Petrology and Geochemistry
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The El Laco volcano in the Andean Cordillera of
northern Chile contains the youngest, least altered and best preserved
magnetite-apatite ores of Kiruna-type. Dr. Naslund will assemble scientists to
participate in a workshop to examine the El Laco deposit in the field and then
to discuss the various models that have been proposed for its origin. There is
an ongoing scientific debate about the origin of a particular class of ore
deposits. If ion oxide rich magmas have erupted at even one locality on Earth,
scientists need to consider the effects such magmas might have on many other
geologic processes in addition to the formation of ore deposits. The formation
of stratified ore deposits by Fe-oxide magmas or by hydrothermal replacement
might also have implications for the formation of recently identified fragmental
hematite deposits on Mars. This award will provide support for students and
researchers in the early stages of their career to attend this meeting which
will be held along-side of the larger IAVCEI General Assembly meeting in nearby
Pucon, Chile&lt;br/&gt;