* 0405451
* SGER: Evaluation of Community Climate System Model (CCSM) Constituent Transport Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Bruno Sanso, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/2004
* USD 24,998.00

This research uses statistical tools to evaluate the simulation of chemical
constituent transport in the Community Climate System Model (CCSM). Traditional
methods for evaluating the ability of climate models to represent the transport
of constituent gases rests on simple correlation and mean quantity analyses of
simulated transports and observed fields. The new approach of the PIs is to use
an off-line chemical model that includes the same representations (physics) for
advection, convective transfer and boundary layer mixing as used in the CCSM
atmospheric model (CAM). The off-line chemical transport model is very
efficient, enabling long simulations in relatively short computer wall-clock
time. The diagnostics tools to be developed will enable improved analyses of the
spatial and temporal variability of the simulated constituent transports, as
measured against decades of reanalysis data, including better evaluations of the
statistical significance of the model results.

Broader Impacts: Improvements in the ability of climate models to simulate the
atmospheric transport of radiatively active trace gases is important for future
climate projections; a benefit for environmental managers and policy makers in
their efforts to understand and manage climate change. The CCSM is used by many
university climate scientists who should benefit through the results of this
research.