* 0405123
* U.S.-Oman Workshop on Marine Sciences for Living Resource Development, Muscat, Oman, February 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Bernard Zahuranec, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/2006
* USD 25,000.00

0405123 Zahuranec

Description: This award is to support a "U.S.- Oman Workshop on Marine Sciences
for Living Resources Development, Muscat, Oman, February 7-11, 2004." The
workshop will bring together a group of U.S. and Omani marine scientists who
have expertise and knowledge on a variety of topic areas to explore issues and
for suggesting a plan of action for future research. The topics will include:
benthic biology; zooplankton; coral reefs; mangroves; cetaceans; marine turtles;
fish and fisheries; bioactive materials; marine biotechnology; and protected
areas and species. Four working groups will address: marine invertebrates;
marine vertebrates; extraction and manipulation; and conservation and education.
Each participant will look at one component of the ecosystem from a different
perspective. Bringing the participants all together and encouraging them to
exchange ideas and approaches will help identify problem areas and lacunae in
the knowledge base as well as new ways of dealing with them in this part of the
Indian Ocean. The workshop results will be documented in a printed report as
well as in a web site discussing suggested research approaches. It is expected
that this intellectual ferment will not only benefit the Omani scientists but
the US scientists, as well.

Scope: The Omani coastline is a rich field of research that has interested
marine biologists scientists in the United States and other countries because of
its geographic location, the warm climate and the merging of several water
bodies. In addition Oman has been a much more open country for foreign
scientists than many in the turbulent Middle East. Oman presently has a large
part of its gross domestic product from petroleum production. Because this is a
finite resource, in the future, Oman will have to depend on other sustainable
income. Having a long coastline on the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea suggests
that living marine resources may make a significant contribution to the
country's income. However, in order to develop these resources in a sustainable
rather than exploitable way, marine research in a variety of areas will need to
be conducted before serious development takes place. Besides resulting in an
action plan for future research on Oman's living marine resources, a number of
other impacts are expected. The contacts and interaction engendered by this
workshop will encourage greater collaboration between U.S. and Omani marine
scientists. This will also provide US marine scientists with access to Oman's
marine environment, a rich but poorly understood area. The success of this
workshop will encourage the Omani government to consider hosting similar
conferences on a biennial basis. These would be multilateral rather than
bilateral, with participants from the neighboring countries and might focus on
specific marine topics that are particularly timely or pertinent. US
participation in these would benefit US marine science as well as that in the
other participating scientists.