* 0405271
* Gauge Theory and Geometry in Dimensions Three and Four
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2010
* Peter Kronheimer, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 549,744.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405271&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Peter B. Kronheimer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project
is to apply gauge-theory techniques to&lt;br/&gt;the study of three-dimensional
manifolds. The principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator proposes to investigate Floer
homology and closely&lt;br/&gt;related areas of geometry, and hopes to shed
light on the&lt;br/&gt;applicability of gauge theory to problems in three-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology and geometry. Potential applications of gauge
theory&lt;br/&gt;include a proof of the "Property P conjecture", which states
that&lt;br/&gt;a non-trivial surgery on a non-trivial knot cannot yield
a&lt;br/&gt;simply-connected 3-manifold. There are expected to be
other&lt;br/&gt;applications of Floer homology to questions about surgery
on&lt;br/&gt;knots. As part of this program, the principal investigator
will&lt;br/&gt;complete a thorough investigation of the foundations
of&lt;br/&gt;Seiberg-Witten Floer homology. A similar study of
the&lt;br/&gt;closely-related instanton Floer homology is at present
obstructed&lt;br/&gt;by difficulties stemming from the non-compactness of
instanton&lt;br/&gt;moduli spaces. The principal investigator intends to
examine&lt;br/&gt;these obstructions with a view towards having a more
complete&lt;br/&gt;instanton Floer theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topology is the
qualitative study of space and its connectedness.&lt;br/&gt;Its importance was
recognized at the turn of the last century by&lt;br/&gt;the French mathematician
Poincare, during his investigation of&lt;br/&gt;the laws of motion that govern
the movement of a three-body&lt;br/&gt;system such as the Earth, Moon and Sun
moving according to&lt;br/&gt;Newton's laws. In the past twenty years, topology
has seen&lt;br/&gt;applications in questions such as the knotting of proteins
and&lt;br/&gt;DNA, and in modern theories of high-energy physics. The
topology&lt;br/&gt;of three-dimensional spaces, as opposed to those of
higher&lt;br/&gt;dimension, is of particular subtlety. Through this project,
it&lt;br/&gt;is hoped to bring new techniques to bear on outstanding
questions&lt;br/&gt;in three-dimensional topology. These techniques -- gauge
theory&lt;br/&gt;and the Seiberg-Witten equations -- originated in physics,
where&lt;br/&gt;they had potential application to fundamental questions such
as&lt;br/&gt;quark confinement. They have been an effective tool in the
study&lt;br/&gt;of four-dimensional spaces (such as our space-time). The aim
now&lt;br/&gt;is to apply the same techniques to questions in dimension
three.&lt;br/&gt;