* 0405306
* Collaborative research: Restricted plasticity of canopy stomatal conductance: A conceptual basis for simpler models of forest transpiration
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* David Mackay, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2008
* USD 178,278.00

0405306 MacKay Our proposed project has significant intellectual merit because
it explicitly addresses two key problems facing hydrology. The first problem
concerns the opposing views of stomatal control of water fluxes, with one
perspective assuming carbon assimilation control, and the other assuming an
environmental control. Our conceptual model combines both of these perspectives
in a unified mechanistic framework that combines both assimilation and water
potential controls on transpiration. The second problem addressed by our
conceptual model is the tendency towards favoring complex and often
mathematically ill-posed canopy models over simpler, verifiable ones. We
explicitly address this fundamental issue in hydrologic modeling by using a
novel, object-oriented canopy model that can flexibly adjust its structure and
mechanisms to the data it is provided. By adjusting model complexity spatially
we will gain deep insights on species plasticity and restrictions thereof across
spatial gradients, thus providing a rigorous approach to testing our conceptual
model within our study site in northern Wisconsin. The knowledge gained from our
proposed research has broad implications for land surface modeling efforts
seeking to generate accurate predictions of global change effects on water
cycling. By developing our conceptual model we will be able to provide a
relatively simple, but transportable and scientifically defensible model. Such
models are essential foundations for the creation and implementation of credible
state, federal and international policies aimed at mitigating or otherwise
adjusting to the consequences of anticipated global change. The educational
emphasis of this project is multi-faceted. First, we will seek additional
funding and other means of supporting, advising and training an integrated team
of undergraduate students from the economically disadvantaged region of Northern
Wisconsin, using this project as the principal context for their education in
Forest Ecology at UW-Madison. Also, in connection with the NSF Research
Collaboration Network project entitled "Chequamegon Ecosystem- Atmosphere
Study," for which Mackay is a core project participant, we will hold a
nationally advertised workshop on multi-scale canopy flux measurements and
modeling. The PIs will continue to recruit and hire minorities and other
underrepresented students in our respective fields.