* 0405584
* Inference for Restricted Parameters
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Woodroofe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 288,125.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael Woodroofe &lt;br/&gt;proposal:
0405584&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; INFERENCE FOR RESTRICTED
PARAMETERS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Problems in which a density or
regression function is known to be smooth and to satisfy shape restrictions,
like monotonicity or convexity, are investigated. Shape restricted regression
and smoothing splines offer one promising approach to the problem, and the
combination of shape restrictions with local polynomial methods another. In
large samples the emphasis is on asymptotic distributions. With a lot of
smoothing the contribution of the shape restrictions to the asymptotic
distribution is negligible; with only a little smoothing, the shape restrictions
dominate, leading to non-normal asymptotic distributions. The nature of the
transition between a little smoothing a lot is investigated. In many cases,
especially with smoothing splines, an estimator is the solution to a
differential equation. In such cases it is possible to use the Green's function
to construct an asymptotically equivalent kernel estimator from which the
asymptotic distribution may be found. In moderate samples, the shape
restrictions do affect the distribution of estimators, even in the presence of
substantial smoothing. The size of this effect is investigated both
analytically, using techniques of shrinkage estimation, and by simulation.
Problems with known inequalities for parameters also arise in models with only a
few parameters, like variance components, and classical confidence intervals can
be empty, or degenerate, in such problems. In current work interest centers on
finding Bayesian credible intervals with good frequentist properties.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; The work on shape restricted density estimation and regression is
motivated by a project to map the distribution of dark matter in nearby dwarf
spheroidal galaxies, like Ursa Minor. Dark matter is matter that cannot be seen.
Its existence is inferred from gravitational effects, but what it is comprised
of is an open question. It is expected that knowing where the dark matter is may
shed some light on what it is. The work on models with few parameters is
motivated by the problem of disentangling signal and background events in both
physics and astronomy. The confidence interval problem is an important part of
the search for an elementary particle, the Higgs, in particular, and has been a
featured topic at several recent meetings of high-energy physicists. The
investigator is using these two examples and others in an interdisciplinary
seminar on Statistics in the physical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;