* 0405528
* Collaborative Research:  Systems of Ordinary Differential Equations - Inverse and Non-Self-Adjoint Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Stephen Clark, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 52,383.00

Abstract: 0405528/0405526 Gesztesy/Clark University of Missouri Columbia and
Rolla

Collaborative Research: Systems of Ordinary Differential Equations - Inverse and
Non-Self-Adjoint Problems

Research is proposed in two areas of systems of ordinary differential equations
pertaining to inverse spectral problems and a class of non-self-adjoint singular
Dirac-type boundary value problems. The research problems proposed lead to
important applications in connection with completely integrable nonlinear
evolution equations and to applications in soliton based optical communication
systems. The first area is concerned with inverse spectral problems with
emphasis on characterizing isospectral manifolds for self-adjoint matrix-valued
Schroedinger and Dirac-type operators with periodic (and certain classes of
quasi-periodic) coefficients. The techniques involved comprise matrix-valued
Herglotz functions, inverse spectral theory, uniqueness theorems of Borg and
Hochstadt-type, and pencils of matrices and their factorizations. The second
area is concerned with spectral theory for a non-self-adjoint singular boundary
value problem associated with a particular Dirac-type operator. The latter
permits the existence of Weyl-Titchmarsh-type solutions for any point in its
resolvent set under the most general hypothesis of merely local integrability of
the potential coefficient. This property has not previously been observed in
non-self-adjoint boundary value problems and hence makes this Dirac-type
operator a model operator of particular interest. The common thread through all
the problems proposed is the use of (matrix-valued) Weyl-Titchmarsh-type
functions which encode all spectral information of the underlying Schroedinger
and Dirac-type systems.

Inverse spectral theory for self-adjoint Schroedinger and Dirac-type boundary
value problems, as proposed in the first part of this proposal, is one of the
pillars of applications of spectral theory to the applied sciences including
theoretical physics (quantum physics), geophysics (seismology), medicine
(tomography), etc. As such, it is an integral part of modern applied
mathematics. In addition, this first part permits applications to completely
integrable systems, especially to soliton equations such as the nonabelian
Korteweg-de Vries and the defocusing nonlinear Schroedinger hierarchies of
evolution equations. Completely integrable systems of this type, a rapidly
developing field in pure and applied mathematics especially since the second
half of the 20th century, have widespread and multifaceted applications which
include shallow water wave modelling, various aspects of nonlinear optics, and
problems in condensed matter physics. On the other hand, many concrete
applications of completely integrable systems naturally lead to non-self-adjoint
boundary value problems. A prime example would be the area of nonlinear optics
as modelled by the focusing nonlinear Schroedinger equation. The latter is
intimately connected with a non-self-adjoint Dirac-type operator, the principal
object of study in the second part of this proposal. While general spectral
theory (and especially inverse spectral theory) for such non-self-adjoint Dirac
operators is still in its infancy, we propose a new model for a soliton based
optical communication system based upon our proposed study of a special class of
soliton potentials relative to a periodic background potential.

