* 0405766
* Collaborative Research - SGER - Model Verification of Radiation of Barotropic Energy from the Gulf Stream
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2004,09/30/2005
* Arthur Miller, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2005
* USD 45,018.00

0404499/0401385/0405766&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental process by which
ocean currents lose the energy acquired from the wind will be explored through
analyses of output from state-of-the-art ocean general circulation models. The
main goal is to determine the characteristics of radiation of barotropic energy
away from the Gulf Stream system. The results will then be used to guide the
design of a field program to observe the phenomenon. It is not a priori certain
that the modern ocean general circulation models are properly simulating the
physics of mesoscale barotropic variability in the presence of strong currents
(like the Gulf Stream) and realistic topography. The end result of this work,
which will include model comparisons with real ocean data, might only reveal the
inadequacies of the models, while providing little insight into the nature of
barotropic radiation in the real ocean. At least, information about the ability
(or lack thereof) of modern models to simulate the ocean's barotropic
variability should lead to model improvements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The results from this work will provide information on a phenomenon
that is important to the dynamics of ocean currents but is difficult to isolate.
Insofar as this information leads to improvements of models of the ocean's
general circulation, one can expect subsequent improvements in studies of
phenomena that rely on such models, e.g., studies of climate variability,
ecosystem evolution, and CO2 sequestration, to name just a few broader
applications.&lt;br/&gt;