* 0405613
* Collaborative Research: Rheology of Altered Oceanic Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Brian Evans, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 04/30/2008
* USD 54,231.00

The rheology of altered oceanic lithosphere, and its evolution during
subduction, plays an important role in numerous processes. The interpretation of
thermal models for subduction zones, a goal of the MARGINS Subduction Factory
initiative, depends on good constraints for both the strength of the down-going
slab and the slab-wedge interface. Both of these physical properties may be
controlled by the rheology of serpentine. The increase in pressure and
temperature of the slab during subduction induces the dehydration of serpentine,
releasing water to the surrounding environment, at depths greater than 50-100
km. These dehydration reactions are invoked to explain the double-seismic zone
observed in some subduction zones, and the occurrence of intermediate depth
seismic events (50-300 km). The released water can also be incorporated in the
mantle wedge above the slab, promoting further serpentinization of part of the
overlying mantle, or inducing melt production under the volcanic arc, depending
on P-T conditions and the geometry of the subduction zone and mantle wedge. To
understand the distribution of earthquakes in subduction zones it is important
to constrain the rheological properties of altered lithosphere, how they evolve
during dehydration reactions, the rheology of reaction products, and the
feedbacks between metamorphic reactions and transport properties of the down-
going slab. All of these issues are being explored as part of the MARGINS
Seismogenic Zone initiative.

Deformation experiments are being conducted on serpentinites, talc, and fine-
grained olivine aggregates at high pressure and temperature. The experiments are
designed to: (1) Determine the strength and mode of deformation of serpentinites
at high pressure and temperature, to further characterize the conditions of the
transition from brittle to plastic deformation, and to measure for the first
time the plastic rheology of antigorite if this regime is obtained in the
laboratory. These data provide important constraints needed to understand the
end-member mechanical aspects of deformation of altered lithosphere and fluid
transport in serpentinites. (2) Study the feedbacks between permeability,
reaction progress and rheology during dehydration of serpentinites to constrain
conditions where reaction induced seismicity may occur. (3) Constrain the
rheological properties of the fine-grained reaction products
(olivine+talc+water) of dehydration reactions. This experimental work provides
insights on the fate and transport of water released during dehydration of
serpentine, on the relationship between dehydration and seismicity, and on the
changes in rheology associated with phase changes during subduction.