* 0405994
* Symplectic Topology, Symplectic Submanifolds and Floer Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Ely Kerman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2005
* USD 86,413.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0405994&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Ely Kerman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is comprised of
three projects which concern the&lt;br/&gt;relation between various invariants
of a symplectic manifold and&lt;br/&gt;the periodic orbits of the Hamiltonian
flows which it supports.&lt;br/&gt;Recent work by Kerman shows that one of these
invariants, the&lt;br/&gt;Hofer-Zehnder capacity, is finite for tubular
neighborhoods of&lt;br/&gt;certain symplectic submanifolds. Using a
decomposition theorem of&lt;br/&gt;Biran, this implies several new kinds of
symplectic intersection&lt;br/&gt;phenomena for compact Kahler manifolds. The
goal of the first&lt;br/&gt;project is to study these new intersection results
which suggest&lt;br/&gt;that many basic symplectic properties of a compact
Kahler&lt;br/&gt;manifold are determined by the Biran decompositions
it&lt;br/&gt;admits. The second project is a joint effort with V.L.
Ginzburg&lt;br/&gt;and B. Gurel. It involves the construction of a
generalized&lt;br/&gt;version of Hamiltonian Floer homology in which periodic
orbits in&lt;br/&gt;different homotopy classes are allowed to interact via
a&lt;br/&gt;generalized Floer differential that counts perturbed
holomorphic&lt;br/&gt;curves with punctures. The construction is motivated by
the&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic Field Theory of Eliashberg, Givental and Hofer.
The&lt;br/&gt;resulting theory should also have a rich algebraic structure,
as&lt;br/&gt;well as a variety of applications including new calculations
of&lt;br/&gt;the Hofer-Zehnder capacity for weakly-exact
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. The third project is a program to prove a
conjecture&lt;br/&gt;which asserts the existence of periodic orbits on all level
sets&lt;br/&gt;near a nondegenerate symplectic critical submanifold of
a&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian. This is a generalization of some similar
conjectures&lt;br/&gt;of Arnold which concern periodic orbits of a charged
particle&lt;br/&gt;moving in a magnetic field. The first step is to construct
a&lt;br/&gt;Floer-type invariant for the underlying
variational&lt;br/&gt;principle. Once it is rigorously defined, this should
quickly&lt;br/&gt;lead to many new existence results. It is also hoped that
this&lt;br/&gt;invariant can be used to augment Symplectic Field Theory
by&lt;br/&gt;allowing one to split a symplectic manifold along
certain&lt;br/&gt;hypersurfaces which are not of contact
type.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian flows are used to model many important
physical&lt;br/&gt;systems in which energy is conserved. Such systems
include&lt;br/&gt;planets and satellites moving under their mutual
gravitational&lt;br/&gt;attraction, a charged particle moving in an electro-
magnetic&lt;br/&gt;field, and the flow of an incompressible ideal fluid.
These&lt;br/&gt;motions are often quite complex and one way to begin
to&lt;br/&gt;understand their global behavior is to look for
repeating&lt;br/&gt;patterns, i.e., periodic orbits. While most Hamiltonian
flows&lt;br/&gt;have many periodic orbits, it is usually a difficult problem
to&lt;br/&gt;establish their existence at a fixed energy level. This
problem&lt;br/&gt;is a central theme in the study of Hamiltonian flows and,
in&lt;br/&gt;modern times, has been shown to be deeply related to the shape
of&lt;br/&gt;the space on which the flow is defined. The projects in
this&lt;br/&gt;proposal study various aspects of this relation. In the first
two&lt;br/&gt;projects we use Hamiltonian flows to define and
compute&lt;br/&gt;symplectic invariants. The last project involves the
construction&lt;br/&gt;of a new symplectic invariant which should lead to new
existence&lt;br/&gt;results for periodic orbits of Hamiltonian flows which
describe&lt;br/&gt;the motion of a charged particle in a magnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;