* 0405330
* Monte-Carlo multi-step ahead forecasting for nonlinear time series
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Lijian Yang, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 192,053.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lijian Yang&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL :
0405330&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops multi-step ahead forecasting
methods for&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear time series using a Monte-Carlo procedure. The
focus is on&lt;br/&gt;taking advantage of three types of simplifying structures
in nonparametric&lt;br/&gt;auotoregression time series models: small number of
significant lags,&lt;br/&gt;additive model, and additive coefficient model. For
time series data&lt;br/&gt;generated according to one of these structures, plug-
in type predictors&lt;br/&gt;are developed by estimating the data generating
process (DGP) and&lt;br/&gt;then using the estimated DGP to generate
realizations. By employing local&lt;br/&gt;polynomial and polynomial spline
techniques for the regression structure&lt;br/&gt;and kernel density estimation
for the noise distribution, the empirical&lt;br/&gt;distribution of these
generated realizations approximates the theoretical&lt;br/&gt;distribution of
the time series at rates much faster than that of general&lt;br/&gt;multivariate
function smoothing. Hence, the proposed forecasts are much&lt;br/&gt;more
accurate than those made with many existing methods. Multi-step
ahead&lt;br/&gt;forecasting of time series generated by either multiple index or
partially&lt;br/&gt;linear autoregression are also studied, for which the
forecasting&lt;br/&gt;accuracy is improved significantly as well. Besides
being&lt;br/&gt;theoretically justified, the proposed forecasting methods are
expected to&lt;br/&gt;be computationally expedient and should be easily
accessible to&lt;br/&gt;practitioners working with time series
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time series data appear in many scientific
disciplines in the form of&lt;br/&gt;sequences of numbers observed over fixed
time period. Economic time series&lt;br/&gt;include leading indicators such as
inflation index, oil price, real GNP,&lt;br/&gt;unemployment rate, etc.,
observed monthly or quarterly. Climatology&lt;br/&gt;studies the trend and
variation over time of humidity, precipitation,&lt;br/&gt;temperature, etc,
while geographers collect daily measurements of such&lt;br/&gt;variables as leaf
area index, soil adjusted vegetation index, soil&lt;br/&gt;moisture index and
investigate relationships that exist among them and&lt;br/&gt;with other
indices. Of central importance in the analysis of time series&lt;br/&gt;is the
understanding of the hidden mechanism that generate the
data&lt;br/&gt;sequentially, and the use of such knowledge to predict what the
next one&lt;br/&gt;or few numbers will be. These are one- and multi-step ahead
forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;The statistical tools developed through this research
significantly&lt;br/&gt;enhance the capability to forecast macro-economic time
series data several&lt;br/&gt;quarters, even years, ahead. Advanced forecasts of
this kind can greatly&lt;br/&gt;help the making of macro-economic decisions.
These forecasting methods&lt;br/&gt;have strong impact in multiple disciplines
beyond macroeconomics, for&lt;br/&gt;instance, in the study of interaction
between climate change and the&lt;br/&gt;various geographic indices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;