* 0405695
* Minimal surfaces and geometric analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* William Minicozzi, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 432,002.00

MS-0405695&lt;br/&gt;Title: Minimal surfaces and geometric
analysis&lt;br/&gt;PI: William P. Minicozzi, Johns Hopkins
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will continue
our investigations on minimal surfaces and related &lt;br/&gt;areas of geometric
analysis, including geometric evolution equations such as the
mean&lt;br/&gt;curvature and Ricci flow, and on function theory. Some of
our&lt;br/&gt;main results for minimal surfaces so far - the lamination
theorem&lt;br/&gt;and the one-sided curvature estimate - are for properly
embedded&lt;br/&gt;minimal disks. Recent years have seen breakthroughs on many
long--standing&lt;br/&gt;problems in the theory of minimal surfaces, with
important&lt;br/&gt;contributions from many mathematicians. The lamination
theorem&lt;br/&gt;and the one-sided curvature estimate described here have
played a&lt;br/&gt;key role and have been used by many people. Two of the
important new &lt;br/&gt;directions are removing the assumption of properness
and considering &lt;br/&gt;minimal surfaces with more general topological types.
These results will &lt;br/&gt;have important implications. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The field of minimal surfaces dates back to early work of Euler
in&lt;br/&gt;1744 and Lagrange in 1762 and has remained a vibrant area of
research&lt;br/&gt;for the last 250 years. Minimal surfaces appear frequently
throughout science, &lt;br/&gt;dating back at least to the soap film experiments
of the Belgian physicist Plateau &lt;br/&gt;in the first half of the nineteenth
century. Their mathematical impact has been &lt;br/&gt;significant and has led
to developments in geometry, topology, and partial differential
&lt;br/&gt;equations. The subject has seen major developments recently,
including answers &lt;br/&gt;to some long-standing open questions and a rather
complete picture for properly &lt;br/&gt;embedded minimal disks (such as the
helicoid which was originally discovered in&lt;br/&gt;1776). However, much less
is known when these assumptions are removed; &lt;br/&gt;understanding this is a
key part of our research and the answers are likely &lt;br/&gt;to lead to
further developments.&lt;br/&gt;