* 0405022
* SGER:  Hurricane Isabel Impacts on Chesapeake Bay
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Michael Roman, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

Hurricanes are natural events that can impose a major perturbation to
estuarine&lt;br/&gt;ecosystems. Some effects of previous hurricanes on
Chesapeake Bay (e.g., Agnes in&lt;br/&gt;1972) had lasting impacts on submerged
aquatic vegetation (drastic decrease) and on&lt;br/&gt;fisheries (e.g. soft clam
and oyster decline after Agnes). This SGER (Small Grant for Exploratory Reserch)
project will examine&lt;br/&gt;the effects of Hurricane Isabel on the
hydrographic and food-web structure of&lt;br/&gt;Chesapeake Bay.
&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Isabel, which struck Chesapeake Bay on September
18,&lt;br/&gt;2003, provides a unique opportunity to document and evaluate
effects of a significant&lt;br/&gt;.disturbance event.. Winds in excess of 70
mph vigorously mixed Bay waters. A storm&lt;br/&gt;surge, 6.12 ft at the Bay
mouth took 18 hours to move up the Bay to Baltimore where&lt;br/&gt;maximum
water level was 7.36 ft above mean high water. This significant intrusion
of&lt;br/&gt;shelf water redistributed salt, plankton and fish within Chesapeake
Bay. The 2003 Water&lt;br/&gt;Year (WY), which includes rainfall associated with
Isabel (Oct . Sept) represented the&lt;br/&gt;highest WY freshwater input to
Chesapeake Bay since 1937. The passage of Isabel&lt;br/&gt;during the unusually
wet 2003 provides a unique opportunity to evaluate effects of a&lt;br/&gt;major
perturbation on already enhanced freshwater input to the Bay
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt; The project will involved a 7-day cruise in early
November, 2003 in which the same&lt;br/&gt;sampling procedures are followed that
were designated during the six TIES years (1995-&lt;br/&gt;2000) and two BITMAX
years (2001-2002) thus providing an essential contrast to&lt;br/&gt;conditions
that observed in the wake of Hurricane Isabel. Investigators will intensively
measure the hydrographic and ecosystem structure of the main stem
of&lt;br/&gt;Chesapeake Bay. On leg 1 (3 days) they will conduct continuous
mapping using a towed&lt;br/&gt;undulating recorder and surface mapping system
which measures temperature, salt,&lt;br/&gt;oxygen, chlorophyll and zooplankton
(Optical Plankton Counter) along a 350-km axial&lt;br/&gt;transect down the main
stem of Chesapeake Bay and with up to 24 cross-Bay transects&lt;br/&gt;spaced 10
km apart. The vertical and horizontal resolution of these measurements will
be&lt;br/&gt;approximately 1 m and 200 m, respectively. Maps of physical and
biological properties&lt;br/&gt;will provide an essential background for the
hydrographic, plankton and fish surveys that&lt;br/&gt;will follow. On the
second leg (4 days) they will conduct hydrographic stations (CTDs)&lt;br/&gt;and
measurements of nutrients, phytoplankton biomass and production,
zooplankton&lt;br/&gt;pump and acoustic measurements, and fish
abundance/distributions (Tucker trawl and&lt;br/&gt;midwater trawl) on 26 Bay-
transects. CBOS moorings, including the damaged stations,&lt;br/&gt;will be
maintained through the interval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;