* 0405082
* Raman, Brillouin, Infrared and Modulation Spectroscopy of Collective and Localized Excitations in Tetrahedrally Coordinated Semiconductors and Their Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Sergio Rodriguez, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2008
* USD 360,000.00

This project is devoted to the experimental and theoretical investigation of
collective and localized excitations in tetrahedrally coordinated semiconductors
and their hetero-and nanostructures by a variety of optical (spectroscopic)
techniques. The research will focus on novel phenomena and unique properties
produced in these materials by the deliberate introduction of chemical
impurities as donors and acceptors, or as isoelectronic and magnetic
constituents. Electronic properties of isotopically controlled diamond, Si and
Ge will be investigated. The program will explore and delineate the electronic
states of donor-bound electrons and acceptor-bound holes in diamond, in III-V
and III-VI magnetic (spintronic) multinaries and in chalcopyrites,
genealogically derived from III-V and II-VI semiconductors. Collective and
localized electronic and vibrational states will be investigated in these
semiconductors and their nanostructures with magneto- and piezo-spectroscopy.
Graduate students and undergraduate students participating in the program will
acquire skills in Raman, Brillouin, infrared and modulated
reflectivity/transmission spectroscopy applied to issues at the forefront areas
in current semiconductor physics and, in the process, be trained for careers in
academe, industry, and government.

Research proposed deals with applications of several optical techniques to the
behavior and properties of advanced semiconductor materials. These materials
play a significant role in the current technology and hold the promise and
potential for significant applications. High temperature/high power electronic
devices based on wideband gap, ultra hard semiconductors, e.g. diamond; new
generations of solid state electronics in which spin-polarized charge carriers
are exploited using spintronic materials; the manipulation of semiconductor
properties by the deliberate introduction of specific impurities or by
controlling the isotopic composition: These are illustrative examples of the
excitement and intellectual challenges in the physics of semiconductors and
their future applications. Participants in the program - graduate students and
postdoctoral research associates - will acquire versatile expertise for careers
in academia, national laboratories as well as in research and development in the
opto-electronics industry.