* 0405931
* Collaborative Proposal: Theoretical and Experimental Analysis of Wormlike Micellar and Polymer Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* L. Pamela Cook-Ioannidis, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 172,976.00

Under this project we will develop predictive models of complex fluids,
particularly wormlike micellar solutions and polymer fluids. As opposed to
Newtonian fluids (such as water), these complex fluids exhibit shear-rate-
dependent viscosities and elastic effects. Flows of these fluids exhibit purely
elastic instabilities, pronounced thermal sensitivity, inhomogeneities in flow
conditions (shear banding, shear induced structures, demixing), and early
fracture. Mathematical models based on microstructural considerations will be
developed consistent with two-fluid effects and with micellar breaking and
reforming. The solutions of the resultant initial-boundary value problems for
coupled systems of nonlinear partial differential equations with a non-local
condition will be analyzed, numerically simulated, examined for stability
characteristics, and compared with detailed experimental results in both shear
and transient uniaxial extensional flows. The experiments will guide the
modeling, and the modeling will in turn guide experimental measurements. The
results of this research will form a basis for control of these fluids in use
and in processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer fluids and wormlike micellar
solutions are ubiquitous today, being used in paints, plastics, foods,
detergents, pharmaceuticals, agrochemical sprays, and oil recovery. A basic
understanding of the properties of these mixtures under flow conditions is
crucial to their effective use. Through a multidisciplinary collaboration, this
project develops predictive tools for use in controlling flow of these complex
fluids. This work has potential application as a predictive tool for an
important sector of the economy.&lt;br/&gt;