* 0405586
* Braids and Knots
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Joan Birman, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2009
* USD 61,908.00

The main focus of this proposal is the conjugacy problem in braid
groups,&lt;br/&gt;and ultimately in Garside and Artin groups and also in surface
mapping&lt;br/&gt;class groups. To begin, we propose to investigate the
interface between&lt;br/&gt;two known approaches to the conjugacy problem in the
braid groups: (a) the&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial solution that originated with the
work of Frank Garside in&lt;br/&gt;1968; and (b) the dynamic approach which was
first studied by Jakob&lt;br/&gt;Nielsen in 1932 and later given new meaning, in
1982, by William Thurston.&lt;br/&gt;We note that (a) gives a definitive test
for when two braids are&lt;br/&gt;conjugate, whereas (b) gives less than that.
On the other hand (a) is&lt;br/&gt;exponential in both word length and braid
index, whereas (b) suggests the&lt;br/&gt;possible existence of a polynomial
solution. The moment seems to be ripe&lt;br/&gt;for an investigation which
combines aspects of both. The new work of&lt;br/&gt;Gebhardt on (a) shows that
the `Super Summit Set', a complete class&lt;br/&gt;invariant, can be replaced by
the smaller `Ultra Summit Set' (USS). Our&lt;br/&gt;hope is to use the known
dynamic classification to study the USS. We will&lt;br/&gt;begin with a study of
reducing curves for reducible braids, and go on to&lt;br/&gt;study finite order
(FO) and pseudo-Anosov (PA) braids. We conjecture&lt;br/&gt;that for braids in
the USS the reducing curves can be chosen to be round&lt;br/&gt;circles which
meet a line containing the punctures in 2 points. We&lt;br/&gt;conjecture
further that PA braids have `rigid powers whose combinatorics&lt;br/&gt;is
particularly simple. Looking at the braid group as a special case
of&lt;br/&gt;mapping class groups, one then expects further that the associated
train&lt;br/&gt;tracks will be special and interesting. If all this goes well,
there will&lt;br/&gt;be further problems to investigate, including related
combinatorics in&lt;br/&gt;more general mapping class groups, and related
dynamics in more general&lt;br/&gt;Garside and Artin
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years there has been great interest in
certain codes, in `Public&lt;br/&gt;Key Cryptography, which are based upon the
use of braid groups. The&lt;br/&gt;underlying idea has been that the so-called
`word problem in the braid&lt;br/&gt;groups is known to have a solution which is
fast. That is, the time&lt;br/&gt;required to check whether two words represent
the same element in the&lt;br/&gt;braid group is known to be polynomial as a
function of word length L and&lt;br/&gt;braid index N. On the other hand, the
conjugacy problem, which is more&lt;br/&gt;difficult, has been thought to be
fundamentally exponential in L and N.&lt;br/&gt;Like most such problems in
complexity theory (e.g. the factorization of&lt;br/&gt;numbers into primes) the
possibility always exists that a particular&lt;br/&gt;problem which was thought
to be exponential will turn out to be polynomial&lt;br/&gt;if a more ingenious
solution can be found. The PI has been a leading&lt;br/&gt;expert in the study
of braid groups for many years. She now proposes to&lt;br/&gt;investigate the
conjugacy problem in the braid groups from a new point of&lt;br/&gt;view which
she hopes will show it to be polynomial, like the word problem,&lt;br/&gt;in
both L and N. The underlying idea is to look at two very
different&lt;br/&gt;approaches to the conjugacy problem, one based on
`combinatorics and the&lt;br/&gt;other on `dynamics, and to apply ideas from the
second approach to&lt;br/&gt;simplify the first. If successful, this research
would have implications&lt;br/&gt;in Public Key Cryptography as regards the
security of codes based upon&lt;br/&gt;braid groups. It should also have many
applications in mathematics because&lt;br/&gt;of the central role played by the
braid groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;