* 0405036
* Performance Characteristics of a Spin-Polarized Field-Effect Transistor
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Paul Thibado, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 350,612.00

This project addresses tunneling characteristics of spin-polarized electrons in
GaAs utilizing a novel double-tip scanning tunneling microscope (STM) approach.
Measurements of I-V characteristics of a three terminal electrical device
structure will make use of a spin-polarized source, a spin-polarized drain, and
a spin-friendly transport channel between the source and drain with the entire
unit housed inside a vacuum chamber. The source and drain will be made of
single-crystal, &lt;110&gt;-oriented nickel wire electrochemically etched into a
needle shape to also serve as an STM tip. The STM tips will be brought within 1
nm of an n-type GaAs sample, so spin polarized electrons can tunnel from Ni to
GaAs. A unique double-cleave sample allows the tips to be placed on orthogonal
surfaces so as to have their points of tunneling be as close as 5 nm from the
other. The source-to-drain current will be measured as a function of the lateral
separation distance between the two tips. As the second tip is scanned downward
the distance between the two tips will grow. As this distance grows so does the
distance from the source to the drain, making this a tunable channel length
device structure. As the electron's path length grows, the orientation of the
electron's spin changes (due to precession about the external magnetic field of
the tips). When the path length is just right, the electron's spin will rotate
just such as to leave the orientation of the spin matched with the orientation
of the second tip, resulting in a high current flow. If the electron's spin is
not well matched, then a lower current is expected. The current is expected to
oscillate in space as the second tip is scanned across the cleaved GaAs surface.
Additionally, ultra-thin ferromagnetic GaMnAs layers will be grown by MBE. After
double cleaving the sample, spin transfer properties will be measured by
injecting spins into one surface and pulling them out of the side surface above,
inside, and below the GaMnAs layer to allow local transport properties through
the layers to be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
basic research issues in a topical area of electronic materials with high
technological relevance. An important feature of the project is the strong
emphasis on education, with emphasis on integration of research and education
including special classroom techniques that promote students' participation
through question/answer portions of lectures. The integrated research and
education project will improve fundamental understanding of factors important to
the evolving field of spintronics, which combines conventional electronics and
spin transport. Additionally, the project assists development of strong
technical, communication, and organizational skills in students made possible by
a forefront research environment. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;