* 0405572
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Measurements of Magma Flux, Arc Composition, and Lower-Plate Serpentinization in the Central American Subduction Factory
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Peter Kelemen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 04/30/2005
* USD 5,000.00

Under this award, the PIs will carry out an active-source seismic investigation
of the volcanic arc, backarc, and downgoing plate in the Costa Rican portion of
the Central American Focus Site. The program focuses on the central Costa Rican
segment of the arc, a site of marked transitions in lava chemistry, because the
narrow isthmus here is well-suited for detailed seismic imaging using onshore-
offshore techniques. This location also enables the incorporation of data from
the regional Costa Rican seismic network with the proposed areal active-source
array. This combination will result in a detailed 3D image of arc crustal
structure in the area. The goals are to determine the basic crustal
architecture, composition, integrated magma flux, and fractionation processes of
the arc, and to constrain the degree of hydration (e.g., serpentinization) in
the downgoing Cocos Plate lithosphere. The work addresses the following: (1)
What is the bulk composition of the Central American arc and, by inference, of
its primary magma? (2) What is the long-term magma flux into the arc, and how
does it compare to other arcs? (3) What are the length scales and degree of
lateral variability in the Costa Rica arc? (4) Does the state of hydration of
oceanic crust and upper mantle vary along the arc, and if so, does it correlate
with changes in the "fluid signal" (e.g., Ba/La) of arc lavas? The program
entails two ships (seismic ship and OBS ship), including about 80 days of ship
time, OBS's, and extensive collaborative efforts with Germans and other ongoing
seismic studies on land. The study has a number of broader impacts, including
the extensive involvement of graduate students, teacher training activities,
international collaboration with German and Costa Rican scientists, and high
importance to the goals of the MARGINS program.