* 0405380
* UMEB: Environmental Biology in the Pacific Islands
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Celia Smith, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Alan H. Savitzky
* 08/31/2009
* USD 630,048.00

"UMEB: Environmental Biology in the Pacific Islands," based at the University of
Hawaii at Manoa, will train students from the Polynesian and Micronesian
islands, highly under-represented in the biological sciences, to pursue
professions in environmental biology. Coming from thousands of islands scattered
over more than 160,00 square miles of the tropical Pacific Ocean, the UMEB
interns, selected during their freshman and sophomore years, will have the
opportunity to participate in environmentally relevant training and research at
the University of Hawaii at Manoa or Chaminade University, a small private
college near the UHM campus. The program will enroll up to seven student interns
each summer, with 4 - 5 expected to continue with year-round support. As a
cohort, the students will participate in a series of field trips to expose them
to both nearly intact and heavily disturbed terrestrial and marine habitats and
will attend lectures/discussions with participating faculty and with
representatives from governmental agencies and non-governmental organizations
that are concerned with environmental issues. Each student will join a research
group in the laboratory of one of 11 mentors where s/he will gain hands-on
research experience. With guidance from mentors, graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows and other undergraduates in each laboratory, each Pacific Islands intern
will gain skills by apprenticeship and undertake an individual research project
on a topic such as endangered species conservation, impacts of invasive alien
species, and the effects of pollutants on life processes at many levels. Each
student's project will include a field component, so the participants become
familiar with the problem they are studying in nature, as well as bench top lab
activities. Students will present their research results each year at an end-of-
summer symposium; students accepted into the full year program will be
encouraged to develop their projects for presentation at national scientific
meetings and for publication in professional journals. Over 4 years, the program
will support 8 - 12 students to the completion of bachelor's degrees after which
students are expected to apply for graduate schools or environmentally relevant
jobs. The present grant builds on a prior UMEB award that supported 40 Pacific
Islanders in environmental research, and provided a cohort of role models for
the new group of students. The newly funded program will start with an excellent
group of interns who were supported and trained on the prior UMEB
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"UMEB: Environmental Biology in the Pacific Islands"
includes a Research Opportunity Award (ROA) that will bring six instructors from
Pacific Islands community colleges to the University of Hawaii, for 6 weeks of
intensive exposure and training in local environmental problems and to conduct
research into potential solutions. Through field trips, visits to active
research laboratories, and lectures and practical in-lab training, participants
will be taught modern approaches to environmental biology and the molecular
methods for examining genetic diversity at a variety of levels. They will be
supplied with modern equipment for performing such studies that they will take
back to their home institutions to use in training and mentoring students and
carrying out relevant research. Together with student-intern training of Pacific
Islanders, the ROA effort will significantly improve the capacities to of the
local community colleges to train and practice sound environmental practices and
remediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will produce a new and somewhat
unique group of culturally-connected Pacific Islanders specifically trained to
serve their home islands as informed leaders in natural resource protection and
restoration. Further, they will be positioned to provide information to the
world on the special problems experienced in island nations relative to topics
such as resource sustainability, protection of biodiversity, management of
coral-reef fisheries, integrated watershed management and control of invasive
species. Because many of the targeted islands have long depended on the mainland
U.S. for trained scientists to fill research, management and policy-oriented
positions, environmental programs have often failed due to lack of follow up
from those on short term contract and because of a lack of community acceptance
and involvement. For more information, contact Dr. Michael G. Hadfield (Phone:
808-539-7319; e-mail: hadfield@hawaii.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;