* 0405383
* Structure and Solubility of H2O and Silicate in Silicate Melts and Aqueous Fluids in the Earth's Deep Crust and Upper Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Bjorn Mysen, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2009
* USD 109,994.00

Energy and mass transfer processes in the Earth and terrestrial planets involve
melting, crystallization, hydration, and dehydration at high temperature and
pressure. These processes control materials recycling near convergent plate
boundaries, govern lithosphere destruction and creation, often are responsible
for volcanic and seismic hazards, and impact on distribution and availability of
economic and energy resources in the Earth. Water-rich magmatic liquids
(silicate melts) and silicate-rich aqueous fluids play central roles in these
processes.&lt;br/&gt; In order to characterize these processes, experimental
data will be obtained of silicate and H2O solubility in aqueous fluids and
silicate melts, determination of their structure (in-situ while at high pressure
and temperature), and modeling of solubility behavior in and physicochemical
properties of silicate-rich aqueous fluids and hydrous silicate melts for
compositions, temperatures, and pressures corresponding the Earth's deep crust
and upper mantle. The solubility and structure data will be acquired as a
function of (i) alkali metal/Si and alkaline earth/Si in simple metal oxide-
silica-H2O systems, (ii) Al/(Al+Si) of aluminosilicate melts, and (iii) and the
type and proportion of metal cations (K, Na, Ca, Fe, and Mg) in binary metal
oxide silicate, and ternary and quaternary metal oxide aluminosilicate systems
in the pressure and temperature regime of the deep crust and the upper mantle of
the Earth. The proposed research program is an integral part of a broader
research effort that is focused on the influence of H2O on rock-forming
processes in the Earth and terrestrial planets. &lt;br/&gt; In addition to the
application of the research to mass and energy transfer processes in the Earth
and terrestrial planets, the projected experimental information also has
application to the glass, ceramics, and solid and nuclear waste industry because
H2O dissolved in silicate melt and glass govern properties such as durability,
density, crystallization behavior, expansivity and compressibility, element
diffusion, and related transport properties. Interaction between aqueous fluids
and waste-containing glass depends on the same melt and glass
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;