* 0405909
* Modeling and System Support to Balance the Resource Demand and Supply in High Performance Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,09/30/2006
* Xiaodong Zhang, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 09/30/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Xiaodong, Zhang&lt;br/&gt;0405909&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High performance
computing in multiprocessors and clusters has been mainly characterized for
performance evaluation and guided for performance optimization by communication-
oriented models, such as the LogP model, which considers the communication
latency as the dominant factor contributing the performance degradation. With
the rapid development and advances of commodity processors and network
technologies, a modern cluster is equipped with fast interconnection networks,
where each node has a high capacity with increasingly fast CPUs and larger
memory. Unfortunately, the speed gaps between the CPU and the memory and the I/O
storage continue to grow, seriously limiting the cluster computing efficiency.
Since the dominant bottleneck concerns have been dramatically changed from
communication bandwidths to memory bandwidths, there are several limits of using
a LopP-like model. First, balancing and well-utilizing the CPU, memory and
storage resources in clusters is a serious issue to be addressed because this is
a major source limiting the sustained performance. Second, one common phenomenon
due to the large CPU and memory speed gap is that CPU cycles are over-supplied
while the memory and I/O bandwidths are highly demanded and not
sufficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project will address the
growing concern of unbalanced resource demand and supply in cluster computing,
we propose several related research projects. The first objective is to develop
memory hierarchy oriented analytical performance models and experimental tools
to quantitatively provide the insights into the resource demand and supply in
high performance cluster computing, which guide users and computer architects to
optimize their system designs and program implementations. This will be a
general model covering both communication and memory effects. The second
objective is to concentrate our efforts on two critical issues to improve the
sustained performance: (1) locality exploitation and (2) latency reduction
beyond the on-chip cache level by proposing two novel and cost-effective memory
system designs and their implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
design and build a structured PSP scheme and its implementation in the cluster
to decentralize the resource management. These methods will be tested on three
types of large real-world and data intensive applications: the CFD computation,
a direct numerical simulation of turbulence, and Internet multimedia data
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;