* 0405348
* "Structure and Dynamics of Social Networks and Other Networked Systems."
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Mark Newman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 268,421.00

The principal investigator and his colleagues study the&lt;br/&gt;structure and
function of real-world networked systems,&lt;br/&gt;particularly information,
computer, and social networks. The&lt;br/&gt;work includes an empirical
component concerned with the discovery&lt;br/&gt;and analysis of network
structure, including collaboration&lt;br/&gt;networks, citation networks of
papers and of registered patents,&lt;br/&gt;transportation and other geographic
networks, social networks,&lt;br/&gt;and computer networks of various kinds
including administrator&lt;br/&gt;and server-client networks and networks of
"weblogs." Properties&lt;br/&gt;studied include correlation functions, spatial
structure,&lt;br/&gt;centrality and similarity measures, and measures of
assortative&lt;br/&gt;mixing and community structure. There is also a
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;component to the work, involving the development of models
to aid&lt;br/&gt;in the understanding of the effects of network structure.
Of&lt;br/&gt;particular interest are generalized random graph models
of&lt;br/&gt;networks, percolation models of network resilience,
growth&lt;br/&gt;models, exponential random graphs, and Markov graphs.
The&lt;br/&gt;project also includes the development of new computer
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for extracting and visualizing network structure,
particularly&lt;br/&gt;for the detection of community structure in
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and colleagues try to
understand the form&lt;br/&gt;and behavior of networks, particularly information
networks,&lt;br/&gt;computer networks, and social networks. The work has bearing
on a&lt;br/&gt;number of issues of current importance. A knowledge of
the&lt;br/&gt;structure of networks of acquaintance is crucial to
an&lt;br/&gt;understanding of how information, such as news, rumors,
consumer&lt;br/&gt;trends, etc., spreads through society. Similarly, networks
of&lt;br/&gt;physical contact between people govern the way in which
diseases&lt;br/&gt;spread and computer networks govern the spread of
computer&lt;br/&gt;viruses. A proper understanding of the nature and progress
of&lt;br/&gt;infections is impossible without good network models. The
work&lt;br/&gt;described here is aimed both at determining what the structure
of&lt;br/&gt;the networks in question is, and also at modeling the effect
of&lt;br/&gt;that structure on possible outcomes. As well as enhancing
basic&lt;br/&gt;understanding of these problems, the results point to ways
in&lt;br/&gt;which network structure or dynamics can be changed in order
to&lt;br/&gt;either improve network transmission (in the case of
information)&lt;br/&gt;or slow it down (in the case of epidemics). For
disease&lt;br/&gt;transmission, for instance, it may be possible to
suggest&lt;br/&gt;effective targets for immunization or education campaigns to
slow&lt;br/&gt;disease spread. New data resources and analysis techniques
also&lt;br/&gt;are developed that will aid future work by other researchers
on&lt;br/&gt;related topics.&lt;br/&gt;