* 0405836
* Research in Classical Minimal Surface Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* William Meeks, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 101,991.00

DMS-0405836 Title: Research in classical minimal surface theory PI: William H.
Meeks, University of Massachusetts (Amherst)

ABSTRACT

Proposed Research Project Abstract

In this proposal the researcher will study the geometry, asymptotic behavior,
conformal structure and topology of properly embedded minimal surfaces in three-
dimensional Euclidean space. One of the main goals of the proposal is to
classify all of the properly embedded minimal surfaces which can be parametrized
by domains in the Euclidean plane and to describe the asymptotic geometry of all
finite genus examples. Related theoretical techniques concerning compactness,
regularity and convergence of minimal surfaces of locally bounded genus will be
investigated as well. One hoped for application of this research is to classify
all smooth finite group actions on the three-dimensional sphere. As an outgrowth
of his recent joint manuscript with Charles Frohman on the topological
classification for minimal surfaces, the researcher proposes to prove that
Bryant surfaces in hyperbolic three-space are unknotted.

Classical minimal surface theory has its roots in 18-th and 19-th century
mathematics. Minimal surfaces are the first important examples of what is called
the calculus of variations, first described by Euler around 1735. Physically
minimal surfaces can be modeled locally as soap films on wires or by surfaces of
least-area relative to their local boundaries. Minimal surfaces play an
important role as a tool in the study of three-dimensional topology and
Riemannian geometry. The subject of minimal surfaces has a broad impact in
mathematics and physical sciences. Minimal surfaces are stationary fluid
interfaces,so their shapes arise in many physical problems. The work in this
proposal would classify the possible physical shapes which could occur as
infinite interfaces. Many of the known examples of minimal surfaces are observed
physically, so it is of interest to have a rigorous theorem which predicts the
shapes which can occur. The research proposed here strongly impacts the area of
classical differential geometry of surfaces in three-dimensional Euclidean
space. As is well known to geometers, minimal surface theory has been and
continues to be one of the principal tools for proving theorems in general
relativity and three-dimensional topology. One well-known such application is
Schoen and Yau's proof of the Positive Mass Conjecture. Recent work of Gabai on
the Generalized Smale Conjecture shows the continued importance of minimal
surfaces in three-dimensional topology. Most of the research proposed here is
related to and motivated by the hope that it will lead to a positive solution of
the Pitts-Rubenstein Conjecture and to the classification of three-manifolds
with finite fundamental group. This hoped for topological application to one of
the outstanding classification problems in mathematics has its roots in previous
joint research by the researcher, Peter Scott, Charles Frohman and S. T. Yau. In
part because of the important connections with other areas of mathematics and
the ease in which it is possible to make computer graphics pictures of beautiful
classical examples, minimal surfaces continue to be one of the principal topics
for popular science articles and public science exhibits. Thus, indirectly, the
exciting research problems outlined in this proposal help bring many young
scientists and mathematicians to the frontiers of research.

