* 0405188
* Exponential Asymptotics in Sample Path Intersection and Related Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Xia Chen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 12/31/2007
* USD 91,597.00

0405188 Chen The PI will study the exponential convergence arising from the
intersections of sample path(s). The importance of this project comes from the
following three reasons: First, the area of sample intersections is full of
mathematical elegance and surprise. It is also of great interest to the people
working in the fields of physical and biological sciences. Second, this study is
a crucial step toward understanding the asymptotic patterns (at the exponential
level) of additive functionals and local times of the multi-parameter processes.
As a concrete example of the local times run by multi-parameter processes, the
long term behaviors of intersection local times locally resemble those of the
local times of Brownian sheets. Third, the problems involved are often
mathematically challenging. The intersection local times are the processes with
strong memory and sharp singularity. Many of the results proved in this field
show a heavy dimension dependence, which results from a combination of these two
factors. In existing literature, a substantial difference between self-
intersection and inter-path intersection has also been observed in the multi-
dimensional cases. Compared with other aspects of the study, such as the weak
laws, much less has been known in the limit behaviors such as large deviations,
small ball probabilities and related strong limit laws. Recently, the proposer
and his collaborators have made some substantial progress on the exponential
asymptotics and the law of the iterated logarithm for the intersection local
times run by Brownian motions, stable processes and random walks. The progress
suggests further questions and establishments in broader situations. The project
concerns three types of models, to which the exponential asymptotics will be
investigated: The intersection local times of random walks and some more general
processes; the range and intersection of ranges of the random walks; and the
local times and additive functionals of multi-parameter processes. It is a well
known fact in the biological and physical communities that the notion of
intersection local times is an effective tool in the study of polymer and
polaron models. This project is related to the long term behaviors of these
models. The study will advance our knowledge on how the systems evolve in
various scales. Therefore, the success of this project will also have impact on
some areas in the biological and physical sciences.