* 0405129
* The Dynamics of Flame Fronts - Asymptotics and Computations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Moshe Matalon, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 228,000.00

The objective of this research is to gain fundamental understanding of the
complex processes occurring in practical combustion systems through mathematical
modeling. The work is concerned with the propagation of multi-dimensional flame
fronts with emphasis on their interaction with the underlying flow. One set of
problems address the propagation of flames in channels and cracks, which is of
considerable interest in a number of applications where the penetration of the
flame may be favorable, as in miniaturized combustion devices, or detrimental,
as in crevice volumes of an internal combustion engine. The second set of
problems is concerned with edge-flames, which are of fundamental importance to
the phenomena of flame stabilization and liftoff occurring in many applications
such as household burners and furnaces. Edge-flames play an important role in
the evolution of holes created on the flame interface because of high strain or
excessive heat loss, and thus are fundamental to the dynamics of turbulent
diffusion flames. Understanding of these complex phenomena will be achieved by
constructing models that contain the necessary physical ingredients of the
problem at hand, constructing solutions to the mathematical models by means of
asymptotic techniques and numerical methods, and comparing the results with
experimental observations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Combustion provides the
majority of the energy that we consume today. It is important to ensure that
combustion processes are utilized in the most efficient way and in such a way to
minimize their adverse effect on the environment. This research will provide
fundamental understanding of the dynamics of flame fronts, the interaction of a
flame with the underlying flow field, inflammability limits, and intrinsic
instabilities associated with the burning process. This knowledge will have an
effect on future industrial combustion design and emerging micropropulsion
technologies, resulting in improved energy utility and reduction of pollutants.
Students trained through involvement in this research project will become
valuable to the educational and research needs of the country.&lt;br/&gt;