* 0405706
* SGER:    Collection and Processing of Satellite Data from the 2003 Tokachi-Oki (Hokkaido) Japan Earthquake for Determination of Permanent Ground Deformations
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Jean Pierre Bardet, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 11/30/2005
* USD 30,435.00

The 26 September 2003 Tokachi-oki earthquake (Mw = 8.3) in Hokkaido, Japan,
caused significant soil liquefaction, ground lateral spreading, and slope
failures along the eastern coast of Hokkaido. The ground accelerations exceeded
0.5 g at 100 miles from the hypocenter. The objectives of this SGER (Small
Grants for Exploratory Research) project are to collect and process satellite
data in order to determine the extent and magnitude of permanent ground
deformations resulting from the compressibility and failure of soil deposits. It
involves collaboration between researchers at the University of Southern
California and the University of Texas at Austin, and will be carried out in
collaboration with researchers at Kyoto University and Waseda University in
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The satellite data to be collected includes
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images and high-resolution optical satellite
images. The collected data will be processed for (1) mapping the location and
magnitude of ground deformations over large geographic areas using SAR
interferometry and interpretation of optical satellite images; (2)
differentiating ground deformations (lateral and vertical) induced by local soil
conditions (e.g., liquefaction) and overall tectonic processes; and (3)
developing a comprehensive GIS model of field observations and ground
deformations. This investigation of large-scale geotechnical features will
complement the field observations from the post-earthquake reconnaissance work
of U.S. and Japanese investigators. The utilization of satellite data has the
potential to provide unique and complementary information about large-scale
ground deformations and their associated damage after earthquakes. It is
expected that this research will yield novel results in geotechnical engineering
that will become part of future developments and improvements in current remote
sensing systems.