* 0405057
* Symposium:  Biological Systems and Soft Materials:  Future Directions in Statistical Physics; March 6-7, 2004; Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, VA.
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Beate Schmittmann, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2005
* USD 8,000.00

The Division of Materials Research, the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Chemistry Division jointly participate in funding this
award. This award provides support for a symposium entitled "Biological Systems
and Soft Materials: future directions in statistical physics" to be held on
March 6-7, 2004, at Virginia Polytechnic Institute, in Blacksburg, VA. The
symposium aims to bring researchers together with common interests in biological
systems, soft materials, and statistical physics far from equilibrium. The
diverse group of invited speakers includes members of underrepresented groups.
Each speaker represents a strong theoretical foundation combined with an active
research program in soft matter or biological systems that is closely tied to
experimental data. Physicists, chemists, biologists, and engineers will report
on theoretical, experimental and computational research at the meeting. Funding
will primarily provide partial or full support for junior researchers enabling
them to participate in the meeting. This is a timely meeting in this topical
area for the Mid-Atlantic region of the United States. The broader impacts of
this meeting include participation of members of underrepresented groups and
fertilization of ideas across several
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;