* 0405955
* Computational modeling of filaments with applications to DNA packing and sedimentation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Oscar Gonzalez, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2008
* USD 141,999.00

Proposal: DMS-0405955&lt;br/&gt;PI: Oscar Gonzalez&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Texas at Austin&lt;br/&gt;Title: Computational Modeling of
Filaments with Applications to DNA Packing and
Sedimentation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will carry out two projects aimed at developing a deeper
understanding of the geometrical and physical properties of material filaments.
The first project deals with the numerical analysis of optimal packing problems
for curves with thickness. The objective is to exploit the concept of global
curvature to develop numerical methods for optimizing the energy of a curve in
three-dimensional space (or a framed curved if twist is important) subject to an
excluded-volume constraint in which the curve is the centerline of a flexible,
solid tube of prescribed radius. The second project deals with the relation
between shape and speed in the sedimentation dynamics of thin, rigid (or nearly
rigid) filaments. The objective is to characterize how features of geometry
(such as length, curvature, tubular neighborhood size) and topology (knot type)
affect the possible speeds at which a filament can sediment in a viscous
(Stokes) fluid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of how material filaments
may be optimally packed in confined geometries and how they may supercoil or
wrap around themselves is of great interest in the study of macromolecules such
as DNA and other systems in chemistry and biology. While recent modeling
advances have led to concise mathematical formulations of such problems,
numerical techniques for studying them have received relatively little
attention. The first research project pursued by the investigator is focused on
the development of provably convergent numerical methods for studying these and
other related packing problems. Sedimentation and gel electrophoresis are common
laboratory techniques for analyzing DNA and other polymers. These methods
exploit the observation that small, relatively stiff polymer fragments of
different shape typically travel at different speeds when forced through a
viscous fluid or through a gel. However, the general relation between shape and
speed is at present not well understood. The second research project pursued by
the investigator is focused on the characterization of the shape-speed relation
for sedimentation. Results from this research may lead to improved laboratory
techniques, and may enable more detailed structural information about polymers
to be deduced from sedimentation data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;