* 0405166
* US-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:   Robust Semi-Supervised Clustering with Application to Multi-Modal Database Categorization
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Hichem Frigui, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/2005
* USD 30,000.00

0405166&lt;br/&gt;Frigui&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-France cooperative
research project between Hichem Frigui's research group at the University of
Memphis and the IMEDIA research team led by Nozha Boujemaa at the French
National Institute for Research in Informatics and Applied Mathematics (INRIA)
in Rocquencourt focuses on the development of effective clustering algorithms
suitable for categorizing massive multi-modal scientific data collections. The
proposal addresses theoretical aspects of clustering algorithms and their
applications in analyzing and organizing scientific data sets, namely: (1)
scientific text and related images in botanical biodiversity date produced in
the last 50 years; and (2) gene expression data from Arabidopsis thaliana genome
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project will advance
knowledge in data clustering methods using integration of fuzzy set theory and
statistical estimators. They will develop new algorithms that identify clusters
of data in subspaces, that combine multi-modal features, and that use few
labeled samples to guide the clustering process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The new algorithms, along with the scientific data sets, will be
combined with the U.S. investigator's content-based image retrieval (CBIR)
prototype funded under his NSF-CAREER project. The CBIR prototype will be used
in education activities for freshman engineering and computer science students
as well as high school students. The methods developed will be useful for
applications in information security, bioinformatics, content-based multimedia
and other large data sets. Through this award, U.S. students are given the
opportunity to develop research skills in an international research environment
and initiate partnerships with French researchers for future
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;