* 0405610
* Connections for Nonfree Actions and Applications to Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Debra Lewis, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2009
* USD 110,001.00

Proposal: DMS-0405610 PI: Debra K Lewis Institution: University of California -
Santa Cruz Title: Connections of Nonfree Actions and Applications to Mechanics

ABSTRACT

The theory and applications of generalized connections and moving frames for
nonfree actions is studied, with particular emphasis on geometric integration
methods for the numerical integration of differential equations with symmetries
and nonlinear constraints. Classical connections are defined only for free
actions; the normalization condition would force the Lie algebra-valued
connection form to be singular at singular points of the group action. However,
if the connection form is regarded simply as a mechanism for specifying an
equivariant projection onto the tangent space to the group orbit, the connection
form can be replaced with a smooth one form taking values in the dual of the Lie
algebra. Several key results from the classical theory of connections on
principal bundles are generalized to partial connections. In support of this
theoretical work, and as an application of it, a variety of mechanical systems
are studied, including models from molecular dynamics, celestial mechanics, and
micromagnetism. The primary application is the design and analysis of geometric
integration schemes, that is, algorithms for the numerical approximation of
trajectories of differential equations that capture some essential features of
the exact solutions, independent of the overall accuracy of the approximations.
The decomposition of tangent vectors into vertical (rigid) and horizontal
(internal) components given by a partial connection form can be used to
construct geometric integrators combining Lie group methods with traditional
numerical integration schemes. Such decompositions also facilitate the
development of geometrically meaningful performance criteria for competing
numerical schemes.

A `connection' is, roughly speaking, a consistent way of describing the
evolution of a mechanical system as a combination of `rigid' motions determined
by the symmetry group and `shape-changing' motions. (In fact, connections can be
defined for more general problems using appropriate mathematical analogs of
rigid motions and shape.) Such decompositions have long played a central role in
mechanics, geometry, and mathematical physics. For example, connections can be
used in engineering applications to efficiently predict the orientation of a
flexible system (e.g. a complex space structure), when a detailed simulation of
the motion of the system is intractable. Symmetric states (e.g. axisymmetric
shapes) are of tremendous practical and theoretical importance; almost all man-
made objects have some symmetry and many are highly symmetric. However,
connections for systems with symmetric configurations have been introduced only
recently, by the investigator and coworkers, and many crucial features remain to
be explored. A diverse assortment of applications, relevant to computer design
and manufacture, telecommunications, and medicine, motivate and guide the new
theory. For example, generalized connections can be used in the design of
efficient computer simulations of multibody systems, which are used in satellite
design and control, biomechanics, and robotics. The development of geometric
algorithms that can be implemented as `after-market' modifications of
conventional algorithms facilitates the adoption of innovative methods in
industrial and applied research settings by minimizing the costs and risks
involved in modifying expensive, trusted, and highly specialized software.