* 0405073
* Research Starter Grant:  Genomic Analysis of Microbial Communities: Revealing the Ecological Function of Non-Cultivated Planctomycetes in Soil
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Daniel Buckley, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

A research starter grant has been awarded to Dr. Daniel H. Buckley of Cornell
University to determine the functional significance of non-cultivated
Planctomycetes in soil microbial communities. Metagenomic libraries and whole
genome amplification will be used to obtain genomic DNA fragments from
Planctomycetes to provide insight into the physiological potential of these
microorganisms in soil communities. These genome-enabled insights will be
extended into an ecological context by using molecular techniques to examine the
diversity and distribution of Planctomycetes in relation to agricultural
management practices and in relation to soil nitrogen and sulfur cycling. Soil
is the thin skin of the Earth on which all terrestrial forms of life depend. Our
soils are home to a staggering array of microorganisms whose activities impact
soil fertility, atmospheric composition, the breakdown of pollutants, and
discharges to groundwater and aquatic ecosystems. While the importance of soil
microorganisms has been recognized for some time, the techniques needed to
identify, characterize and study the ecology of these organisms have only been
recently developed. Planctomycetes are a recently discovered group of bacteria
which have been observed in soils all over the world and may constitute as much
as 21% of the microbial community in arable soils. Despite their abundance and
ubiquity in soils, an understanding of the role these microbes play in
terrestrial ecosystems remains elusive. This research program will provide
unprecedented information about the ecology and evolutionary history of
Planctomycetes, with the specific objective of determining the environmental
processes mediated by these microorganisms in soil microbial communities.