* 0405063
* Reactions Between Liquid Metal Alloys and Doped (Semiconducting) Aluminosilicate Glassmelts
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Reid Cooper, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2005
* USD 104,536.00

Abstract - Cooper - 0071325

The foundation for the research planned are discoveries in the PI's group that
resulted in a predictive dynamic reaction model for the float-glass process. In
"traditional" float glass (flat glass prepared from floating a soda-lime
silicate melt on pure molten tin, highest temperature of ~1100oC), the large
driving-force (energy) of reaction is dissipated most rapidly by a redox dynamic
that is dominated by the diffusive motions of electron holes and network-
modifying cations. The PI's model explains many idiosyncratic features of the
chemical profile in float glass. Combined with solution thermodynamics for
float-alloy design, the model was used to extrapolate the float-glass process to
temperatures in excess of 1400oC, opening the possibility of float-processing
flat glass of distinctly refractory compositions (e.g., for application as
substrates in high-end flat-panel displays). The model also suggests a framework
of understanding in which glass composition and float-medium composition can be
engineered together so as to create high-value-added flat glass with unique
physiochemical properties and performance. The research planned represents the
first steps to "designer"-flat-glass of unique properties.

The PI plans to conduct an experimental and theoretical study of the reaction(s)
between molten aluminosilicate solutions with molten metal solutions,
specifically: (1) the driving force and chemical species involved in the redox
couple at the silicate-metal interface, (2) the physical mechanism(s) of
chemical diffusion in the reacting aluminosilicate glassmelt in response to the
chemical diffusion accompanying the overall reaction. In addition, the physical
properties/characteristics of the reacted glassmelt via its reaction with the
liquid metal alloy allows for creation of a surface with perhaps unique
catalytic, photonic or thermochemical (e.g., crystalline nucleation) responses.

Specifically, there will be two experimental thrusts: (a)
time/temperature/distance (i.e., into the glassmelt) analyses of reactions
between Cu-37Ge (at.%) and both iron-free and ferric-iron-doped sodium
aluminoborosilicate (NABS which is similar to Pyrex) and magnesium
aluminosilicate glassmelts, and (b) structural and chemical (radial distribution
function and electron loss spectroscopy) analyses of reacted glassmelts as
functions of chemical-diffusion-affected composition, at an anticipated lateral
resolution of 5-10 nm, using energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy.

This project is being co-funded by the Ceramics Program in the Division of
Materials Research (Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate) and the
Process and Reaction Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical and
Transport Systems (Engineering Directorate).

