* 0405724
* Dynamical Systems Approaches to Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2009
* USD 444,266.00

Professor Wayne will study the long-time behavior of partial differential
equations like the Navier-Stokes, Euler, and Maxwell's equations which arise in
the study of fluid dynamics and optics. He will use methods and techniques from
dynamical systems theory to make qualitative and quantitative predictions about
the behavior of the solutions of these equations and will focus on five main
areas: (i) The derivation, justification and experimental validation of model
equations for waves on fluid surfaces; (ii) The long-time behavior of solutions
of the Navier-Stokes equations; particularly vortex solutions; (iii) The
modeling of very short pulses in optical media; (iv) The existence and stability
of pulse solutions in coupled optical systems; and (v) The approximation of the
motion of thin elastic media. In particular, he will attempt to extend the
insights gained from understanding the invariant geometrical objects in the
phase space of ordinary differential equations to the infinite dimensional
setting of partial differential equations, focusing particularly on the case of
problems on unbounded spatial domains where the presence of continuous spectrum
may cause qualitative differences between the behavior of the finite and
infinite dimensional systems.

The types of systems that Professor Wayne will study arise in many applications,
including nonlinear optical communication, fluid mechanics and the behavior of
elastic materials. For instance, attempts to obtain faster and faster
transmission of information through optical fibers often utilize extremely short
optical pulses. While there is a well understood and much studied method for
approximating the transmission of long pulses through such fibers optical
technology is now reaching the point where this approximation breaks down and
new models are needed. Point (iii) in the list of projects above aims to develop
such approximations. This problem, like the others that will be studied in this
project, is characterized by the fact that while it is impossible to solve the
equations governing the system exactly, applications require at least a
qualitative understanding of the behavior of solutions. Professor Wayne's
research has three goals: First, the derivation of model equations which can be
used to approximate the behavior of the true physical system -- whether it
arises in optics, fluids, or elsewhere. Secondly, the computation of accurate
estimates to control how much the behavior of the true system can deviate from
that of the model system, and finally the development of geometrical insights
which can provide a qualitative means of understanding and predicting the
behavior of this type of complicated physical system even if the actual solution
can not be computed.

