* 0405965
* Water Management in PEM Fuel Cells
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Keith Promislow, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 110,000.00

The goal of this project is the first mathematical analysis of the structure and
scaling of the multiphase flow in the gas di_usion layer of PEM fuel cells. The
weak flux regime identified from the scaling suggests a reduction of the coupled
degenerate parabolic system of conservation laws for heat and mass transport
with phase change to a sharp interface model, with a linear problem on either
side of a slowly moving free interface. A rigorous analysis of this problem,
based upon the renormalization group, will yield analytical expressions for
vapor and liquid fluxes in terms of prescribed boundary conditions and material
parameters. Based upon this reduction, a suite of fast, robust numerical schemes
in 1+2 and 1+3D will be developed to investigate control strategies for water
management. We estimate a speed up in computational time of 3-4 orders of
magnitude over resolution of the full problem. A key application is the
development of drying purge cycles, these minimize damage from ice formation
after shut-down&lt;br/&gt;by dehydrating the gas di_usion layer and flow fields,
while maintaining humidification levels in the membrane. Numerical simulation of
drying purges requires fast and accurate capturing of the multiphase fronts, a
feature unavailable in existing codes. In addition, a simplified model of the
coupled parabolic-elliptic problem for water management in the ionomer membrane
will be developed and analyzed. Recent experimental work has shown multiple
steady states, hysteresis, and long-time oscillations in membrane hydration
levels. At low inlet humidity levels associated with autohumidification the
membrane hydration couples strongly to the electric potential through the
membrane conductivity, leading to "dry-cell" bifurcations and slow moving
fronts. Autohumidification criteria which avoid the dry-cell bifurcation will be
developed, the inverse problem detecting the dry-cell bifurcation from external
voltage measurements will be investigated. A model of the cathode catalyst layer
including oxygen and hydronium transport, the overpotential, the electric
potential, and build-up of liquid water layers will be developed. The connection
between averaged reaction rates and catalyst layer micro-structure will be
rigorously established through homogenization theory by solving key cell-
problems which elucidate the role of triple junction points and catalyst layer
geometry on over-all performance. A connection between micro-structure geometry
and the experimental technique of AC impedance spectroscopy will be
pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proton electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells are
unique energy conversion devices with a broad range of applications. Powered by
hydrogen gas or directly from methanol, they hold promise to revolutionize the
automotive industry while at the same time yielding e_cient power generation for
cell phones, laptop computers, camcorders, digital cameras, PDAs, and other
applications in the 10-100 Watt range. However, optimization is required to
achieve targets of cost reduction, unit power density, operational lifetime, and
to improve performance for autohumidification regimes. Water management is key
not only to e_cient cell operation but also to prolonging cell operational
lifetime. The development of the proposed models and high-performance
computational tools for water management in PEM fuel cells represent a
significant breakthrough in the computational resolution of the delicate free-
surface motion required to&lt;br/&gt;understand water management. These novel
computational tools will improve resolution while reducing computation time from
from weeks to minutes. This dramatic enhancement of computational performance
will have substantial impact on the development of new materials and
manufacturing processes for the fuel cell industry, including the PI's
industrial partners, Ballard Power Systems andW.L. Gore. Moreover, the
development of lightweight, durable, low thermal and acoustic signature power
sources has been identified by the Intelligence Community as an important
ingredient of homeland security.&lt;br/&gt;