* 0405716
* Prediction for Multi-factor Point Process Models
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Lawrence Brown, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2008
* USD 191,861.00

Abstract PI: Lawrence D. Brown Proposal: 0405716

This proposal develops two different classes of models for statistical analysis
of temporal point processes with covariates. The temporal structure here has a
two way character, since there is day-to-day variation and also intraday
variation, and these two types of variation must be modeled separately before
being combined. Of interest are accurate predictions and also prediction
confidence intervals for future observations of the process. One class of models
begins by taking a slightly modified square root of the binned point-process
counts and then treats these via variations of customary non-linear Gaussian
random-effects models. The second class of models begins from a more primitive
perspective by developing new classes of point processes having certain
properties related to the usual Gaussian paradigm involving Moving Average and
Auto Regressive constructions. These point processes are actually special cases
of a more general new construction yielding processes with infinitely divisible
finite dimensional marginals, and that are analogs in appropriate senses of
classical AR and MA Gaussian processes. This new class of models is being
adapted and applied to various straightforward temporal settings. The
investigators are also studying how to apply such models in the complex settings
mentioned above involving covariates and different temporal dimensions. A
further area of study is the examination of the differences between the results
of analyses involving the new class of stochastic processes and those using the
simpler, but approximate, square root idea.

Telephone Call Centers are an important and growing component of our modern
service-based economy. Proper management of such a center requires estimation of
several operational "primitives", combined with queuing theory considerations,
in order to determine appropriate staffing levels for efficient and economic
customer service. Accurate prediction of the level of customer arrivals is the
most difficult of the primitives to assess. Predictions as well as confidence
bounds for these predictions are needed. In this proposal two new classes of
statistical models particularly attuned to special features of this type of data
are developed to make such predictions and confidence statements. While these
models are particularly tuned to produce the desired result in the telephone
context, they are also adaptable to a wide variety of other prediction problems,
particularly to an important class of problems in spatial analysis. In addition,
variations of the models are useful in developing techniques for internet
intrusion detection. Computer intrusion (attacks by hackers) is an increasing
impediment to efficient internet communications, and its detection is one vital
step in eliminating this burden.

