* 0405632
* Study of DNA-binding Proteins Using a Mechanical Nanodevice
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Giovanni Zocchi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* David A. Brant
* 09/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop a nano-device based method to study protein-DNA
interactions on a single molecule basis. Specifically, the nano-device will
monitor single protein binding events by detecting the conformational change
induced in the probe DNA. This represents a new paradigm of molecular detection,
whereby the target molecule is detected through the conformational change
induced in a single-molecule probe. Molecular scale devices hold the promise to
revolutionize science and technology, and demonstrating a practical single
molecule device for protein detection will be a significant step in the
development of the field. Scientifically, gaining insight into the interplay
between molecular recognition and mechanical deformation will impact our
understanding of allosteric control mechanisms in bio-polymers. Graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows will be trained in state-of-the-art optical
and micro-mechanical techniques to manipulate single molecules. This research
cuts across disciplines and thus offers an excellent opportunity to broaden the
scientific outlook of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers on current
advances in molecular biophysics and nano-technology.

The molecules of life - proteins, DNA - interact within the living cell in a
spectacular molecular dance, where partners must find each other and direct each
other's steps. Traditional methods of analysis such as X-ray crystallography
examine these processes through snapshots frozen in time. The research proposed
here will develop a new method to directly observe certain steps of the
molecular dance as they happen in real time. Specifically, the project will
employ a nano-device to observe the process of a single protein molecule
interacting with a short stretch of DNA. The successful outcome of the project
will, scientifically, build up our knowledge of how molecular recognition is
coupled to molecular deformation in biological systems; technologically, it will
demonstrate a nano-technology based platform for high-sensitivity protein
detection. Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will be trained in state-
of-the-art optical and micro-mechanical techniques to manipulate single
molecules. This research cuts across disciplines and thus offers an optimal
opportunity to broaden the scientific outlook of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers on current advances in molecular biophysics and nano-
technology.

