* 0405899
* Applied Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Jeffrey Rauch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 125,170.00

Abstract: 0405899, J. Rauch, University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applied
Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator will investigate mathematical
problems&lt;br/&gt;involving hyperbolic partial differential equations. These
equations&lt;br/&gt;appear in the description of waves which propagate with
finite speed,&lt;br/&gt;for example acoustics, electromagnetism, fluid and aero
dynamics,&lt;br/&gt;plasmas, lasers, telegraphy, radio, television, cell phones,
shock&lt;br/&gt;waves, music, power lines, .... etc. Typical mathematical
problems&lt;br/&gt;involve showing that specific problems, motivated by
applications,&lt;br/&gt;have solutions and studying their qualitative
properties, for example&lt;br/&gt;stability and methods for effective
computation. A first set of&lt;br/&gt;problems in the proposal concerns the
damping of acoustic waves by&lt;br/&gt;enclosing the acoustic cavity in a
diffusive medium. Two situations&lt;br/&gt;easy to understand are the protection
of pilots and passengers in&lt;br/&gt;airplanes from the noise of the engines
and the absorption of sound in&lt;br/&gt;a submarine so that it will not escape
to the sea. There are also&lt;br/&gt;applications to the automatic control of
mechanical systems immersed&lt;br/&gt;in fluids. A second problem concerns the
scattering of solutions of a&lt;br/&gt;strongly nonlinearly damped wave
equation. A third problem is to show&lt;br/&gt;that the phenomenon of continuum
generation in focused laser pulses is&lt;br/&gt;a consequence of nonlinear
electromagnetic models without ionization.&lt;br/&gt;Self focused laser beams
exhibit continuum generation. The band of&lt;br/&gt;frequencies present in the
focused beam is much broader and spans a&lt;br/&gt;continuum of frequencies (in
contrast to a discrete set) than before&lt;br/&gt;the focusing. Current
explanations are frankly not very convincing.&lt;br/&gt;This is a fundamental
problem long recognized in the laser physics&lt;br/&gt;community. It is a place
where mathematics may add important&lt;br/&gt;insights. Focused beams are used
in many situations including a&lt;br/&gt;surprising application to reduce
resistance in hypersonic aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposer will study
the behavior of solutions of the differential&lt;br/&gt;equations that govern
the propagation of waves. One problem&lt;br/&gt;investigated is how well sound
can be excluded from a region by&lt;br/&gt;enclosing the region is an absorbing
layer. Here the absorption in&lt;br/&gt;the layer is supposed to be of a
diffusive nature, like one would have&lt;br/&gt;for a gel. Applications include
sonic insulation of airplane&lt;br/&gt;fuselages and submarines and the control
of immersed mechanical&lt;br/&gt;systems. A second problem to be studied is that
of white light&lt;br/&gt;generation in focused lasers. When high power lasers
focus, their&lt;br/&gt;color changes from the color of the carrier frequency to
nearly white&lt;br/&gt;light. There are a variety of explanations of this, none
very&lt;br/&gt;convincing. The PI will try to find a better one. There is
convincing&lt;br/&gt;experimental evidence that the phenomenon does not require
ionization&lt;br/&gt;of the propagation medium and this will help to keep the
equations&lt;br/&gt;under study manageable and well
founded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;