* 0405723
* Thom Polynomials for Group Actions and Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Richard Rimanyi, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2008
* USD 91,946.00

Associated with an invariant subvariety of a representation we
&lt;br/&gt;consider its cohomology class in equivariant cohomology, and call it
&lt;br/&gt;the Thom polynomial of the variety (``singularity''). Thus, the Thom
&lt;br/&gt;polynomial is a G-equivariant characteristic class. Tracing back the
&lt;br/&gt;definition of equivariant cohomology we obtain that the knowledge of
&lt;br/&gt;the Thom polynomial of singularities reduces global singularity
&lt;br/&gt;theoretic problems to homotopy theory (namely, to the computation of
&lt;br/&gt;the characteristic classes of the underlying topological situation).
&lt;br/&gt;Thom polynomials compute the cohomology class of the locus in a
&lt;br/&gt;parameter space over which an object (map germ, differential form,
&lt;br/&gt;arrangement, a bundle, a digaram of linear maps, etc) degenerates. A
&lt;br/&gt;promising direction is the search for the corresponding good notion
in &lt;br/&gt;extraordinary cohomology theories, the computation of these
&lt;br/&gt;extraordinary Thom polynomials and finding topological applications.
&lt;br/&gt;Another important direction is working out global
singularity&lt;br/&gt;theory of geometrically or physically relevant
representations, such as&lt;br/&gt;Dynkin quiver representations, surface
bundles, multisingualrity loci &lt;br/&gt;over the complex and the real numbers,
hyperplane arrangements, as &lt;br/&gt;well as their connections to degree,
resultant and discriminant &lt;br/&gt;formulas. In many of these cases one
expects different positivity &lt;br/&gt;properties of the Thom polynomials,
which can contribute to the newly &lt;br/&gt;emerging bridge between geometry
and combinatorics. The third goal is &lt;br/&gt;to explore the indirect usage of
Thom polynomials in Geometric &lt;br/&gt;Invariant Theory. Here Thom polynomials
can compute various non-&lt;br/&gt;stability loci of representations, hence they
give natural, &lt;br/&gt;geometrically defined relations in the cohomology ring
of the G.I.T. &lt;br/&gt;quotients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In various
geometric and topological situations singularities occur&lt;br/&gt;for global
reasons. That is, the global topology of a space, a &lt;br/&gt;manifold, a
variety or a map forces some singularities to occur. (A &lt;br/&gt;trivial
example is the global topology of the Klein bottle which &lt;br/&gt;forces
double points when mapped into 3-space.) This global behaviour &lt;br/&gt;of
singularities is governed by their Thom polynomials. If we &lt;br/&gt;substitute
global topological invariants into the Thom polynomial we &lt;br/&gt;obtain the
number of singularities forced by topology. This general &lt;br/&gt;point of
view contains several mathematical areas as special cases, &lt;br/&gt;among
others ``degeneracy loci formulas'' of algebraic geometry,&lt;br/&gt;immersion
and general multiple point formulas of differentaial &lt;br/&gt;topology, and
the theory of Schur, Schubert and quiver polynomials of &lt;br/&gt;algebraic
combinatorics. Thom polynomials, however, are notoriously &lt;br/&gt;hard to
compute. Although some powerful methods are known, some by the
&lt;br/&gt;author, no universal method has beed found. We propose to study the
&lt;br/&gt;basics of Thom polynomial theory, including possible generalizations
&lt;br/&gt;to other cohomology theories. Another challenge is the understanding
&lt;br/&gt;of the interior structure of natural infinite series of Thom
&lt;br/&gt;polynomials. This direction promises to establish connections between
&lt;br/&gt;the different areas that play roles in different computational
&lt;br/&gt;approaches, e.g. algebraic topology, symmetric functions,
&lt;br/&gt;interpolation theory, localizations, Groebner basis
theory.&lt;br/&gt;Another main goal is to find applications of computed Thom
polynomials&lt;br/&gt;in topology, geometry and invariant theory.&lt;br/&gt;