* 0405628
* Kinetics of Phase Transitions in Multiblock Copolymer Solutions and Gels
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Rama Bansil, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 05/31/2008
* USD 305,000.00

Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Research. Block copolymer solutions in
selective solvents exhibit a rich phase behavior forming solutions or gels of
spherical or cylindrical micelles. The primary focus of this research is (i) to
examine the kinetics of order-disorder and order-order phase transitions between
these different states using synchrotron based time-resolved small angle x-ray
scattering (SAXS), and (ii) to compare the experimental data with theoretical
models and computer simulations to determine structural changes during these
transitions and understand the nucleation and growth mechanisms involved in
these transitions. The transitions to be investigated include:

(i) The transformation kinetics from spherical micelles arranged in various
cubic lattices to cylindrical micelles ordered in a hexagonal array and the
reverse process. (ii) The effects on the disorder-order kinetics due to the
presence of an intermediate metastable or stable phase with a different symmetry
than the final ordered state. (iii) Other transitions such as between cubic
phases, and between lamellar and gyroid phases.

Two novel features of this research are (i) to build a pressure jump apparatus
to make almost instantaneous transitions, and (ii) to fabricate nanoscale solid
state devices using block copolymer films as templates, e.g. to make a gigahertz
nanomechanical resonator.

Broader Impacts of the Proposed Research. Solvent mediated interactions are
directly relevant to the numerous industrial applications of multiblock
copolymer solutions and gels. The research project will also contribute to: 1.
Enhancement of Infrastructure for Research and Education. (i) The pressure jump
apparatus and the data analysis programs will be available to other users at
Synchrotron facilities. (ii) The computer simulations will be incorporated into
a web-based instructional package being developed for students of Polymer
Physics courses at the senior undergraduate and graduate level. 2. Mentoring and
Training of Future Scientists and Broadening Representation of Women in Physical
Sciences. This research is expected to lead to Ph. D dissertations of two
graduate students, as well as to provide research opportunities for
undergraduates, both men and women. The students will receive hands-on training
in the use of facilities at National Laboratories, participate in local and
national meetings, and interact closely with the collaborators from other
universities. High school students will participate via BU's Summer Research
Program. 3. International collaboration with scientists in Czech Republic is an
integral part of this program. The research will be presented at National and
International conferences. 4. Outreach Activities. The P.I. will continue to
give presentations to high school and college students and other general
audiences about the broad implications of polymer research via programs such as
Freshman Fridays, Science Saturdays and the Pathways Program.

