* 0405376
* Applications of Frames to Internet Coding, Wireless Communication, Speech Recognition and Quantum Information Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Peter Casazza, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2008
* USD 224,870.00

Hilbert space frames for a variety of industrial applications will be
constructed. First, frames will be constructed for packet-based communication
systems, such as the internet. Here, errors of erasure, that is, the loss of
some coefficients will be addressed. The goal is to improve the overall speed
and accuracy of data transmission. Next, specific frames for wireless
communication systems will be explored with the goal of improving both speed and
reliability. The differences in the nature of the error between these systems
and packet-based systems requires different constructions. Also, frames for
speech-recognition technology will be constructed with the aim to quickly
recognize, distinguish and extract separate voices found in overlapped speech.
Speech recognition is heavily dependent upon noise in the phase. So the specific
issues of noisy phase and the loss of phase information will be addressed.
Finally, Grassmannian (i.e. equiangular frames) frames will be derived
symbolically and/or numerically for quantum physics, especially quantum
information theory. The goal is to develop optimally distributed frames needed
for quantum state tomography, quantum cryptography and foundationalissues in
quantum mechanics. For each of these projects new classes of frames will be
discovered, characterized and constructed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics
necessary to improve the speed and accuracy of the internet will be produced.
This will also allow messages to be delivered accurately even if much of the
original information is lost in transmission. In related work, specific problems
related to wireless communications systems - such as cell phones will be
addressed. Here it is desired to produce cell phones which do not fade and have
crisp clear signals. Also the mathematics needed to separate voices in
overlapped speech will be explored. The goal is to eventually have cars,
appliances etc. which respond directly and quickly to voice communications. All
of these projects have important applications to homeland security as well as
civilian use. &lt;br/&gt;