* 0405145
* FRG: Materials Physics and Chemistry of Light-Ion-Exfoliation of Single-Crystal Ferroelectric Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Hassa Bakhru, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 717,683.00

New knowledge and greater fundamental understanding of exfoliation of
ferroelectric thin films by deep implantation of light ions (He and H), followed
by selective chemical etching are sought. The exfoliation process yields single-
crystal films of ferroelectric materials, such as lithium niobate, lead
zirconate, and strontium titanate, but fundamental materials science knowledge
of the process is lacking. This project seeks basic information about how high-
energy ion-based processes alter narrow spatial regions in single-crystal
complex oxides, as well as determination of process issues such as vertical and
lateral patterning resolution and crystal quality. The exfoliation process being
studied here differs from that seen in semiconductors since lift-off proceeds by
highly selective wet etching of the heavily implanted region. Research questions
to be addressed regarding this process include: What physical mechanism mediates
the high selectivity of the etching process? What are the solid-state chemical
changes in the implantation region following He or H implantation of
ferroelectrics crystals? What is the role of interstitial-mediated stress in the
implantation region? Are nanocavities formed as in H-implanted Si? To what
extent is the chemical stoichiometry of the surface changed following the
exfoliation process? The approach is to investigate basic materials chemistry
and physics of deeply, heavily implanted ferroelectric crystals and subsequent
exfoliation from this material. In particular, the project will involve
examination of 1) changes in crystal lattice, i.e. defects, nanocavities,
interstitial concentration, in ferroelectric crystals; 2) changes in crystal
chemistry, i.e. the composition and formation of volatile interstitial species
and local-stress-induced chemical dissolution reactions in the implant region;
and 3) compositional changes in, and recovery of, the exfoliated complex-oxide
surface-following heavy implantation of light ions in ferroelectric crystals.
%%% The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials
science having high technological relevance. The research will contribute basic
materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new understanding and
capabilities in electronics/photonics and promotes the integration of research
and education. The project is interdisciplinary spanning aspects of electrical
engineering, applied physics, chemistry and materials science with undergraduate
and graduate students working together to conduct both fundamental and applied
research in new materials, materials processing techniques, and devices. The
project is highly collaborative enabling PI/co-PIs and students to collaborate
via extended visits and shorter trips with a major National Laboratory,
Brookhaven, and across two New York State universities, Columbia and SUNY
Albany, each of which offers unique facilities and experiences. Collaborative
research interactions with other internal and external research groups, such as
those at Columbia's MRSEC and Rutgers, are also anticipated. ***