* 0405900
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Management of Environmental Problems in Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Hsin-Neng Hsieh, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 48,000.00

0405900&lt;br/&gt;Meegoda&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research between Dr. Jay Meegoda, Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), Newark,
New Jersey and Dr. Samer Ezeldin, Construction Engineering Department, American
University in Cairo (AUC), Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study the Management of
Environmental Problems in Egypt. The proper management of municipal solid waste
(MSW) and wastewater are major challenges to Egyptian communities. The
investigators will develop a comprehensive environmental management program to
address urban municipal solid waste and rural wastewater problems. Solutions
developed from the environmental management program are expected to assess the
different performance aspects in terms of their effectiveness as well as their
economical benefits. These goals are to be achieved through mathematical models
as well as extensive experimental simulations that are coupled with laboratory
testing and subsequent field verifications. The proposed research is built upon
the expertise and current research of the investigators in this arena from both
New NJIT and the AUC. The facilities needed for successful completion of the
project are available at both institutions. Research findings will be
disseminated through publication in journals, conference proceedings, short
courses and the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broad Impact: The
proposed research is expected to provide cost effective, adaptable and
sustainable solutions to municipal solid waste and wastewater problems of Egypt.
The private sector and municipal authorities are the end users of this project.
The project activities include the participation of graduate and undergraduate
students. The undergraduates will be mainly recruited from underrepresented
groups, through a research experience for undergraduates (REU) program at NJIT.
International research opportunities are provided to a graduate student who will
visit Egypt to meet AUC collaborators. One Egyptian Ph.D. student is to be
trained at NJIT and a number of U.S. Masters students are to be trained at the
AUC. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;