* 0405658
* National Black Graduate Students In Psychology Conference Revised
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert Sellers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2007
* USD 20,000.00

The present proposal is for twenty-four months of support for the Black Graduate
Conference in Psychology (BGCP). The BGCP has been held annually since 1995. The
conference was organized with three goals in mind. These goals are to: 1)
provide African American graduate students in psychology with a supportive
atmosphere to present their research and receive constructive feedback from
fellow African American graduate students and faculty that will improve their
research capabilities; 2) provide students with an opportunity to exchange
strategies and experiences that will help them to thrive in graduate school and
beyond; and 3) provide a forum for African American graduate students in
psychology to develop long-lasting professional relationships with future
colleagues. Each year since 1995, approximately 50 African American graduate
students in psychology and African American faculty have participated in the
conference. The conference is open to African American graduate students in all
areas of psychology. As such, a variety of substantive research topics are
presented. Conference activities consist of paper presentations, poster
sessions, roundtable discussions and professional development presentations.
Abstracts of students presentations are published on a website that is designed
to provide African American graduate students with support and valuable
information. Students are required to participate in all aspects of the
conference. This requirement along with the small size of the conference fosters
a climate of support and ensures that students get to know each other. The
conference has had a significant broader impact on the field of psychology by
playing a vital role in training African American graduate students to become
productive and effective researchers. Over the years, more than 20 former
participants have gone on to become academic psychologists. The impact of the
conference continues to be felt as the research skills and professional contacts
that former participants gained from the conference help them navigate the
tenure process more successfully. This broader impact will only grow as more
African American graduate students get a chance to participate in the
conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;