* 0405136
* Spin Polarized Transport Properties in Tunnel Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* John Xiao, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2009
* USD 330,000.00

Two vital scientific areas with important technological prospects involve spin
transport in tunneling structures made of metals and semiconductors. The
fabrication of magnetic tunnel junction heterostructures is becoming a mature
technology, and yet there still remain important scientific issues related to
the bias dependence of the tunneling magnetoresistance, noise, and structure-
property relationships. This individual investigator award supports a project
that focuses on developing a thorough understanding of spin-polarized tunneling
transport. The studies involve: applying electron holography to profile the
tunnel barrier; investigating, both in theory and in experiment, how the
density-of-states, the barrier height, and the barrier shape affect the bias
dependence of the tunneling magnetoresistance; examining the interplay among
different length scales arising from charge and spin transport; using noise
spectroscopy to probe magnetization reversal and fluctuations, defects in the
tunnel barrier, and the distribution of conductance channels in the barrier; and
developing room temperature ferromagnetic semiconductors. These issues directly
impact the technological prospects of using tunnel junction structures for
nonvolatile magnetic random access memory and field sensing applications, such
as magnetic recording read heads and biological assays that use magnetoresistive
sensor arrays. In view of this, the PIs maintain collaborations with industry.
The program also aims to bring relevance to science education where two distinct
needs have become apparent. The first is that higher education must address
explicitly the issue of transferable job skills in the curriculum. The second is
the importance of science and magneto-electronic technology to U.S.
competitiveness and economic growth. These two needs will be addressed in a
program that spans local, regional, and international
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern technological advances in nanofabrication
methods and heteroepitaxy have greatly invigorated the investigation of
magnetism and are providing the capability to engineer magnetic phenomena at the
nanoscale. New fields of basic research have also emerged - a notable example is
"spin-electronics" or "spintronics". Applications of these advances are enabling
the creation of entirely new magneto-electronic device structures and driving
the development of a revolutionary new class of electronics based on electron's
spin (a quantity related to electron's magnetic behavior) in addition to, or in
place of, electronic charge. Two vital scientific areas with important
technological prospects involve spin transport in metallic tunnel junction
systems and semiconductors. In this proposal, we concentrate on developing a
thorough understanding of spin-polarized tunneling transport through a
synergistic combination of: a novel microscopy technique used to reveal how the
properties of the tunnel barrier affect a device's resistive response to an
applied magnetic field (magnetoresistance); examining the interplay among
different length scales arising from charge and spin transport; using noise
spectroscopy to probe magnetization reversal and fluctuations, defects in the
tunnel barrier, and the distribution of conductance channels in the barrier, and
developing room temperature ferromagnetic semiconductors. These issues directly
impact the technological prospects of using tunnel junction structures for
nonvolatile magnetic random access memory and field sensing applications, such
as in magnetic recording read heads. In view of this the PIs collaborate with
leading industries towards optimizing device performance. The program also aims
to bring relevance to science education. Two distinct needs have become
apparent. The first is that higher education must address explicitly the issue
of the role of transferable job skills in the curriculum. The second is the
importance of science and magneto-electronic technology to U.S. competitiveness
and economic growth. These two needs will be addressed in a program that spans
local, regional, and international levels.&lt;br/&gt;