* 0405432
* Directed Crystallization Precursor Structures in Polymer Melt by Flow
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Benjamin Hsiao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2009
* USD 586,000.00

The proposed research aims to investigate several fundamental issues of flow-
induced crystallization in polymers with an emphasis on events that occurred at
the earliest stages of phase transition. These issues include: (1) the pathway
to forming nanostructured scaffolds comprised of microfibrils (shish) and trans-
crystalline lamellae (kebabs) in undercooled polymer melt by flow prior to full
scale crystallization; (2) the relationships among the internal material
parameters (chain length, length distribution and chain branching, or the
relaxation time spectrum), the external flow parameters (temperature, strain and
strain rate, or stress), and the formation of the initial precursor structures;
and (3) the nature of the flow-induced crystallization precursor structures in
shish and kebab microstructures. The proposed research plan will include: (i)
the use of polymer blends with model compounds to enable the investigation of
the flow-induced precursor structures, (ii) the use of combined methods
including rheology, in-situ Raman spectroscopy and synchrotron SAXS/WAXD
techniques and ex-situ microscopic methods, and (iii) the comparison of results
from weak shear-flow and strong elongation-flow studies.&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific merits of the proposed study are as follows. The subject of flow-
induced crystallization remains to be one of the most important problems in
polymer processing today, and it is still not yet fully understood. The major
hurdles in the past were mainly due to the lack of suitable in-situ
characterization tools to determine the structures at the earliest stages of
flow-induced crystallization. Using the recently available synchrotron X-ray
techniques, these hurdles have been effectively overcome. The in-depth
understanding obtained in the proposed study shall increase the ability of the
polymer industry to correlate the structure, morphology, process and property
relationships for crystalline polymers. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
proposal are several. The immediate benefit is that the proposed activities will
produce tight links between two scientific institutions (Stony Brook University
and the National Synchrotron Light Source). Students and scientists will be
trained in both institutions. They will be exposed to relevant industrial
problems and will have a chance to tackle these problems with direct
interactions from industrial scientists. They will also be involved in the Stony
Brook MRSEC summer education program, where they will supervise undergraduate
students and industrial scientists to carry out simple synchrotron X-ray
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;