* 0405246
* Dissertation Research: Scorpionfish (Telostei: Scorpaenoidei) Phylogenetics and the Evolution of Venom in Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Melanie Stiassny, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,970.00

Venom and venom delivery systems have evolved in animal groups ranging from
jellyfishes to scorpions, spiders, lizards, snakes and even primates.
Surprisingly, snakes are neither the most diverse or most abundant group of
venomous vertebrates, for there are more than 1,400 species of venomous fishes,
which account for more than 70% of all venomous animals with backbones. It is
perhaps equally surprising that only now are scientists undertaking the first
detailed studies to examine the evolution of venom as a defensive specialization
in fishes. Among the ten groups of venomous fishes, scorpionfishes are the focus
of the present study. This is because this group is the most diverse group of
venomous marine fishes. It also includes some of the world's most familiar
venomous fishes (lionfishes and turkeyfishes, which are very popular with
aquarists) as well as the most deadly (stonefishes, which can kill an adult
human unfortunate enough to step on one). Evolutionary relationships within
scorpionfishes have been contentious, yet a rigorous family tree is the critical
first step to broader study of their venom and venom delivery systems. To build
such a tree, this study will undertake a comparative study of more than 100
species of scorpionfishes and related groups using evidence from larval and
adult anatomy and mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequences. The resulting tree
will be used not only to test competing hypotheses about the evolution of venom,
but will also examine anatomical diversification and the evolution of live birth
in scorpionfishes.

This study has three specific broader impacts: 1) training of a doctoral student
in anatomy and molecular biology; 2) detailed information on species-level
relationships of the many commercially harvested species of scorpionfishes such
as California rockfishes; this is an important goal given that scorpionfishes
represent more than 9% of harvested fish in the Unites States and are becoming
increasingly endangered or threatened worldwide; 3) provision of a framework for
making informed choices of species when screening venoms for potential
pharmaceutical applications; venoms of other animals have proven to be of
outstanding pharmaceutical importance, yet such investigations of fishes are in
their infancy and a tree of scorpionfishes could jump-start promising
bioprospecting of their venoms.