* 0405634
* U.S.-Argentina/Chile Collaborative Research on Volcano Remote Sensing
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* William Rose, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2006
* USD 40,000.00

0405634&lt;br/&gt;Rose&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.- Argentina/Chile award
will provide support to Dr. William I. Rose and Ms. Lizzette A. Rodriguez,
Michigan Technological University. Support is provided by the Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Petrology and Geochemistry
Program. The PIs will collaborate with their counterparts, Dr. Jose G.
Viramonte, Universidad Nacional de Salta, Dr. Eduardo E. Medina, Universidad
Catolica del Norte, Antofagasta, Chile, and Dr. Gabriel Platzeck, Comision
Nacional de Actividades Espaciales, Buenos Aires, Argentina in Cordoba,
Argentina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support travel of U.S.
volcanologists from Michigan Tech, the University of Hawaii, University of
Oregon and the University of Pittsburgh to participate in collaborative field
and remote sensing studies and to attend a volcanological remote sensing
workshop. The primary goal is to develop the use of the Central Andes as a site
for research involving volcanism and remote sensing. The U.S. researchers will
bring their expertise in new technological methods in volcanology to share with
their Argentine colleagues, who have extensive experience in the field. A
Volcanology Field Course will involve a field trip to a geo-transect across the
Andes from Salta, Argentina to San Pedro de Atacama, Chile, that will allow the
participants to gain familiarity with remote sensing targets, providing training
on the latest ground based remote sensing techniques currently being used in
monitoring networks around the world. These mutually beneficial activities will
catalyze new collaborations between volcanologists and students of global change
and life in extreme environments. &lt;br/&gt;