* 0406627
* Local Regularity and Long Time Behavior of Solutions on Non-Linear Evolution Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Igor Rodnianski, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 144,000.00

Proposal DMS-04006627&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Local regularity and long time
behavior of solutions of &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear evolution
equations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Igor Rodnianski, Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
proposal is the study of the local regularity and&lt;br/&gt;global behavior of
solutions of the Einstein equations.&lt;br/&gt;The local behavior is encoded in
the propagation of local regularity&lt;br/&gt;in the scale of the L2 based
Sobolev spaces.&lt;br/&gt;We will attack the L2 curvature conjecture, which
asserts&lt;br/&gt;that a solution, metric g, of the Einstein vacuum equations
Ric(g)=0&lt;br/&gt;can be locally extended as long as its curvature tensor is
bounded in &lt;br/&gt;L2.&lt;br/&gt;The problem is beyond the range of
application of the standard Fourier &lt;br/&gt;analysis&lt;br/&gt;based methods
and thus will require development of new analytic tools.&lt;br/&gt;The global
behavior will be studied in the context of the problem&lt;br/&gt;of stability of
Minkowski space in the wave coordinate gauge.&lt;br/&gt;This particular gauge is
used in physics to construct the &lt;br/&gt;post-
Minkowskian&lt;br/&gt;approximations and we hope to provide an additional
insight into &lt;br/&gt;validity&lt;br/&gt;of these expansions. The stability
problem belongs to the category of &lt;br/&gt;global&lt;br/&gt;existence for
solutions with small data problems for the equations not
&lt;br/&gt;satisfying&lt;br/&gt;the standard null
condition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Einstein equations of General Relativity
provide the main classical &lt;br/&gt;description&lt;br/&gt;of evolution of the
physical space-time continuum. The study of &lt;br/&gt;mathematical
and&lt;br/&gt;physical phenomena arising in General Relativity is of the
fundamental &lt;br/&gt;importance.&lt;br/&gt;While the physical understanding of
the subject has made rapid &lt;br/&gt;advancement and generated a number of
outstanding conjectures the &lt;br/&gt;rigorous mathematical picture
is&lt;br/&gt;yet to emerge. The latter is to a large extent due to a highly
&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;nature of the Einstein equations and a lack of
the mathematical tools &lt;br/&gt;to deal with it.&lt;br/&gt;The development of
a satisfactory mathematical approach lies on the &lt;br/&gt;interface
between&lt;br/&gt;Analysis, Geometry and Partial Differential
Equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;