* 0406454
* Analytic Studies on Pseudo-holomorphic Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Thomas Parker, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2009
* USD 172,281.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0406454&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Thomas H. Parker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
analytic aspects of the theory of&lt;br/&gt;pseudo-holomorphic curves. The aim
is to develop effective&lt;br/&gt;methods for computing Gromov-Witten invariants
of symplectic&lt;br/&gt;manifolds and enumerative invariants of algebraic
manifolds. The&lt;br/&gt;main thrust is a continuing project with E. Ionel on
the&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten invariants of six-dimensional manifolds.
String&lt;br/&gt;Theory is especially effective in making predictions about
a&lt;br/&gt;special type of six-dimensional spaces called Calabi-Yau
3-folds.&lt;br/&gt;One of the most fascinating predictions of String Theory is
the&lt;br/&gt;Gompakumar-Vafa conjecture, which claims that the plethora
of&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten invariants are determined by a more
limited&lt;br/&gt;collection of `BPS numbers'. The first proposed project seeks
to&lt;br/&gt;derive and prove the Gompakumar-Vafa formulas by adapting
the&lt;br/&gt;analytic methods that C. Taubes developed to relate
the&lt;br/&gt;Seiberg-Witten and Gromov invariants. This approach to the
BPS&lt;br/&gt;numbers is different and more geometric than the
physicists'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work also includes efforts to
extend the PI's&lt;br/&gt;previous work on Relative GW invariants to invariants
relative to&lt;br/&gt;``a stratified symplectic subspace'', and to give a
geometric and&lt;br/&gt;computationally effective description of the virtual
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;class for symplectic manifolds which are not
necessary&lt;br/&gt;semipositive. A fourth project concerns the ``modified
GW&lt;br/&gt;invariants'' defined by the P.I.'s student Junho Lee; those
make&lt;br/&gt;it possible to study a class of manifolds (Kahler surfaces
with&lt;br/&gt;positive geometric genus) where there are important
conjectures&lt;br/&gt;that are not currently approachable by GW methods. The
last&lt;br/&gt;project is geometric analysis of a different sort aimed
at&lt;br/&gt;understanding how supersymmetry simplifies expressions for
heat&lt;br/&gt;kernels on manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most
notable developments in mathematics in the past&lt;br/&gt;decade has been the
remarkable confluence of ideas coming from&lt;br/&gt;String Theory, Algebraic
Geometry, Partial Differential&lt;br/&gt;Equations, and Symplectic Geometry. A
major part of that story&lt;br/&gt;revolves around the idea of counting
holomorphic curves in&lt;br/&gt;algebraic manifolds. That problem was studied
for 100 years with&lt;br/&gt;few results. Then, around 1990, it was realized
that the problem&lt;br/&gt;can be translated into symplectic geometry and
tackled using the&lt;br/&gt;powerful machinery of mathematical gauge theory.
(Gauge theory,&lt;br/&gt;originally part of physics, has been the focus of many
very&lt;br/&gt;fruitful interactions between mathematicians and physicists
over&lt;br/&gt;the past twenty years; it includes Yang-Mills and Seiberg-
Witten&lt;br/&gt;Theory, and String Theory). This `Gromov-Witten
invariant'&lt;br/&gt;approach led quickly to formulas answering some of the
original&lt;br/&gt;curve-counting problems. The subject is now advancing rapidly
on&lt;br/&gt;many fronts, and is being continually stimulated by
the&lt;br/&gt;predictions of physics. This project is aimed toward
further&lt;br/&gt;developing this theory using the gauge theory that is
approach&lt;br/&gt;most closely aligned with physics, and to use the
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;approach to make conceptual bridges between the algebraic
and&lt;br/&gt;physics viewpoints.&lt;br/&gt;