* 0406361
* Analysis of High Dimensional Data Using Subspace Clustering
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Wei Wang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2008
* USD 252,689.00

An important and visible trend in empirical science today is&lt;br/&gt;the
increasing prevalence of large data sets that contain from thousands
to&lt;br/&gt;hundreds of millions of measurements. Examples include data sets
arising&lt;br/&gt;from high throughput measurement techniques such as gene
expression arrays,&lt;br/&gt;proteomics and computer network monitoring. While
the analysis of large&lt;br/&gt;data sets is important to scientists, it is
often outside the realm of&lt;br/&gt;classical statistical methods, and
frequently presents new conceptual and&lt;br/&gt;computational challenges. The
funded research has two principle parts. In&lt;br/&gt;the first, the
investigators are studying the application of a relatively&lt;br/&gt;new
development in the field of Data Mining, known as subspace
clustering,&lt;br/&gt;to the exploratory statistical analysis of high
dimensional data. In the&lt;br/&gt;second, the investigators are applying ideas
from Statistics and Probability&lt;br/&gt;to the development of new subspace
clustering methods, and to rigorous&lt;br/&gt;mathematical analyses of their
results. Research is being carried out in&lt;br/&gt;the context of ongoing
collaborations with biological scientists, and is&lt;br/&gt;being incorporated
in software that will be used by the collaborating&lt;br/&gt;scientists to
identify and assess significant sample-variable&lt;br/&gt;associations in a
variety of large data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important and
visible trend in empirical science today &lt;br/&gt;is the increasing prominence
of large data sets that contain from&lt;br/&gt;thousands to hundreds of millions
of&lt;br/&gt;measurements. Examples include data sets arising from high
throughput&lt;br/&gt;measurement techniques such as gene expression arrays,
proteomics and&lt;br/&gt;computer network monitoring. Whereas small to moderate
data sets typically&lt;br/&gt;have more samples than measurements, in large data
sets it is common to have&lt;br/&gt;more measurements than samples, so-called
``high dimension and low sample&lt;br/&gt;size''. The investigators are studying
the application of data mining&lt;br/&gt;methods known as subspace clustering to
the exploratory analysis of high&lt;br/&gt;dimensional data. Subspace clustering
identifies distinguished sample&lt;br/&gt;variable interactions (submatrices) in
a given data matrix. Unlike standard&lt;br/&gt;two-way clustering, the sample
and variable sets for different clusters can&lt;br/&gt;overlap. The
investigators are investigating the noise sensitivity of&lt;br/&gt;existing
subspace clustering algorithms, and are developing and&lt;br/&gt;implementing
new subspace clustering methods for average based selection&lt;br/&gt;criteria
that are better suited for applications where noise is present.&lt;br/&gt;As an
application of these methods, they are using subspace clusters
to&lt;br/&gt;classify high dimensional data. Using a variety of tools from
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;probability, the investigators are also developing a
rigorous theoretical&lt;br/&gt;framework in which multiple testing and the
statistical significance of&lt;br/&gt;subspace clusters can be addressed. The
funded research is being carried out&lt;br/&gt;in the context of ongoing
collaborations with biologists and
computer&lt;br/&gt;scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;