* 0406706
* RUI: Laboratory Studies of Early Universe Chemistry
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Anthony Calamai, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 05/31/2008
* USD 238,432.00

AST-0406706&lt;br/&gt;Calamai&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current models for the
creation of structure in the early Universe indicate that during the epoch of
first star formation, the hydrogen and deuterated hydrogen molecules are the
dominant coolants for collapsing primordial gas clouds at temperatures between
ten thousand and one hundred Kelvin. The recent detection of reionization, and
thus star formation, at high redshift, underscores the pivotal role played by
the creation and destruction of these molecules at early times. However,
significant uncertainties, even to orders of magnitude, exist in the published
atomic data for the particularly important charge exchange and rearrangement
reactions. These uncertainties translate into major inaccuracies in the
predicted relative abundances of both molecules at this key epoch. This study
comprises a series of laboratory investigations to measure the rate coefficients
for the relevant reactions in the relevant temperature range for cosmological
object formation. New atomic data from a cylindrical radio-frequency ion trap
will guide theoretical calculations, and will be introduced into models of
pregalactic structure and first star formation to investigate the astrophysical
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will significantly enhance the
undergraduate learning experience at the Appalachian State University, whose
student body includes a high proportion from under-represented groups. The new
apparatus and projects using it will greatly benefit the on-campus physics
research opportunities for a diverse group of undergraduate majors and masters
level students. This research will also enhance recently established
collaborations amongst a number of universities and government laboratories.