* 0406513
* Analytical/Computational Methods for Rare Events in Lightwave Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* William Kath, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2008
* USD 233,528.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-046513&lt;br/&gt;William Kath, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Analytical/Computational Methods for Rare Events in
Lightwave Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
construct new methods based upon variance reduction techniques, such as
importance sampling, that can be used to efficiently simulate rare events caused
by noise in lightwave systems. Importance sampling is a method of biasing (or,
altering) the probability distributions used to generate random Monte-Carlo
trials so that simulated errors occur more frequently than would be the case
otherwise. The aim here is to exploit the mathematical structure of the
equations governing the propagation of signals to allow importance sampling to
be performed. For example, in optical fibers, the governing equation is the
nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS) equation, which is a completely integrable
Hamiltonian system. The inverse scattering solution of the NLS equation shows
that each pulse has a set of modes associated with it; these modes correspond to
changes in the pulse's amplitude, phase, position and frequency. Since
any&lt;br/&gt;value of the pulse parameters yields a valid solution of the NLS
equation, no resistance is encountered if any of them is changed by noise. These
four modes thus provide a natural basis upon which to construct methods by which
the noise is intentionally biased to produce large signal
fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of high-bit-rate data
transmission over optical fibers is one of the major technological achievements
of the late 20th century. Optical fibers have fueled the growth of the global
internet and are revolutionizing the ways in which information is communicated
and processed. Because of the enhanced levels of performance demanded of modern
lightwave systems, traditional analytical or computational methods are by
themselves insufficient to accurately model the rare events that determine the
overall&lt;br/&gt;performance of these highly complex systems. At the same time,
their often large development costs makes the accurate prediction of their
behavior and performance essential. Recent work has demonstrated, however, that
hybrid analytical/computational approaches can make accomplishing this task not
only possible, but also practical. Proof-of-concept examples have shown that
error probabilities in such systems as small as one part in a trillion should no
longer be considered beyond the reach of estimation. The methods that will be
developed as part of this project are expected to provide the basis for
computational tools that can yield large reductions in the time required to
determine the performance of such systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;