* 0406461
* Applications of homotopy theory to 4D geometry, number theory, and physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Jack Morava, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 298,878.00

DMS-0406461 Jack Morava

Homotopy theory plays an important role in recent work in four-dimensional
geometry, physics, and number theory: it is a technically powerful ideology,
which exposes deep connections among topics which may on the surface seem
unrelated. Recent work of Madsen, Tillmann, Weiss, Cohen, and others on the
stable cohomology of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces is based on the study
of certain cobordism categories suggested by ideas from string physics. These
constructions have four-dimensional analogs (of similar significance in
physics), which display surprising connections to the pseudoisotopy theory
developed in the 80's and 90's by Hatcher, Waldhausen, and others. That theory
involves the algebraic K-theory of the integers in a nontrivial way; and the
latter subject is now seen to play an important role in an apparently unrelated
circle of ideas connecting the absolute Galois group of the rational number
field to the theory of motives in algebraic geometry (through work of Deligne,
Goncharov, Kontsevich, and others). These ideas are in turn involved in work of
Connes, Kreimer, and others on a reinterpretation of the classical theory of
renormalization in physics. One of the central notions of this proposal is the
hope of finding in differential topology an analog of the algebraic geometers'
mixed Tate motives, which would be related to the algebraic K-theory of the
integers as that subject is to Waldhausen's algebraic K-theory of spaces.

In less technical terms: homotopy theory provides a body of techniques for
studying mathematical objects and their deformations on an equal footing;
indeed, it is equally happy studying deformations of deformations, and so on.
This proposal is concerned ultimately with two sets of ideas with roots in
physics, one coming from modern string theory, the other from the more classical
theory of renormalization. The former set of ideas has deep connections with
differential topology, and the latter is related to recent developments in
algebraic geometry and number theory. On the surface, differential topology and
arithmetic algebraic geometry are far apart, but they are linked through the
algebraic K-theory of the integers, which is at base a part of homotopy theory.
[Because that subject deals so systematically with deformations of one theory
into another, it provides a very convenient set of tools for relating such
disparate subjects.] This proposal suggests a way of clarifying these linkages,
based on ideas about the K-theory of spaces rather than numbers, which were
first proposed by Waldhausen, and which have lately given further currency by
workers in arithmetic geometry such as Soul\'e. This program would bring
together these important recent developments in mathematics and physics in a
conceptually satisfying way.

