* 0406923
* Structure and Evolution of Relativistic Outflows Associated with Supermassive Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Matthew Lister, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2008
* USD 296,607.00

AST-0406923 Lister

The principal investigator will carry out detailed analysis of data from a large
observational program that is examining the structure and evolution of the most
powerful known outflows in the Universe. These collimated, relativistic jets of
plasma are powered by supermassive black holes in active galactic nuclei (AGN),
and undergo complex evolution due to interactions between their external medium,
internal magnetic fields, and inherent fluid instabilities. The observing
project involves the investigator and his students, and collaborators at the
National Radio Astronomy Observatory, the University of Michigan, and Denison
University. Various data will be used by the investigator and students to study
poorly-known long-term jet properties, including nozzle precession, stationary
features, and the magnetic and kinematic evolution of features. Simulations will
characterize selection effects in the sample and determine the intrinsic speed
distribution of the parent population from the observed speeds. Statistical
tests will look for correlations between the speeds and polarization
characteristics of the jets, leading to a better understanding of how magnetic
fields influence the kinematics of relativistic flows.

The project will significantly broaden the research opportunities available to
undergraduate physics majors at Purdue and Denison University. Participating
students will learn valuable research and computer skills by working on data
from a cutting edge astronomical facility, and will be encouraged to present
their results at scientific meetings. The investigator will develop peer-
instruction activities for large-enrollment introductory astronomy courses
taught at Purdue University. Even broader impact will be achieved through
development of materials to be used in the Purdue K-12 physics outreach program
in the state of Indiana, and by maintaining a large internet database, an
important resource for the community.