* 0406020
* Image Segmentation for cDNA Microarray Data and Jump-Preserving Surface Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Peihua Qiu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2008
* USD 89,994.00

This project discusses two different but related research problems: (1) image
segmentation for analyzing cDNA microarray images, and (2) jump-preserving
surface estimation from noisy data. Image segmentation of microarray images is a
critical stage in generating gene expression data, which are widely used in
pharmaceutical and clinical research for identifying particular diseases.
Several image segmentation procedures have been included in some software
packages for handling gene microarray data. In this project, a new image
segmentation methodology is proposed based on local linear kernel smoothing. It
is expected that this method would possess some good theoretical properties.
Preliminary numerical studies show that it outperforms some existing procedures.
For the purposes of de-noising, change of image resolution, data compression,
etc., images often need to be reconstructed. Since edges of an image carry
critical information about objects, they should be preserved when the image is
reconstructed. So edge-preserving image reconstruction is an important research
problem. An image can be regarded as a surface of the image intensity function.
In this project, the image reconstruction problem is studied from the
perspective of surface estimation. A new jump-preserving surface estimation
methodology is proposed based on local linear kernel smoothing. Compared to some
existing procedures, this method is easy to use and simple to compute. It is
also possible to develop profound statistical theory for this method based on
existing theory about local linear kernel smoothing.&lt;br/&gt;Gene microarray
data are widely used in pharmaceutical and clinical research. By comparing gene
expression in normal and abnormal cells, microarrays can be used for identifying
genes involved in particular diseases, and then these genes can be targeted by
therapeutic drugs. Most gene expression data are produced by segmentation of
microarray images. So image segmentation techniques are related directly to the
quality of gene expression data. This project proposes a new image segmentation
technique. Based on preliminary numerical studies, it could improve the current
segmentation techniques, and consequently, improve the quality of gene
expression data and have a positive impact on pharmaceutical and clinical
studies involving gene microarrays. This project also suggests a new jump-
preserving surface estimation methodology, which can be used directly for
restoring true images from their noisy versions. Compared to some existing
procedures, this method is easy to use and simple to compute. It should be
helpful for several different sciences and industries using such techniques
(e.g., medical sciences, meteorology, oceanography, military, space
communication, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;