* 0406911
* After-School Program Exploring Science (APEX)
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Judy Brown, Museum of Science, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia James
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,224,492.00

"After-School Program Exploring Science (APEX)" proposes to develop and
implement a training model that will enhance the capacity of community-based
after-school programs to provide science-learning opportunities for children
ages 5-10. Capacity building will center on expanding the human resource base as
well as access to hands-on resources that enable investigative science in
informal settings. " APEX" will create a series of engaging hands-on science
investigations that will be designed for replication in a wide range of informal
learning environments. "APEX" community partners include the YMCA, YWCA and
Family Christian Association of America (FCAA). The Miami Museum of Science will
also partner with Miami-Dade Public Schools, Florida International University
and Miami-Dade College to formalize opportunities for paraprofessionals and pre-
service teachers to meet a portion of their certification requirements by
leading "APEX" Science investigations in after-school programs thereby providing
community-based after-school programs with a more stable workforce while at the
same time supporting future teachers in the development of inquiry-based
teaching skills. Through "APEX" over 275 after-school provider staff will be
trained along with up to 300 pre-service teachers and paraprofessionals. The
project will work with 93 after-school programs and impact roughly 7,000 high-
need students.