* 0406928
* Support for the International Quantum Structures Association Conference of 2004
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Franklin Schroeck, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

This award furnishes travel support for participants in the seventh biennial
meeting of the International Quantum Structures Association, held in Denver,
Colorado, 17-22 July 2004. The purpose of the meeting is to present new concepts
and original ideas in the field. Topics of the meeting will include: quantum
logics, quantum probability theory, quantum measurements, the philosophy of
quantum theory, quantum information, quantum computing and coding, quantales,
group theory and quantum mechanics, C* algebras and von Neumann algebras,
Hilbert space methods, and applications. This meeting, the first in this series
to be held in the United States, provides an opportunity to increase the
awareness and participation of U.S. researchers in on-going international
research in quantum structures.

Research in quantum structures deals with the mathematics, the physics, the
philosophy, the language, and the logic of quantum theory. Study of these topics
is increasingly important in view of recent advances in the application of
quantum-mechanical phenomena, including secure quantum communication protocols
and the latest efforts in quantum computing and coding. The biennial meeting of
the International Quantum Structures Association in July in Denver provides
researchers an opportunity to promote and disseminate information in the field
of quantum structures, as well as initiating joint research. This is especially
important to the young researchers from the United States, who will have the
opportunity to meet sixty or seventy of the world's leading researchers in
quantum structures and begin collaborative research with them.