* 0406472
* Archaeological Application of Airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar Technology in Southern Mexico and Central America
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Robert Sharer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 78,421.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation, a multi-national, multi-
institutional team of archaeologists will work with NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab to
deploy the Airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar (AIRSAR) system in southern
Mesoamerica and Central America in the spring of 2004. The focal areas of AIRSAR
survey will include: northwest Yucatan (Mexico); the Usumacinta River region
(Mexico and Guatemala), the Pasion River region (Guatemala), the central and
northern Peten (Guatemala); the Central Atlantic Slope of Costa Rica; and the
Diquis Region/General Valley (Costa Rica), with connecting transects to include
portions of Nicaragua, Honduras, and El Salvador. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has the following objectives: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) To test and
refine the effectiveness of the AIRSAR in archaeological applications in
tropical and subtropical regions; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) To expand our
understanding of the occupation history in various regions of southern
Mesoamerica and Central America through the combination of AIRSAR maps and
archaeological ground survey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AIRSAR is arguably the most
sophisticated and versatile airborne radar platform in the world, with
capacities to characterize environments and to detect human alterations to
environments that are only now being fully developed. AIRSAR is a unique system
that provides multi-band, multi-polar and multi-frequency data of broad areas
with resolutions significantly higher than those of publicly available satellite
and shuttle images. In addition, the long wavelength, low frequency radar
signals of AIRSAR penetrate through forest canopy, which presents an
unprecedented potential for archaeological applications in the tropical
environment. Simply put, AIRSAR can acquire data that can be provided by no
other instrument or research methodology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our present
understanding of Precolumbian socioeconomic and political organization in
southern Mexico and Central America is based on evidence from a very limited
sample of archaeological features across an enormous cultural landscape. Dense
forest coverage in many regions has limited the application of previous remote
sensing technologies and ground survey. The AIRSAR mission presents a unique and
promising opportunity to penetrate the forest canopy and detect an array of
critical archaeological and associated ecological features. If the system
functions as anticipated, results could be breakthrough discoveries of new
sites, and offer new or revised images of archaeological features including
settlement size and density, agricultural systems, systems of causeways, trade
networks, and fortifications. Thus, ground checked data derived from AIRSAR
would make a significant contribution to our understandings of Precolumbian
societies in Mexico and Central America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the
successful application of AIRSAR has implications far beyond archaeology.
Diverse ecosystems of southern Mesoamerica and Central America, including
rainforests, cloud forests, wetlands, and coastal floodplains, are being
destroyed at an alarming rate, because of agriculture, logging, and development,
as well as anthropogenic climate change. Their loss implies significant effects
on local weather patterns, freshwater supplies, habitats for numerous species,
and global climate. The ability to link data pertaining to the modern and
ancient landscapes through data from AIRSAR offers a long-term perspective on
anthropogenic environmental change in these vulnerable ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;