* 0406958
* A Monte Carlo Calculation of the Escape Fluxes of Nitrogen from Mars
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Sultan Hameed, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/2005
* USD 42,592.00

AST 0406958&lt;br/&gt;Hameed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements suggest that non-
thermal loss processes over geologic time have been significant in determining
the abundance of nitrogen (N2) in the Martian atmosphere. Since N2 is involved
in many photochemical reactions with the background atmosphere, knowledge of the
escape properties of atomic nitrogen is necessary for the reconstruction of the
ancient Martian thermosphere. In the traditional approach, all atoms produced at
the base with energies greater than the escape energy and velocity vectors
oriented upward are assumed to escape. This approximation, however, does not
appropriately describe the escape properties of heavier species, such as
nitrogen, carbon, and oxygen from upper atmospheres. Monte Carlo computations of
the escape flux of atomic oxygen have been carried out previously for the
Martian thermosphere. However, to date no studies using the Monte Carlo method
have been employed for the escape of atomic nitrogen. This research project,
directed by Dr. Sultan Hameed, is the first to carry out Monte Carlo
computations for nitrogen escape fluxes for the low and high solar activity
Martian atmospheres. In using the Monte Carlo method, invaluable insight will be
gained into the processes leading to the escape of nitrogen and the evolution of
the early Martian atmosphere. In particular, the energy and altitude
distributions of escaping nitrogen atoms as well as the escape fractions will be
computed for the present day low and high solar activity Martian atmospheres.
Significant differences are expected for the low and high solar activity models,
which should provide information on the long term variations of the escape
fluxes. Also, the contribution of various escape mechanisms to the total flux of
escaping nitrogen atoms is still relatively unknown, and this study will help to
address those questions in greater detail. As N2 could have buffered the escape
of other species in the past, quantifying the present day escape of nitrogen is
important for reconstructing the ancient water inventory on Mars and could have
played an important role in sequestering the early liquid water present on Mars.
Since geological evidence appears to suggest that the Martian atmosphere was
once capable of supporting liquid water on the surface, it is crucial that
reliable time dependent models which incorporate the escape of atomic nitrogen
are constructed to model past conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic nitrogen
could also comprise a significant portion of the present day high solar activity
Martian corona, and hence knowledge of the escape properties of nitrogen atoms
could be used to predict coronal densities, which may be valuable for future
aerobraking missions. The wider impact of this research will occur by the
application of these findings to understand the evolution of other planetary
bodies, such as Earth and Venus.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;