* 0406189
* Partial Differential Equations and Geometric Analysis in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Siqi Fu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 17,455.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A basic problem in several complex variables is to
understand&lt;br/&gt;the interplay between the analytic and geometric natures of
a domain.&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator plans to address this problem by
&lt;br/&gt;studying the d-bar-Neumann problem, invariant metrics, and
&lt;br/&gt;automorphism groups. More specifically, the principal investigator
plans&lt;br/&gt;to study compactness and eigenvalue spectrum of the d-bar-
Neumann operator.&lt;br/&gt;He will investigate necessary and sufficient
conditions for &lt;br/&gt;compactness of the d-bar-Neumann problem in geometric
and potential&lt;br/&gt;theoretic terms. He will also study eigenvalue spectrum
of the&lt;br/&gt;d-bar-Neumann problem by investigating, among other problems,
&lt;br/&gt;the several complex variables analog of Mark Kac's question: ``Can
one &lt;br/&gt;hear the shape of a drum?''. In addition, the principal
investigator&lt;br/&gt;plans to study invariant metrics, in particularly, the
Bergman and&lt;br/&gt;Kobayashi metrics. He will consider boundary behavior and
the zero set of&lt;br/&gt;the Bergman kernel function, as well as completeness
of the Kobayashi&lt;br/&gt;metric. Another problem to be studied is the theory
of automorphism&lt;br/&gt;groups and its relationship with the regularity of the
d-bar-Neumann&lt;br/&gt;problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex analysis is a key
tool in many areas of sciences and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;For example, the
Laplace transform is essential in the study of &lt;br/&gt;mechanical vibrations
and electric circuits. The Laplace equation &lt;br/&gt;has important
applications to hydrodynamics, electrostatics, &lt;br/&gt;and heat conduction.
The problems under investigation in this project &lt;br/&gt;are not only
intrinsically interesting, but also have implications in &lt;br/&gt;areas such
as complex geometry, operator theory, potential theory,&lt;br/&gt;mathematical
physics, and quantum mechanics. Many tools to be used in&lt;br/&gt;this project
come from other branches of mathematics and sciences. Some&lt;br/&gt;problems
may even rely on computer programming. The investigator will&lt;br/&gt;also
contribute to the development of human resources by supervising
a&lt;br/&gt;graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;