* 0406796
* Spectroscopy of Mercury's Surface
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Ann Sprague, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2008
* USD 220,132.00

AST 0406796&lt;br/&gt;Sprague&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sprague and her
collaborators will make spectroscopic measurements of
Mercury's&lt;br/&gt;surface materials through major .spectral windows in the
Earth's atmosphere, between 7.5 and&lt;br/&gt;25 micrometers for the purpose of
gaining knowledge about Mercury's composition. The&lt;br/&gt;spectroscopic
measurements will be made with a state-of-the-art mid-infrared spectral
imager&lt;br/&gt;(Boston University's MidInfraRed Spectral Imager--MIRSI) on the
Infrared Telescope Facility&lt;br/&gt;(IRTF) on Mauna Kea, HI. The telescope is
at high altitude and permits making measurements&lt;br/&gt;from the ground
through a minimum of atmospheric water vapor, a substance that attenuates
the&lt;br/&gt;thermal flux coming from other planets to detectors at the
telescope. Mercury is the planet with the greatest density and has a significant
magnetic field. These two things together indicate it must be an iron-rich
planet. However, the iron at Mercury must be sequestered in the core, or at
least beneath the surface layers, or be completely transformed to native iron
metal, because no ground-based observations have found convincing evidence for
ferrous iron in the surface materials. One goal of the new observations is to
determine if there has been volcanism on Mercury that has vented materials from
the deep interior. If so there should be measurable signatures of materials that
have very high melting temperatures. Such signatures would indicate that heat
from Mercury's interior has vented to the surface. In turn this would help
constrain the thermal history of the planet and whether there may still be a
liquid outer core. If there is a liquid outer core, perhaps dynamo action is
still operating on Mercury and generating the magnetic field measured by
instruments on Mariner 10 spacecraft. It is thought that Mercury may have formed
in a section of the planetary nebula that was characterized by a reducing
environment (one with a relatively low partial pressure of oxygen). If this was
so, then Mercury's surface should contain silicates favoring the presence of Mg
over Fe. A good place to look for such material is at locations which appear to
have undergone volcanic resurfacing. A search for spectral features associated
with magnesium in silicates, especially pyroxene, will be made at optically
smooth and low albedo regions and at locations where freshly excavated materials
are exposed by relatively recent impact gardening. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
measurements will occur at an important time in the study of the solar system
because the first spacecraft mission to Mercury since the mid 1970's is due to
launch in 2004 and go into orbit about Mercury in 2009. The spectral
measurements made by Dr. Sprague and collaborators will help to place the
results of the spacecraft mission MESSENGER (Mercury Surface, Space ENvironment,
GEochemistry, and Ranging) in a better context. This project includes active
participation of undergraduate physics majors from Susquehanna University, a
small four-year liberal arts college in central Pennsylvania. By sharing the
resources of a large University and NSF with students who would otherwise be
unable to participate in research with new, highly capable instrumentation at
premiere telescope facilities, Dr. Sprague and collaborators greatly extend the
importance of their work. A graduate student will also be trained in the
techniques of infrared remote sensing analysis. Such techniques are important to
astronomy in general and to the analysis of data from new space missions like
Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF).&lt;br/&gt;