* 0406341
* Collaborative Research:    NGS:     Dynamic Runtime and Compilation Support for I/O-Intensive Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Alok Choudhary, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2008
* USD 336,498.00

Abstract, CNS-0406341&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tera-scale high-performance computing
has enabled scientists to tackle very large and computationally challenging
problems, such as those found in the scientific computing domain. However, as
computing scales to levels never seen before, it also becomes extremely data
intensive and I/O intensive. Thus, I/O is becoming a major bottleneck, thereby
slowing the expected pace of scientific discovery and analysis of data.
Furthermore, in order to cope with larger problems and data sizes, models and
applications are being designed to be dynamic in nature. That is, the
applications are dynamic both in terms of their computation patterns as well as
data access patterns. Due to the complexities of systems and applications, it
is, therefore, very important to address research issues and develop dynamic
techniques at the level of runtime systems and compilers to scale I/O in the
right proportions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to design and
develop next generation software techniques to address the data, I/O, and
storage bottlenecks for large-scale scientific applications. Particularly, this
project aims to investigate dynamic runtime and compilation techniques for
scalable I/O optimizations for largescale systems. Another important aspect will
be to drive these optimizations by learning and characterizing performance of
I/O and data accesses, and subsequently using those to develop rules that will
be used by dynamic runtime and compilation systems to enable high-performance
I/O. Current state-of-the-art compiler support for I/O-intensive applications is
tremendously lacking. Runtime needs of many large-scale I/O-intensive
applications can benefit a lot from a robust dynamic compilation and linking
infrastructure. The specific objectives of this project
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Developing an understanding of dynamically varying
data access needs of I/O-intensive applications,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.
Capturing dynamic access patterns and application steering information at
runtime within a metadata manager,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Designing and
implementing dynamic compilation techniques based on the runtime access
patterns&lt;br/&gt;and performance statistics collected by the metadata
manager,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Designing and implementing a layout manager that
collects storage format (layout) suggestions from multiple concurrently
executing applications and determines the globally acceptable storage layouts
for disk-resident and tape-resident data,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Designing and
implementing a high-level, dynamic, easy-to-use I/O library that can be invoked
by the dynamic compiler/linker,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Investigating what types
of user-specified hints can be passed to the runtime system/compiler,
and&lt;br/&gt;how they can be incorporated to reduce the overheads associated
with dynamic compilation,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Evaluating the performance of
the developed dynamic compilation/linking infrastructure
under&lt;br/&gt;realistic I/O-intensive workloads and quantifying the runtime
overheads associated with dynamic&lt;br/&gt;compilation,
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. Providing the developed infrastructure and
experimental findings in the public domain, and&lt;br/&gt;incorporating the
research findings into the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;