* 0406636
* SGER:    Multi-Site Soil-Structure Foundation Interaction Test
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Ricardo Dobry, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 06/30/2006
* USD 34,157.00

A project is proposed to perform multi-NEES site structural testing of a common
structure in conjunction with soil-structure interaction. The objective of the
proposed project is to provide a realistic test bed application with which to
verify and extend the components of the NEESgrid and the NEES equipment sites
for distributed simulation. The proposed project will involve the collaboration
of three NEES Equipment Sites (Lehigh University; University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign; and RPI), the NEES System Integrator, and National Center for
Supercomputer Applications (NCSA).



The test bed will consist of a model of the I-10 Santa Monica Freeway. This
structure was damaged during the 1994 Northridge earthquake. Each of the
equipment sites will house a physical model of a component of the bridge, with
the superstructure being modeled analytically using the NCSA parallel computing
facility. Using hybrid testing methods, command displacements from NCSA will be
issued to the physical substructures at each of the equipment sites, which in
turn are imposed and the measured restoring forces returned to NCSA. The

communication between the sites and NCSA will involve the use of the Internet in
conjunction with software and protocols developed by the NEES System Integrator.



The proposed project utilizes aspects of simulation that comprise many of the
applications of the NEES Equipment Sites and NEESgrid, including: (1) advanced
analytical geotechnical modeling under dynamic loading; (2) advanced analytical
structural modeling under dynamic loading; (3) advanced geotechnical testing
using centrifuges; and (4) advanced structural testing using multi-degrees-of-
freedom testing facilities. The Lehigh NEES Equipment Site will be responsible
for one of the bridge piers. This pier will be built and tested at the

Lehigh NEES Equipment Site. Lehigh will also be involved in analytical modeling
of structural components of the bridge structure to perform analytical
simulations in conjunction with distributed simulation in some of the phases of
the project.



The results from the proposed project will offer numerous benefits. The NEES
Equipment Sites will benefit from an evaluation of the software and hardware
currently established for distributed testing. The data repository and
telepresence for NEES will be put into action, enabling the general community to
observe the tests and observe that the NEES vision of distributed simulation is
finally realized and proven. Finally, the project will help to extend the state-
of-the-art in integrated experimental-analytical simulation in earthquake
engineering.

