* 0406625
* Central States Section of the Combustion Institute Austin; March 21-23-, 2004; Austin, TX
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Ronald Matthews, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 03/31/2005
* USD 6,000.00

Abstract, 0406625&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Central States Section of the
Combustion Institute (CSSCI) supports the broader objectives of The Combustion
Institute with a primary focus on facilitating discovery and application of
combustion science. CSSCI holds yearly meetings to promote the exchange of new
ideas among combustion researchers in the Central United States, i.e., within
the states of Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota,
Ohio, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, and Wisconsin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics on the program include fundamental aspects of
flames, chemical kinetics, and pollutant formation as well as applications in
engines and turbines. The meeting will also consider research issues in fire
control and combustion-based synthesis of materials as well as experimental
diagnostic techniques and computational methods. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
award provides partial support for students of the region to participate in a
meeting of the CSSCI from March 21-23, 2004, at the University of Texas at
Austin and provides these students with the conference proceedings. Students
participating in such meetings not only gain technical insight from interacting
with senior researchers but also develop a greater sense of community within
their research area. Further, the Central Section of the Combustion Institute
has a strong industrial combustion community within it, and the ability for the
students to interact with the industrial researchers aids the students in terms
of career placement and in terms of better motivating their research.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of promoting participation of students
in scholarly workshops is that &lt;br/&gt;graduate training and education take
place beyond the university environment. The interaction between students from
different universities and between students and more senior researchers is an
important part of the graduate learning experience. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;