* 0406468
* US-Switzerland Dissertation Enhancement:  The Effects of a Buried Ice Lens on Snow Microstructure
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Freeman Smith, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 06/30/2007
* USD 13,000.00

0406468 Smith

This U.S.-Switzerland dissertation enhancement project addresses the effects of
buried ice layers on snow microstructure and metamorphosis. The investigations
will be performed at the Swiss Federal Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research
under joint mentorship of Freeman M. Smith of Colorado State University and
Professor Martin Schneebeli of Switzerland. The graduate student, Ethan M.
Greene, will develop a digital model of snow microstructure and perform analysis
of thermal conductivity as well as mechanical property measurements. The project
takes advantage of specialized equipment in Switzerland that allows 3-D image
reconstruction of snow.

The study itself addresses research related to the occurrence of avalanches.
Avalanches result when snow metamorphism produces weak snow layers. Field data
on environmental factors, physical conditions that cause avalanches as well as
snow and ice formation are limited. Through the proposed laboratory simulations,
Mr. Greene and his mentors propose to simulate the conditions leading to
weaknesses in the snow structure and to isolate the impact of thermal changes on
the ice layer and snow microstructure. The research will advance understanding
of causes of avalanches and in improved avalanche forecasting. The graduate
student will benefit from an international experience early in his career and
connections with a leading international institute in his field.