* 0406841
* Atmospheric Impacts and Craters in the Solar System
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Erik Asphaug, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2008
* USD 146,402.00

AST 0406841 Korycansky

Dr. Donald Korycansky and collaborators will carry out simulations of
atmospheric impacts and cratering on the surfaces of bodies in the solar system
using state-of-the-art methods. The calculations will yield an understanding of
the crucial aspects of the impacts and build on previous work on this problem by
these researchers. This work has three foci: 1) Differentiating among models of
atmospheric impacts which have been proposed for this problem, 2) Connecting the
effects of atmospheres on impacts (i.e. ablation and fragmentation) with craters
on planetary and satellite surfaces (Venus, Earth, Mars, Titan), and 3)
Implementing a high-quality material failure and fracture model for impactors
into the hydrocode SAGE that will be used. A number of simulations will be
carried out of the impact of objects into planetary atmospheres and the
formation of craters by fragmented impactors. The latter calculations will be
calibrated by comparison with experimental results from the scientific
literature. The new calculations largely involve the use of the computer code
SAGE, developed at the Los Alamos National Laboratory. SAGE is a powerful and
flexible code that simulates hydrodynamic processes. It employs high-quality
algorithms for the basic dynamics and can model important and relevant physics
such as material strength. It also contains an adaptive mesh routine that
concentrates computational resources efficiently. It can be run on computer
clusters, to which this research team has access, comprising 80 processors in
total.

The SAGE code mentioned above is flexibly configured for a wide variety of
projects. The code is easy to run and easy to configure for new problems, which
may be significant research projects in their own right. As such it is well
suited for student involvement in research. This includes not only graduate
students, but also undergraduates that are following the Planetary Science Path
as part of their work for the Earth Sciences major at UC Santa Cruz. More
broadly, the results of this research project should shed light on a complicated
phenomenon, atmospheric impact, that has wide implications for society. Given
the widely perceived vulnerability of human society to impact hazard, any
knowledge that sheds light on the process is helpful. ***



