* 0406021
* The Topology of Smooth 4- -manifolds, with Applications to the Topology of Symplectic 4- -Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Scott Baldridge, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2005
* USD 75,207.00

In this proposal Baldridge investigates the topology of
smooth&lt;br/&gt;4-manifolds using gauge theory techniques. The goals of
the&lt;br/&gt;proposer are to find easier ways to calculate the Seiberg-
Witten&lt;br/&gt;invariants of 4-manifolds, to provide new examples of
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;4-manifolds, and to better understand the topology of
4-manifolds&lt;br/&gt;which admit a circle action and symplectic form. The first
project&lt;br/&gt;involves studying the moduli space of solutions to
the&lt;br/&gt;Seiberg-Witten equations of a smooth 4-manifold when the
Dirac&lt;br/&gt;operator is conjugated by the exponential of a Morse function.
In&lt;br/&gt;a collaborative project with Li, the proposer also plans to extend
the&lt;br/&gt;geography problem for symplectic 4-manifolds to
nonsimply&lt;br/&gt;connected manifolds and fill out this geography for
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;manifolds with Kodaira dimension 1. In the third and
fourth&lt;br/&gt;projects the proposer explores ideas related to Taubes's
question,&lt;br/&gt;that is: If a 4-manifold is symplectic and diffeomorphic to
the&lt;br/&gt;product of a three manifold with a circle, does that three
manifold&lt;br/&gt;fiber over a circle?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 3-manifold is a
space that locally looks like the familiar space&lt;br/&gt;we live in. If one
imagines replacing every point in the&lt;br/&gt;3-manifold with a circle of
points in a nice way, one gets an&lt;br/&gt;example of a 4-manifold with a
circle action. Here `action' means&lt;br/&gt;a rotation of the space along each
circle. Four manifolds with&lt;br/&gt;circle actions have many nice periodic and
symmetry properties,&lt;br/&gt;which makes them particularly suitable for
modeling and testing&lt;br/&gt;physical theories. (For example, the space-time
universe we live&lt;br/&gt;in is an example of a general 4-manifold which may
have a circle&lt;br/&gt;action.) These manifolds are especially useful for
modeling if&lt;br/&gt;they also have a symplectic structure --- a key ingredient
in&lt;br/&gt;almost all the equations of classical and quantum physics.
Work&lt;br/&gt;in this proposal investigates what shapes symplectic
4-manifolds&lt;br/&gt;with circle actions can have, and the shapes of
4-manifolds in&lt;br/&gt;general. This is done by relating invariant features of
a&lt;br/&gt;4-manifold to the number of solutions of certain systems
of&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear partial differential equations on that
manifold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;