* 0406229
* Adaptive Sampling Designs in Network and Spatial Settings
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* James Rosenberger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

The purpose of this research project is to develop new
adaptive&lt;br/&gt;sampling designs and inference methods for sampling in
network and&lt;br/&gt;spatially structured populations. Adaptive sampling
designs are those&lt;br/&gt;in which the procedure for selecting the sample can
depend on values&lt;br/&gt;of variables of interest observed during the survey.
In spatial&lt;br/&gt;settings, that can mean adaptively adding new units to the
sample in&lt;br/&gt;the vicinity of high or otherwise interesting observed
values. In&lt;br/&gt;network or graph settings, links can be adaptively followed
from&lt;br/&gt;interesting sample nodes to add new nodes to the sample. A
variety of&lt;br/&gt;new sampling procedures, together with design and model
based&lt;br/&gt;estimation methods, will be investigated in the study. A
new,&lt;br/&gt;flexible and versatile class of adaptive designs, termed ``active
set&lt;br/&gt;adaptive sampling,'' was found during the preliminary work toward
this&lt;br/&gt;project. Designs in this class have certain advantages over
adaptive&lt;br/&gt;cluster sampling and some of the traditional network sampling
designs&lt;br/&gt;in being more flexible, allowing for control of total sample
size and&lt;br/&gt;not requiring complete inclusion of connected
components.&lt;br/&gt;Design-unbiased estimates are possible with some of these
designs,&lt;br/&gt;providing inferences that are robust against assumptions
about the&lt;br/&gt;population. These designs lend themselves toward model-
based&lt;br/&gt;inferences as well and can be used in some situations to help
ensure&lt;br/&gt;that the assumptions for the model-based inferences are met.
This&lt;br/&gt;project will advance the theory and methodology of adaptive
sampling&lt;br/&gt;and in particular will fully investigate and develop
several&lt;br/&gt;categories of new adaptive sampling designs within this class
and&lt;br/&gt;develop and evaluate design and model based inference methods for
use&lt;br/&gt;with adaptive designs of all types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
adaptive sampling designs, the study design can change in&lt;br/&gt;response to
the values and patterns observed during the study. For&lt;br/&gt;example, in a
study of an at-risk hidden human population, social&lt;br/&gt;links from
particularly high-risk individuals can be followed to add&lt;br/&gt;more
individuals to the sample; in a survey of an unevenly
distributed&lt;br/&gt;natural resource, new observations may be adaptively made
in&lt;br/&gt;neighborhoods of high observed abundance. In previous work it
has&lt;br/&gt;been established that in many situations the theoretically
optimal&lt;br/&gt;sampling strategy is an adaptive one. Specific adaptive
designs, such&lt;br/&gt;as the adaptive cluster sampling designs developed in a
previous&lt;br/&gt;project, have been shown to give substantial gains in
precision or&lt;br/&gt;efficiency over conventional strategies for certain types
of&lt;br/&gt;populations, in particular rare, clustered ones. The results of
the&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will provide research tools for other
scientific&lt;br/&gt;fields, including the biological, environmental, health,
and social&lt;br/&gt;sciences. Each of these fields has to deal with populations
that are&lt;br/&gt;difficult to sample by conventional means because of
their&lt;br/&gt;unpredictably uneven spatial and network structures. The
sampling&lt;br/&gt;methods resulting from this project have applications to
many&lt;br/&gt;situations of importance to society, including studies of
hidden&lt;br/&gt;populations such as those at risk for HIV/AIDS,
environmental&lt;br/&gt;assessment and monitoring, biological surveys, natural
resources&lt;br/&gt;explorations and inventories, Internet surveys, rapid
response to&lt;br/&gt;natural and induced health threats, studies in human
social behavior,&lt;br/&gt;and archaeological
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;