* 0406482
* Alexandrov's Geometry and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Anton Petrunin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 01/31/2009
* USD 95,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0406482&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Anton Petrunin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator
proposes to continue his research in&lt;br/&gt;Alexandrov geometry and its
applications, studying collapse with&lt;br/&gt;lower curvature bound (joint with
W.Tuschmann and&lt;br/&gt;V.Kapovitch). This part of the project can be thought
of as an&lt;br/&gt;attempt to generalize and refine Gromov's Betti number
theorem.&lt;br/&gt;This research can be divided into three main
parts:&lt;br/&gt; (i) Finding new topological invariants which are finite on any
family &lt;br/&gt;of ``similar'' manifolds which the PI has
described.&lt;br/&gt; (ii) Using the gradient push to limit the number of
bundles with the&lt;br/&gt;same fiber and base which can admit given lower
curvature and upper &lt;br/&gt;diameter bounds&lt;br/&gt; (iii) Showing that
simply connected spin manifolds with non-zero&lt;br/&gt;A-hat-genus can not be
almost non-negatively curved.&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator also proposes
to continue his study of&lt;br/&gt;positive functions of curvature which give a
bounded integral&lt;br/&gt;along any positively curved manifold with lower
curvature bound,&lt;br/&gt;upper diameter and lower volume bound. This should
clarify the&lt;br/&gt;nature of curvature tensors of Alexandrov
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;The PI would like to show that the curvature tensor
for&lt;br/&gt;Alexandrov spaces is well defined as a measure valued tensor
in&lt;br/&gt;any distance co-ordinates. If true, this should give a
solution&lt;br/&gt;to such long standing questions as whether a convex surface
in&lt;br/&gt;Alexandrov space is an Alexandrov space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator proposes to compile a collection of&lt;br/&gt;exercises
in modern geometry. The idea is to find problems which&lt;br/&gt;could be solved
in one step. However solutions are supposed to&lt;br/&gt;be non trivial and
would also lead to a discovery of important&lt;br/&gt;ideas in modern geometry.
PI has already gathered some number of&lt;br/&gt;such problems which can be
viewed online and many people had been&lt;br/&gt;engaged in this project. This
project is oriented toward&lt;br/&gt;students and young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian manifold could be considered as a
simplified version&lt;br/&gt;of space-time. The author considers an approach to
studing&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian manifolds. It is based on considering
extremal&lt;br/&gt;metrics, in an appropriate sense, for example how
Riemannian&lt;br/&gt;manifolds collapse to lower dimenssional objects. This
method&lt;br/&gt;makes possible to get new resuls in the main stream direction
of&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian geometry: how to make conclusions about
global&lt;br/&gt;structure of space basing on local properties.&lt;br/&gt;