* 0406085
* Collaborative Research: Highly Structured Models and Statistical Computation in High-Energy Astrophysics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* David van Dyk, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2008
* USD 343,775.00

Pricipal Investigators: David Van Dyk and Xiao-Li
Meng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: UC Riverside and Harvard
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Highly Structured Models
and Statistical &lt;br/&gt;Computation in High-Energy
Astrophysics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California-
Harvard Astrostatistics Collaboration aims to design&lt;br/&gt;and implement
fully model-based methods of statistical inference to&lt;br/&gt;solve
outstanding data analytic problems in high-energy&lt;br/&gt;astrophysics. The
Collaboration's methods explicitly model the&lt;br/&gt;complexities of both
astronomical sources and the data generation&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms inherent in
new high-tech instruments and fully utilize the&lt;br/&gt;resulting highly
structured models in learning about the underlying&lt;br/&gt;astronomical and
physical processes. Using these models requires&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated
scientific computation, advanced methods for statistical&lt;br/&gt;inference,
and careful model checking procedures. The PIs of the&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration
(van Dyk and Meng) both have substantial research&lt;br/&gt;experience in
developing the methods that the Collaboration is&lt;br/&gt;extending, employing,
and publicizing: inferential and efficient&lt;br/&gt;computational methods under
highly-structured models that involve&lt;br/&gt;multiple levels of latent
variables and incomplete data. Such models&lt;br/&gt;are ideally suited to
account for the many physical and instrumental&lt;br/&gt;filters that compose
the data generation mechanism in high-energy&lt;br/&gt;astrophysics. The five
consultants on the project (Chiang, Connors,&lt;br/&gt;Kashyap, Karovska, and
Siemiginowska) all have expertise on the&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation and science
of high-energy astrophysics, and, all have&lt;br/&gt;collaborated with
statisticians in efforts to develop appropriate&lt;br/&gt;methods to address
scientific questions. There are two primary impacts&lt;br/&gt;of this project:
the impact of the development of more reliable&lt;br/&gt;statistical methods on
scientific findings in astronomy and the impact&lt;br/&gt;of the new statistical
inference and computation methods in a wide&lt;br/&gt;range of scientific
fields. As the Collaboration develops methods and&lt;br/&gt;distributes free
software for specific inferential tasks, it also&lt;br/&gt;educates the
astronomical community as to the benefit of careful use&lt;br/&gt;of
sophisticated statistical methods. (The Collaboration organizes one&lt;br/&gt;or
two special sessions at meetings of the American Astronomical&lt;br/&gt;Society
each year.) It is expected that a fundamental impact of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed
research will be a more general acceptance and more prevalent&lt;br/&gt;use of
appropriate methods among astronomers. Second, the&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration is an
example of a new mode of statistical&lt;br/&gt;inference. Rather than using off-
the-shelf models and methods, it is&lt;br/&gt;becoming ever more feasible to
develop application specific models&lt;br/&gt;that are designed to account for
the particular complexities of a&lt;br/&gt;problem at hand. The Collaboration
develops inferential and&lt;br/&gt;computational methods for handling such
multi-level models. As&lt;br/&gt;application specific multi-level models become
more prevalent, these&lt;br/&gt;methods will have application throughout the
natural, social, and&lt;br/&gt;engineering sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, there has been an explosion of new data in&lt;br/&gt;observational
high-energy astrophysics. Recently launched or&lt;br/&gt;soon-to-be launched
space-based telescopes that are designed to detect&lt;br/&gt;and map ultra-
violet, X-ray, and gamma-ray electromagnetic emission&lt;br/&gt;are opening a
whole new window to study the cosmos. Because the&lt;br/&gt;production of high-
energy electromagnetic emission requires&lt;br/&gt;temperatures of millions of
degrees and is an indication of the&lt;br/&gt;release of vast quantities of
stored energy, these instruments give a&lt;br/&gt;completely new perspective on
the hot and turbulent regions of the&lt;br/&gt;universe. The new instrumentation
allows for very high resolution&lt;br/&gt;imaging, spectral analysis, and time
series analysis. The Chandra&lt;br/&gt;X-ray Observatory, for example, produces
images at least thirty times&lt;br/&gt;sharper than any previous X-ray
telescope. The complexity of the&lt;br/&gt;instruments, the complexity of the
astronomical sources, and the&lt;br/&gt;complexity of the scientific questions
leads to a subtle inference&lt;br/&gt;problem that requires sophisticated
statistical tools. For example,&lt;br/&gt;data are subject to non-uniform
censoring, errors in measurement, and&lt;br/&gt;background contamination.
Astronomical sources exhibit complex and&lt;br/&gt;irregular spatial structure.
Scientists wish to draw conclusions as to&lt;br/&gt;the physical environment and
structure of the source, the processes&lt;br/&gt;and laws which govern the birth
and death of planets, stars, and&lt;br/&gt;galaxies, and ultimately the
structure and evolution of the&lt;br/&gt;universe. Nonetheless little effort has
been made to bring the&lt;br/&gt;strength of modern statistical methods to bare
on these problems. The&lt;br/&gt;California-Harvard Astrostatistics
Collaboration develops statistical&lt;br/&gt;methods, computational techniques,
and freely available software to&lt;br/&gt;address outstanding inferential
problems in high-energy astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed are an
example of a new mode of statistical&lt;br/&gt;inference: Rather than using off-
the-shelf methods, it is becoming&lt;br/&gt;ever more feasible to develop
methods that are application specific&lt;br/&gt;and are designed to account for
the particular complexities of a&lt;br/&gt;problem at hand. The inferential and
computational methods designed by&lt;br/&gt;the Collaboration for handling such
multi-level models have&lt;br/&gt;application throughout the natural, social,
and engineering sciences.&lt;br/&gt;