* 0406209
* Regularity questions in the geometric calculus of variations and in geometric flow problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Leon Simon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 378,164.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal DMS-0406209&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Abstract&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; ``Regularity questions in the geometric calculus of
variations&lt;br/&gt;and in geometric flow problems'' (Leon Simon and Brian
White)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Leon Simon plans to pursue various
questions related to the structure&lt;br/&gt;of the singular sets of minimal
submanifolds and energy minimizing&lt;br/&gt;maps. More specifically Simon aims
to establish first order&lt;br/&gt;regularity (i.e. that the singular set lies
in a locally finite union&lt;br/&gt;of continuously differentiable submanifolds)
for various multiplicity&lt;br/&gt;1 classes near points where there is a
tangent cylinder with a&lt;br/&gt;cross-section which admits a calibration. Such
a result would in&lt;br/&gt;particular apply to mod-2 minimizers near ``top-
dimensional'' singular&lt;br/&gt;points. Brian White plans to study regularity
properties of mean&lt;br/&gt;curvature flow, including non-uniqueness properties
and ``fattening.''&lt;br/&gt;In addition he will continue his work on the
singular structure of&lt;br/&gt;minimizing cones with coefficients in a metric
group, and his work on&lt;br/&gt;2 dimensional minimal surfaces with particular
emphasis on the study&lt;br/&gt;of branch points. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
understanding of singularities, and how singularities are formed,&lt;br/&gt;is a
fundamental element in our overall understanding of many physical&lt;br/&gt;and
geometric phenomena. For example, in cosmology singularities of&lt;br/&gt;space-
time (e.g. ``black holes'') play a fundamental role, and
the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of singularity formation in geometric flow problems
is a&lt;br/&gt;key ingredient in the approach of Hamilton, Perelman and others
to&lt;br/&gt;Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture. Likewise in the study of
the&lt;br/&gt;``canonical'' objects which arise naturally in topology and
geometry,&lt;br/&gt;singularities arise in a very natural and unavoidable
manner, and the&lt;br/&gt;understanding of these singularities is an absolutely
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;problem. As with most non-linear phenomena, there is not a
single&lt;br/&gt;general theory which applies in a wide range of different
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;Rather, each different context has its own collection of
effective&lt;br/&gt;techniques, and it is the development and application of
such&lt;br/&gt;techniques in the context of the geometric calculus of
variations&lt;br/&gt;which is the focus of the present research proposal.
Specifically,&lt;br/&gt;Simon and White propose to continue their efforts toward
a more&lt;br/&gt;complete understanding of singularities, and how they are
formed, in&lt;br/&gt;the context of area minimizing submanifolds and energy
minimizing&lt;br/&gt;maps, and in the context of various geometric flow
problems.