* 0406656
* Dynamics of Multicomponent Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 03/31/2008
* USD 520,000.00

This research is aimed at a fundamental understanding of dynamic processes -
diffusion, viscosity, &lt;br/&gt;viscoelasticity - in any polymer material
containing more than one chemical repeat unit. Such &lt;br/&gt;multicomponent
polymers . a class that includes miscible and immiscible blends, random and
block &lt;br/&gt;copolymers, and their mixtures . are ubiquitous in modern
macromolecular science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;Description of the dynamics of
single component polymers has advanced considerably, primarily via
&lt;br/&gt;reptation-based models, but the extension to multicomponent systems
lags behind. There are two main &lt;br/&gt;obstacles: (i) limited understanding
of the composition and temperature dependence of the local &lt;br/&gt;segmental
dynamics that underly all mechanisms of chain relaxation, and (ii) incomplete
understanding of &lt;br/&gt;the effects of mixing on the mechanisms of chain
dynamics. The proposed research will address both of &lt;br/&gt;these issues
through strategic measurements on model systems, using a unique combination of
three &lt;br/&gt;powerful techniques: rheology, oscillatory flow birefringence,
and diffusion. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt; Recent research has
revealed a variety of fascinating phenomena in the dynamics of binary polymer
&lt;br/&gt;mixtures, attributable to the fact that the temperature dependences
of the segmental mobilities of the two &lt;br/&gt;components are distinct. This
"thermorheological complexity" arises both from intrinsic differences in
&lt;br/&gt;flexibility, an intramolecular contribution, and from differences
between the bulk, average composition, &lt;br/&gt;and that of the local
environment surrounding a segment. A partial explanation for these observations
&lt;br/&gt;based on the idea of self-concentration, the local enrichment of the
environment in like monomers due &lt;br/&gt;simply to chain connectivity, has
proven capable of describing much of the phenomenology. Furthermore,
&lt;br/&gt;it provides an organizing principle by which the behavior of various
systems can be classified, and it &lt;br/&gt;highlights those future experiments
that are likely to be most revealing. The three experimental
&lt;br/&gt;techniques in combination will allow precise extraction of the
dynamics of each component, in carefully &lt;br/&gt;selected model blends, over
broad ranges of composition and temperature. These data should enable full
&lt;br/&gt;characterization of the local dynamics, which in turn will direct the
development of an improved, &lt;br/&gt;predictive model. Then, with an
understanding of local dynamics in hand, it will be possible to address
&lt;br/&gt;several longstanding issues concerning chain dynamics, via the same
experimental protocol. In particular, &lt;br/&gt;measurements of the composition
and temperature dependent viscosity on the same model blends will
&lt;br/&gt;allow detailed testing of proposed models, such as "double
reptation", for the effects of polydispersity on &lt;br/&gt;chain dynamics.
Furthermore, the extraction of the full frequency dependent response and
diffusivity of a &lt;br/&gt;dilute component in a mixture will lead to an
experimental resolution of the longstanding "constraint &lt;br/&gt;release
versus contour length fluctuations" controversy in linear viscoelasticity.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt; The vast majority of commercial polymer
materials are processed in the liquid state, where the &lt;br/&gt;viscoelastic
response (both linear and non-linear) ultimately dictates what can and can't be
done. As the &lt;br/&gt;fraction of commercial materials that may be considered
"multicomponent" increases steadily, the &lt;br/&gt;importance and utility of
both "correlative" (i.e., take what is observed and relate it to molecular
&lt;br/&gt;variables) and "predictive" (i.e., predict properties based on
molecular variables) schemes grows as well. &lt;br/&gt;The research described
herein shows promise of providing the first reliable predictive scheme for the
&lt;br/&gt;viscosity of a miscible polymer blend. Furthermore, the underlying
concepts should contribute to &lt;br/&gt;predictive schemes for the
viscoelasticity of other multicomponent systems, and in the longer run for the
&lt;br/&gt;non-linear flow properties as well. &lt;br/&gt; This program
integrates teaching and research over the full range of polymer science .
synthesis, &lt;br/&gt;characterization, morphology, rheology, dynamics, and
theory . for students in chemistry, chemical &lt;br/&gt;engineering, and
materials science programs. This breadth of training has made group alumni
attractive in &lt;br/&gt;both academic and industrial settings, and to companies
extending well beyond the traditional polymer &lt;br/&gt;industry. Regular
opportunities for mentoring undergraduates, and for presenting research results
at &lt;br/&gt;national scientific meetings and to audiences of industrial
scientists, constitute an essential component of &lt;br/&gt;graduate student
education in this program.