* 0406471
* Electronic Properties of Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Carmen Almasan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2008
* USD 330,000.00

This project is focused on the investigation of in-plane and out-of-plane
normal-state electrical conduction, using extremely high quality single crystals
of selected copper-oxide superconductors and layered manganites. Our
understanding of the physics of the normal-state charge transport along the
CuO(2) planes and in the out-of-plane direction in the high transition
temperature Tc cuprates is still far from complete. This is in part due to the
scarcity of comprehensive experimental studies on the evolution of these
properties with doping across the full range of stoichiometry: under-doped,
optimally-, and over-doped regimes. For the cuprates, the emphasis will be on
the transformation of the normal-state conduction across the phase diagram,
which includes insulating, under-doped, and over-doped regimes. A series of
electrical transport and magnetization investigations are proposed. The data
will be analyzed for information about electronic transport and conduction
mechanisms. Layered manganites have a reach phase diagram, which includes
several phase transitions. These thermodynamic phase transitions have a strong
effect on the charge transport. A comprehensive study of the conduction
mechanism in manganites will be undertaken through charge transport and
magnetization measurements. This research will significantly enhance our
fundamental understanding of charge conduction in cuprates and manganites by
addressing key issues in the physics of these systems. More broadly, the results
from this basic investigation may provide insight into appropriate doping
schemes to facilitate applications of cuprates and manganites for electronic
sensors and devices such as magnetic field sensors or even computer logic
devices. This highly interdisciplinary project contributes to the education and
training of doctoral and undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral
researchers at the institutions, which are part of the collaboration. The
diversity of the expertise gained by the participants in this research program
is a substantial advantage in today's knowledge based, technology driven
economy, being beneficial to a future career in industry, government, or
academia.

This experimental research project concerns the unusual electrical properties
and behavior of high temperature superconductors and layer manganites. The high
temperature superconductors, even in the normal state, conduct electricity in
ways that are very different from typical conductors such as cooper and silicon.
Also, the conduction of electricity in manganites is strongly affected by
thermodynamic phase transitions. This project will significantly enhance our
fundamental understanding of the electrical behaviors of cuprates and
manganites. Clarifying these novel electrical behaviors may contribute to
eventual applications of these materials for electronic sensors and devices such
as magnetic field sensors or even computer logic devices. This project offer
excellent research and education opportunities for graduate students within an
interdisciplinary program. It involves minority-group graduate students who
pursue thesis research and receive excellent training beneficial to a future
career in industry, government, or academia. The international collaborations
with scientists from Romania and Spain, needed to carry out parts of this
project, contribute to the nation's infrastructure for research and education.