* 0406170
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Pastoral Ecologies and Economies of the Late Bronze Age in the Middle Volga Region, Russia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Kathleen Morrison, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Under Dr. Kathleen Morrison's supervision, Laura Popova will complete the
collection of paleobotanical and archaeological data for her dissertation
research on the Late Bronze Age (1700-1300BC) of the Middle Volga region, Russia
(Samara province). During the Late Bronze Age (hereafter LBA), groups that
inhabited the steppe and forest-steppe of Samara were strategically located
between mining centers in the Ural Mountains, the desert oases of Kazakhstan,
the metallurgical centers of the Don River, and dense forests to the north. In
this period of unprecedented cultural interaction and trade, the Middle Volga
region was a hub of activity. At the same time, there was a shift in settlement
strategies from groups living in dispersed temporary communities to more long-
term settlements. Most archaeologists attribute the change in settlement
patterns to a change in climate (arid to humid) at the beginning of the LBA.
This interpretation of the role of the environment in social change sees the
environment as something static, and the group's reaction to environmental
change as a given. This project seeks to re-evaluate this alteration in
settlement strategies by examining how humans interacted with the environment of
the Volga-Ural region during the LBA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We cannot understand
why people built these long-term settlements until we have a better sense of the
social, political, economic and ecological issues the people of the region faced
during the LBA. This research will embed the occupational histories of places
within the broader landscape histories of the region, because it is in
understanding the linkages within and between places that we begin to
reconstruct how resources were appropriated. Bronze Age landscape histories will
be examined through excavation, survey and detailed macrobotanical, pollen, and
fecal spherulite analyses highlighting a variety of spatial scales: intramural,
local, and regional. The spatial and temporal dynamics of several LBA places
(Peschani Dol, Kibit, Krasnosamarskoe), which correspond respectively to three
environmental zones: steppe, forest-steppe, and the ecotone between these two
zones, will be studied so as to illuminate how people moved through, were shaped
by, and altered the LBA landscapes in the Middle Volga region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Popova's research will continue the Russian-American
collaboration started by Dr. David Anthony and Dr. Igor Vasiliev. An aim of this
partnership is to educate students of the Samara State Pedagogical University
about the latest archaeological techniques. Students will make up the excavation
crew at Kibit, where they will learn about new methods for studying pastoralism
(macrobotanical, fecal spherulite, and pollen analyses). Results of this project
will be disseminated in Popova's dissertation, journal publications, and in a
field report prepared for the Russian Academy of Sciences. In addition, the
results will be presented at national and international archaeology meetings in
2005. Popova will also create a pollen database for Samara using the pollen
comparative collection at the Institute of Geography in Moscow. This database,
which will be part of a larger Russian-English project website, will be the
first easily accessible resource on pollen of the Russian steppe and forest-
steppe and thus important for future palynological research of the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;