* 0406016
* The Dafermos Regularization of a System of Conservation Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Xiao-Biao Lin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 227,998.00

Lin and Schecter propose to use the Dafermos regularization of a system of
conservation laws to approach difficult questions concerning systems of viscous
conservation laws. The former is an artificial mathematical construct; the
latter are ubiquitous in the sciences, where they represent conservation of
mass, momentum, energy, etc. in many situations. Building on their earlier work,
Lin and Schecter propose to complete their analysis of the spectrum of the
linearized Dafermos operator. They propose to use this analysis to determine the
stability of Riemann solutions as asymptotic states of viscous conservation
laws. They also propose to use it to analyze and improve Dafermos
regularization-based numerical methods for computing curves of Riemann
solutions. They propose to investigate issues in geometric singular perturbation
theory raised by the Dafermos regularization. In addition, Schecter and Lin will
continue work with collaborators on finding traveling wave solutions of viscous
conservation laws with reaction terms; subjects under investigation include
liquid-vapor phase transitions and methods of oil recovery that use heat. They
will investigate the use of the Dafermos regularization in such problems.

In many areas of science and technology, various situations involving fluid
flow, such as oil recovery and flow of thin liquid films used in manufacturing,
can be mathematically modeled by equations called viscous conservation laws. The
models become more tractable when one drops various terms, leaving only a system
of conservation laws. For these equations one can often construct explicit
solutions, called Riemann solutions, that frequently involve jumps that move
with varying speeds. An example from oil recovery using injection of water is a
moving front that is mostly water on one side and mostly oil on the other; the
water pushes the oil toward the well. One reason Riemann solutions are important
is that it is believed that in many situations, solutions of viscous
conservation laws, appropriately rescaled, tend to look more and more like
Riemann solutions as time goes on. However, there are only a few, rather
artificial situations is which this behavior is proved. A related fact is that
we do not have good mathematical techniques to check whether Riemann solutions
are stable, i.e., are really approached for a significant set of initial
configurations of the viscous conservation laws. Lin and Schecter have developed
a new approach to these issues using a different simplification of the viscous
conservation laws, the so-called Dafermos regularization. This equation admits a
smoothed-out version of the Riemann solution as a steady-state. In principle,
one can check its stability by relatively familiar mathematical methods. Lin and
Schecter plan to continue their work on the stability of these smoothed Riemann
solutions, and to use this work to approach the physically relevant situation.

