* 0406120
* GOALI: Interactions of Plasmas/Energetic Beams with Organic Masking Materials for Nanoscale Manufacturing
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* David Graves, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 435,729.00

In this GOALI project, researchers at University of Maryland, UC Berkeley, Lam
Research Corporation, Shipley Corporation, and ITC-Irst, Italy collaborate to
address chemical and morphological stability of nanoscale features produced in
organic materials exposed to plasma environments used for pattern transfer. The
overall goal is to establish an atomistic understanding of the interactions of
etching plasmas with organic materials used for patterning in nanoscale
fabrication/manufacturing, and elucidating the physical/chemical prerequisites
to prevent the introduction of feature surface and line edge roughness. The
approach includes: 1)experiments with a broad set of relevant organic materials,
supplied by Shipley, both model compounds and fully formulated resist systems to
cover materials of interest for various lithographic approaches; 2)plasma
processing of organic materials sets in a well-controlled, well-characterized
and modeled reactor at U. MD; 3)complementary ionic and radical beam exposures
at UC Berkeley; 4)comprehensive materials and surface and selected structure
analysis at ITC IRST; 5)molecular dynamics simulations of the plasma surface
interactions with model compounds at UC Berkeley; and 6)model
formulation/verification, including runs in industrial plasma processing
reactors at Lam Research. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of electronic materials with high
technological relevance. The interaction of reactive and/or energetic fluxes of
particles with macromolecules defining geometric features of devices on a
substrate is ubiquitous in nanofabrication, and in integrated circuits and
related industries. This project seeks to develop a framework of macromolecular
features required for optimized plasma-durability of organic mask images.
Fundamental understanding gained is expected to guide the development of next-
generation pattern transfer technology. The collaborative aspect of the project
provides special opportunities for education. Students will be trained in a
technologically relevant area, with a strong emphasis on fundamental,
mechanistic aspects of scientific/technical issues. Through the industrial
collaboration with Lam Research Corporation and Shipley Corporation students
will acquire a strong background in plasma technology, and advanced organic
materials and resist system design. The collaboration with ITC-Irst, Italy
provides an International component to the project, and the ability to leverage
advanced characterization facilities for material and surface analysis. The work
at the two universities is complementary, encompassing advanced facilities in
state-of-the-art processing, diagnostics, experimental and computer simulation
of plasma-surface interactions. The students and researchers involved in this
project will experience a teamwork-oriented research environment from both
academic and industrial perspectives, where complementarity of competencies
fosters a spirit of leveraging interdependency for empowered thinking.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;