* 0406979
* RUI: Development of Frame Extensions and their Applications, II
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Shidong Li, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2008
* USD 120,767.00

A continuing project relating to applications of pseudoframes for subspaces
(PFFS) is proposed. Pseudoframes are frame-like systems for the linear analysis
and synthesis of a subspace X. They differ from frames in that both analysis and
synthesis sequences are not necessarily contained in X. Theme 1 of the project
studies constructions of biorthogonal wavelets (via PFFS) that incorporate the
regularity requirement and the perfect reconstruction principle with practical
optimal design criteria. Theme 2 studies the application of the geometrical
properties of PFFS in simultaneous noise removal and signal reconstruction. PFFS
generate non-orthogonal projections onto X along any complementary subspace of
X. This enables a technique of noise removal by having the null space of the
projection to contain the noise subspace. Studies in theme 3 will be on the
applications of PFFS to sampling and linear inverse problems in noisy
environments. Given a convolution or (non-ideal) sampling operation, one can
apply PFFS to specify an available reconstruction subspace X for the best
(reconstruction) result. We will study examples of how accessible reconstruction
subspaces X should be selected and how reconstruction or deconvolution is
carried out via PFFS. Performance of these techniques will also be studied.

All signal analysis systems break a signal into components. The principal
novelty that we introduce to signal analysis is the idea of PFFS systems. PFFS
is a tool to analyze a subspace X while standing outside of X. In doing so, one
is given the freedom and additional "room" to perform signal decomposition and
analysis in X by using advanced means not available in X. Consequently, PFFS
systems are more flexible than most others in that they can be designed to
produce the most useful components for denoising and signal reconstruction
purposes. This study will develop multiple PFFS systems designed to solve a
number of different signal analysis problems in broadband communications, target
recognition, and signal/image restoration/de-blurring, etc. In particular, we
hope to advance the art of image compression to achieve high compression rate
with the least artificial distortions such as check-boarding effect (showing
checkerboards on the decompressed image) and ringing effect (showing blurring on
the edges). Similarly, we expect to develop tools for improving speech signal
compression by reducing leakage from one frequency band to another. More
generally, the methods we will develop can be tailored for noise removal and
accurate reconstruction of digital signals in a number of different signal
processing environments.