* 0406150
* U.S. - Argentina Program:  Workshop on  "Volcanic Lakes" in Caviahue, Argentina; November 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Johan Varekamp, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2006
* USD 21,250.00

0406150&lt;br/&gt;Varekamp&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.- Argentina award will
provide support for Dr. Johan C. Varekamp and his counterparts, Dr. Daniel H.
Delpino and Dr. Adriana M. Bermudez of University of Comahue, to organize a
workshop on Volcanic Lakes in Caviahue, Argentina. This workshop will be held
alongside the IAVCEI meeting held in nearby Pucon, Chile, drawing a wide cross-
section of volcanologists, limnologists, global change students and those that
work on life in extreme environments. They will discuss topics such as volcanic
monitoring, public health aspects of volcanic emissions that contaminate surface
waters, dangers associated with lake explosions, and impacts of volcanic signals
on reconstruction of paleo-climate signals in lake sediment sequences, and
others. The village of Caviahue has rivers and lake waters impacted by volcanic
inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meetings will bring together experts from all
over the world to evaluate the state-of-the-art in volcano forecasting. Research
on the extent and severity of volcanic pollution of surface waters in many less
developed countries with active volcanoes will also be
discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the Office
of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Petrology and
Geochemistry Program.&lt;br/&gt;