* 0406017
* Probability on Combinatorial Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Russell Lyons, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2008
* USD 258,000.00

0406017&lt;br/&gt;Lyons&lt;br/&gt; The PI is investigating questions in several
areas of probability on various combinatorial structures. Many of these
questions are set in a group-invariant context and the goal is to understand how
geometric or algebraic properties of the group are reflected in probabilistic
properties of the processes. The PI is working to establish basic topological
properties of higher-dimensional analogues of random forests and to establish
conjectures that arise by analogy to percolation. Phase transitions and entropy
of other determinantal dynamical systems are also under investigation. Coupling
questions are also at the heart of some stochastic comparison inequalities being
studied. Basic questions concern comparison of the behavior of random walks in
two random environments. &lt;br/&gt; The field of statistical physics is
concerned to a great extent with mathematical models of phase transitions (e.g.,
water to ice). Typically the model of space is a fixed lattice, for example, the
square lattice in two dimensions or the cubic lattice in three dimensions. This
lattice is infinite and possesses the mathematical properties of what is called
a group. The simplest model, known as percolation, originated in the study of
fluid flow in the ground and gas flow through a gas mask. One asks how far fluid
can flow, in particular, whether it can flow arbitrarily far. This, of course,
depends on the density of particles that block the flow; there is a phase
transition as the density increases, whereby after a certain point, with
probability 1, fluid can no longer flow arbitrarily far. One would like to know
where that point is and how the probability changes as this critical point is
approached. About 15 years ago, several researchers began investigating lattices
that are quite different from the usual Euclidean ones that are most familiar
and that most closely correspond to our physical world. These new lattices,
called nonamenable, are also usually based on groups. Such investigations began
out of the usual scientific and mathematical curiosity that drives fundamental
research. Within the last 8 years, this area of research, statistical physics on
nonamenable groups, has seen an explosion of interest. This area of research
turns out to be quite rich and to contain a large number of important
fundamental questions whose answers remain unknown. Already, there have been
applications to Euclidean lattices of some of the new ideas that have arisen in
response to the need to develop new tools for nonamenable groups. &lt;br/&gt;