* 0406934
* Classical Knot Concordance and Problems in Four-Manifold Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Charles Livingston, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2009
* USD 124,086.00

Two knots are defined to be concordant if the connected sum of one with
&lt;br/&gt;the mirror of the other is slice: that is, if the connected sum
bounds &lt;br/&gt;an embedded disk in the four-ball. The set of equivalence
classes &lt;br/&gt;forms what is called the concordance group of knots, first
studied in &lt;br/&gt;the early 1960s. It is known that this group is countable,
abelian, &lt;br/&gt;and that it maps onto Levine's algebraic concordance group,
which is &lt;br/&gt;isomorphic to an infinite direct sum of cyclic groups of
infinite order &lt;br/&gt;and of order 2 and 4. The kernel of this map is
infinitely generated. &lt;br/&gt;A main goal of the proposal is the continued
study of the concordance &lt;br/&gt;group and relationships between three-
dimensional properties of knots, &lt;br/&gt;such as symmetry and genus, and
their properties in the concordance &lt;br/&gt;group. Specific topics include
understanding the algebraic structure &lt;br/&gt;of the kernel of Levine's map
(in particular the part of the kernel &lt;br/&gt;generated by knots of Alexander
polynomial one), torsion in the &lt;br/&gt;concordance group, and the splitting
of Levine's homomorphism. To &lt;br/&gt;pursue this study the principal
investigator will develop and apply &lt;br/&gt;methods coming from the theory of
Heegaard Floer homology as defined by &lt;br/&gt;Oszvath and Szabo. Other topics
of study under the proposal relate to &lt;br/&gt;the interplay between the
fundamental groups of 4-manifolds and their &lt;br/&gt;topological structure:
for instance, a continued investigation of the &lt;br/&gt;Hausmann-Weinberger
invariant of a group, the minimal Euler &lt;br/&gt;characteristic of a closed
4-manifold having that group as its &lt;br/&gt;fundamental group, and its
generalizations, will be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal
is the study of knots. From a &lt;br/&gt;three-dimensional perspective,
questions about knots have been studied &lt;br/&gt;for over a hundred years.
More recently it has been recognized that &lt;br/&gt;the structure of a four-
dimensional space, a four-manifold, is &lt;br/&gt;connected to properties of
classical knots that can be associated to &lt;br/&gt;that four-manifold. A main
focus of this proposal is the study of &lt;br/&gt;those properties of knots that
are of relevant to four-dimensional &lt;br/&gt;topology; many of these
properties are encapsulated in something called &lt;br/&gt;the concordance group
of knots. Questions regarding this concordance &lt;br/&gt;group offer test cases
and motivation for the further development of &lt;br/&gt;techniques from general
four-manifold theory. In addition, the study &lt;br/&gt;of concordance brings to
the fore new and fascinating questions in the &lt;br/&gt;realm of classical
three-dimensional knot theory, relating for instance &lt;br/&gt;to questions of
knot symmetry and genus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;