* 0406946
* Diffeomorphism groups in dimensions 2 and 3
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Nikolai Ivanov, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2008
* USD 108,000.00

The proposal is devoted to diffeomorphisms groups of manifolds of
the&lt;br/&gt;dimension 2 and 3. In the dimension 2 the main problem is to
understand the&lt;br/&gt;algebraic structure of the groups of isotopy classes of
such&lt;br/&gt;diffeomorphisms, known as mapping class groups of surfaces or
Teichmueller&lt;br/&gt;modular groups. The proposal addresses some of the
central problems about&lt;br/&gt;the mapping class groups: understanding the
structure of the Torelli groups,&lt;br/&gt;braid groups of surfaces, and mapping
class groups themselves. The problems&lt;br/&gt;addressed in the proposal
are&lt;br/&gt;the ones which either hold the key for the fundamental
properties&lt;br/&gt;of the groups in question (like the problem of finite
presentability of the&lt;br/&gt;Torelli groups) or have connections with other
branches of mathematics (like&lt;br/&gt;the problem of understanding the Wajnryb
presentations from the point of&lt;br/&gt;view of algebraic K-theory and
topological quantum field theory). In the&lt;br/&gt;dimension 3 the key problem
is the understanding of the homotopy type of the&lt;br/&gt;diffeomorphisms
groups, especially of their connected components. The main&lt;br/&gt;goal here
is to relate the few available results in this area to the
more&lt;br/&gt;mainstream tools of topology and to extend, on this basis, these
results to&lt;br/&gt;other manifolds. A particular goal is to understand the
diffeomorphisms&lt;br/&gt;groups for all lens spaces, the simplest 3-manifolds
after spheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal belongs to the field of low
dimensional topology, which&lt;br/&gt;investigates the possible shapes of
objects (namely, the so-called&lt;br/&gt;manifolds) in dimension 2 and 3. These
shapes continue to be in the focus of&lt;br/&gt;the mathematical research for
more than a hundred years. In the last&lt;br/&gt;decades, the theory of
2-dimensional shapes, i.e. surfaces, acquired an&lt;br/&gt;additional
significance as a result of a promising physical "theory of&lt;br/&gt;everything
", namely the so-called string theory. In this theory, the&lt;br/&gt;elementary
constituents of matter are not point-like particles, but
rather&lt;br/&gt;collections of loops ("strings") sweeping a surface during
their motion. The&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional shapes provide the model for the
large-scale structure of the&lt;br/&gt;universe. Some previous results of the PI
in this direction have already&lt;br/&gt;attracted the attention of physicists
working in general relativity. In both&lt;br/&gt;dimensions, 2 and 3, one of the
key problem is to understand the possible&lt;br/&gt;symmetries of these shapes.
The proposal is devoted to some of the main&lt;br/&gt;aspects of this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;