* 0406119
* ADVANCE Fellows:  Effects of Host Age-Structure on the Development and Evolution of Infectious Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Maia Martcheva, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2005
* USD 33,676.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0137687&lt;br/&gt;PI: Martcheva, Maia
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Polytechnic University of New York&lt;br/&gt;Program:
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ADVANCE Fellows Award: Effects of Host
Age-Structure on the Development and Evolution on Infectious
Diseases&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this project focuses on
the study of the role of disease regulation and coevolution of host-parasite
systems in populations with structure through the use of partial differential
equations and dynamical systems theory. Research on this central objective is
carried out through three specific systems. The first model elucidates the role
of disease progression (age of infection) and super-infection in generating
complex dynamics and multiple equilibria with alternating stability. The second
investigates the impact of host heterogeneity on the evolution of infectivity
and multiple infections of the same host. The third application is concerned
with the role of host heterogeneity in the genetic diversity of a disease
pathogen. The impact of age-structure on coexistence of competing strains of the
same causative agent is investigated and so are the effects of complex dynamics
on the coevolution of microparasite virulence and host heterogeneity. The
educational component of this project is concerned with the integration of
mathematics and scientific computing, and their application to life sciences, in
the early and later stages of postsecondary education and training. As part of
the project the investigator will work for the incorporation of MATLAB into the
calculus curriculum through development of appropriate instructional materials.
The investigator will also give lectures and mentor student research projects in
a REU program in computational, mathematical and theoretical biology at Cornell
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maia Martcheva proposes activities to develop
an academic career in Mathematical Biology. The research plan focuses on the
study of the role of disease regulation and coevolution of host-parasite systems
in populations with structure through the use of mathematical modeling.
Historically strategies for disease control have relied on threshold conditions,
the most well-known of which requires that the reproductive number of the
disease (given by the average number of secondary infections caused by one
infective in a population of susceptibles) be smaller than one. The models
considered in this project demonstrate that this threshold condition may not be
sufficient for the eradication of the disease, particularly in case of diseases
with high mortality. An alternative threshold requires that the reproductive
number is reduced below another value (smaller than one), called transmission
threshold. The transmission threshold may be difficult to calculate but an
underestimate can be computed which gives a threshold condition leading to the
eradication of the disease. Martcheva's educational activities include
curriculum development and mentoring undergraduates in mathematical biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: January 28,
2002&lt;br/&gt;