* 0406516
* Algorithms for Macromolecular Modelling 2004
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Robert Skeel, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,548.00

Skeel 0406516

The investigator and his colleagues organize an international, multidisciplinary
workshop on computational methods for macromolecular modeling. The goal of this
workshop is to assess the state of the art in the development of algorithmic
tools for simulation of large molecules. Molecular simulation is now a standard
tool for studying vast plethora of chemical processes ranging from applications
in nanotechnology to the identification and prediction of biomolecular structure
and function. To date, many challenges have been addressed in an incomplete
manner, and there is a continuing demand for high quality algorithms and
supporting mathematical theory for high performance computations. The principal
topics of the meeting are algorithms for force evaluation, integration,
optimization, and sampling; methods for structure prediction, reaction paths,
free energy profiles and conformational dynamics; modeling of force fields and
implicit solvents; and multiscale techniques for quantum-classical and
classical-elastic models. Exchange of information about the latest results
stimulates research progress and avoids duplicate efforts, especially because
there are infrequent international meetings devoted to this topic. Even more, it
makes chemical and life scientists aware of valuable computational and
mathematical techniques; and at the same time, it makes mathematical scientists
aware of the specific nature of the problems and exposes them to insights into
their solution. The program for the meeting, including abstracts and a report of
the open discussion, is made available on the web. The meeting consists of
plenary talks by leading experts, parallel talks by junior and senior
researchers, and a structured discussion session. Most of those supported by
this grant are junior researchers or members of underrepresented groups.

Computer simulations can provide information about the geometry and behavior of
biomolecules and other large molecules that is difficult to obtain
experimentally. Such information is central to biotechnology, materials science,
and nanotechnology. However, current computational methods often consume up to
weeks of computer time and are often of limited reliability. To consider these
issues, the investigator and his colleagues organize the multidisciplinary,
international workshop "Algorithms for Macromolecular Modelling" on August
18-21, 2004 at the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom. The purpose of
the workshop is to stimulate research on the construction of yet faster and more
reliable methods for implementation in simulation software. This is best
achieved by combining the expertise of mathematical scientists with the physical
insights of chemical and life scientists. This workshop is almost unique in the
emphasis that is gives to both the needs of the science and the mathematical
details of the simulation software. The meeting consists of plenary talks by
leading experts, parallel talks by junior and senior researchers, and a
structured discussion session. This project supports travel for United States
participants in the workshop; most of those supported are junior researchers or
members of underrepresented groups. The results of the workshop are disseminated
through a dedicated website. In addition, the collected scientific articles by
the invited speakers will be published in Springer Verlag's Lecture Notes series
in Computational Science and Engineering (LNCSE).