* 0406491
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Computational Study of Chemical Reactions and Material Modification during Polyatomic-Ion and Cluster-Surface Deposition
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Susan Sinnott, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,150.00

OISE-0406491&lt;br/&gt;Sinnott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a one-
year collaborative research project between Professor Susan Sinnott of the
University of Florida in Gainesville and Professor Tamotsu Kondow at Toyota
Technological Institute in Japan. They will be undertaking a computational study
of chemical reactions and material modification during polyatomic-ion and
cluster-surface deposition. They will look at the novel size-specific reactions
that occur in gas solvent assisted chemistry when organic molecules and
molecular clusters are deposited on metal clusters. The studies aim to model
film deposition and surface modification issues relevant to ongoing experimental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The US
researchers are the theoreticians and the Japanese are the experimentalists. The
project has the potential to provide new understanding that will be important
for industrial materials processing. Through the exchange of ideas and
technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. The project includes the
participation of a graduate student and an undergraduate student. Results of the
research will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific journals.
&lt;br/&gt;