* 0406758
* The ORION Center for Advance Accelerator and Beam Physics Research
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2007
* Chan Joshi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Morris Pripstein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 60,001.00

This proposal from a Stanford/UCLA/USC/SLAC collaboration requests support for a
multi-agency Center, called the ORION Center, devoted to advanced accelerator
and beam physics research. Beam physics research has the goal of understanding
the physics and developing the technologies of future particle accelerators.
Accelerator concepts based on plasmas and lasers have the promise of continuing
the growth in available energy, improving beam brightness, and reaching
extraordinary energy densities. Such advances will have the potential of far
reaching impact on sciences ranging from particle physics to coherent radiation
generation to high energy density plasma science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
foundation of the ORION Center will be specialized accelerators and
infrastructure at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) that will be
available to the Center. Research will begin with experiments at the Final Focus
Test Beam (FFTB), which is an extensively instrumented beamline at the end of
the SLAC main linear accelerator (linac) that can deliver 30 GeV electron and
positron beams. The FFTB will be available for at least one more year until it
is needed for X-ray FEL research. It is an exceptional facility for experiments
in non-linear positron/matter and electron/matter interactions. Understanding
these interactions is crucial for plasma based high-energy colliders, and these
experiments are an integral part of the ORION Center. In the longer-term,
experimental activities will be concentrated at the ORION Research Facility,
which will be based on the Next Linear Collider Test Accelerator (NLCTA), an
operating linac at SLAC capable of providing beams from 50 to 350 MeV. The ORION
Facility will be user-oriented and open to experimenters studying all aspects of
advanced accelerator science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The ambition of the ORION Center is to perform breakthrough beam
physics, high energy density plasma, and radiation generation research. If
successful, it will lead to devices that impact particle physics and basic
research in several fields. A novel outreach program will reach underrepresented
students and teachers through the California community college system.
&lt;br/&gt;