* 0406169
* A Synthesis of Objective Bayesian and Designed Based Methods for Finite Population Sampling
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Glen Meeden, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2008
* USD 201,292.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;proposal: 0406169&lt;br/&gt;PI: Glen
Meeden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A synthesis of objective
Bayesian and designed based methods &lt;br/&gt; for finite population
sampling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Project Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
frequentist or design approach to finite population sampling
prior&lt;br/&gt;information is incorporated in the sampling design. However in
some cases &lt;br/&gt;when calculating estimates the design weights need to be
readjusted, and &lt;br/&gt;then it can be difficult to find sensible estimates
of variance.&lt;br/&gt;In the Bayesian approach prior information is
incorporated through&lt;br/&gt;a prior distribution. Since the posterior
distribution does not depend &lt;br/&gt;on the design it has been difficult to
theoretically reconcile the &lt;br/&gt;two approaches. The Polya posterior is an
objective Bayesian approach &lt;br/&gt;to finite population sampling that is
appropriate when little&lt;br/&gt;or no prior information is available. The
investigator is developing &lt;br/&gt;a synthesis of this objective Bayesian
approach and the design&lt;br/&gt;based approach. It has two main threads. In
the first the Polya &lt;br/&gt;posterior is extended to problems where it cannot
be applied directly &lt;br/&gt;because of additional prior information contained
in auxiliary&lt;br/&gt;variables. This leads to a constrained or
restricted&lt;br/&gt;version of the Polya posterior. In the second Bayesian
models are&lt;br/&gt;developed which directly include the design in the
specification of the &lt;br/&gt;prior. Such models are a generalization of the
Polya &lt;br/&gt;posterior and using them one can objectively incorporate
&lt;br/&gt;into a prior the same kind of information that is encapsulated in a
design.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is developing the underlying theory and
methods to&lt;br/&gt;simulate from these objective posteriors so that estimators
can be &lt;br/&gt;found in practice and their frequentist properties studied.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most basic problems of statistics is
making an inference &lt;br/&gt;about a population based on a sample collected
from the population.&lt;br/&gt;When little is known about the population the
mean of the&lt;br/&gt;values in a random sample is used as an estimate of the
population&lt;br/&gt;mean. However in addition to the estimate one also needs a
&lt;br/&gt;sensible measure of its uncertainty or variance. In
most&lt;br/&gt;situations there is prior information available about the
population. &lt;br/&gt;This information should be used in deciding what units
are to be &lt;br/&gt;included in the sample, the value of the estimate and the
appropriate &lt;br/&gt;measure of uncertainty. The investigator is working on a
synthesis &lt;br/&gt;of the two standard approaches to these problems. The
results should make &lt;br/&gt;more effective use of available prior information
than present methods.&lt;br/&gt;Because of the many surveys done each year by
government and others &lt;br/&gt;improving survey practice is of great practical
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;