* 0406323
* Self-Organized Dynamics of Superconducting Flux
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Kevin Bassler, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 186,000.00

This award supports theoretical research on fundamental condensed matter
physics. The collective transport of granular objects driven through a
disordered medium is often intermittent, governed by avalanches. The avalanches
can be small, or system-wide, or they can exhibit scaling behavior.
Understanding avalanche dynamics is of fundamental theoretical and technological
importance to a variety of subjects including river hydrology,
superconductivity, solar flares, and Internet traffic. Much of the theoretical
effort to understand avalanche dynamics has focused on the behavior of cellular
"sandpile" models. Cellular models provide a coarse-grained physical description
that naturally incorporates both the granularity of the objects and the
threshold nature of the breakdown process. They also often have the benefit of
being numerically tractable, making it possible to study their behavior over a
range of length and time scales, which is needed to detect the presence or
absence of scaling, and to determine the universal features of the dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discrete, cellular models will be used to study the
nonlinear transport properties of magnetic vortices driven through a type II
superconductor, and to make quantifiable connection with experiments. It has
been suggested that, because of the repulsive interactions between vortices, and
the attractive pinning between vortices and lattice defects or impurities, the
dynamics of quantized vortices in a superconductor is analogous to that of
grains in a pile of sand. Additionally, the over-damped motion of vortices in
most experiments is captured by the threshold dynamics of most sandpile type
cellular models. Therefore, the driven dynamics of magnetic vortices is an ideal
physical system to attempt to model with cellular models. Furthermore, a number
of experiments characterizing vortex dynamics present opportunities for
establishing and exploring the connection between cellular models and the large-
scale behavior of superconducting vortices. By establishing that connection, the
universal aspects of the dynamics of a variety of other nonequilibrium systems
may also become better understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on
existing results that have developed a cellular model for vortex dynamics, and
demonstrated that it captures at least some of the large-scale properties,
including some quantitative results, of the nonlinear transport in
superconductors that are observed experimentally. In the new work, large-scale
numerical simulations will be used to further explore the connection between the
universal dynamics of cellular models and of superconducting vortices by
extending our existing model to study a variety of novel phenomena observed in
type II superconductors. In particular, the existing model will be extended to
account for thermal effects caused by the resistive heating of vortex motion,
and to describe the three-dimensional nature of vortices. Studies are proposed
to model experiments that measure the scaling properties of flux penetration,
including the formation of dendrites, and of distributions of voltage noise and
vortex flow. Additionally, studies exploring the relationship of the universal
dynamics of the cellular model, and of vortex dynamics, to other physical
systems are proposed. Novel numerical algorithms will be employed to achieve
massively parallel simulations of the models. Collaborations with experimental
groups are also planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will be involved
in the project and the research will enhance efforts to incorporate computation
into the graduate physics curriculum. An interactive website will be developed
to promote outreach. Talks will be given at local high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports fundamental condensed matter
physics. The research investigates, primarily using computational methods, the
transport of magnetic vortices in superconductors. This problem is of interest
for both basic and applied reasons. The theoretical approach utilizes the
connection between this problem and that of the motions of grains of sand in a
sandpile. A strong educational and outreach program is planned as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;