* 0406347
* Genome Sequence for Neurospora crassa
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Bruce Birren, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2007
* USD 76,646.00

A genome contains all the instructions needed to define the biological aspects
of an organism. The ability to read the DNA sequence of genes initiated a
revolution in molecular biology. Recent technological advances have made it
possible to determine rapidly the sequence not only of individual genes but also
of entire genomes. This is critical for understanding cellular processes because
the expression and function of each individual gene reflects complex regulatory
pathways encoded by multiple interacting genes. The availability of genomic
sequence is the single most important resource for understanding the biology of
an organism. The genome of the fungus Neurospora crassa will be sequenced
through a partnership between the Whitehead Institute/MIT Center for Genome
Research (WI-CGR) and members of the Neurospora research community. The
objectives of this study are to determine within one year the complete sequence
of the 43 Mb Neurospora genome, and to make a highly accurate version of this
sequence publicly available. This work will produce annotated sequence and large
insert clones with endpoints precisely known with respect to the sequence that
can be used for ongoing functional studies. While the result will be a clear
boost in research productivity, sequencing the Neurospora genome is not, in
itself, a research activity. It is a production activity in which proven methods
will be applied at a specified rate to achieve a predetermined and easily
measured product. The methods for producing the sequence, including shotgun
sequencing, detection, and assembly, and the requisite database tools for
handling the sequence are already employed at WI-CGR at a scale considerably
greater than is necessary for the Neurospora project. WI-CGR has a long history
of managing successful large scale projects for genome mapping and sequencing
and is engaged in several genome sequencing projects, including human and mouse.
The WI-CGR employs factory-style laboratory automation, automated software for
data collection and analysis and a production environment that stresses high
quality and reliable delivery at extremely high-throughput. The WI-CGR has
worked aggressively to become the most efficient publicly funded high-throughput
sequencing center in the world, as well as the leader in sequence output. The
low cost of this project reflects the economies of scale, in which highly
efficient utilization of personnel, equipment and reagents provides great cost
savings on a per read basis. The low repeat content of Neurospora makes it
ideally suited to whole genome shotgun sequencing, in which paired reads from
the ends of random plasmid clones are assembled. In the first phase of the
project approximately 1.2 million sequencing reads will be generated and
assembled to provide on average 9X depth of coverage of the genome. Subsequent
work involves both automatically-selected and human-directed sequence reads
needed to close gaps and attain uniformly high sequence quality. Sequence
assemblies corresponding to 3X, 6X, and 9X depth of coverage will be publicly
released during shotgun sequencing and annotation and verification of the
sequence assembly will commence with the 9X assembly. The biological value of
this sequence is extraordinarily high because of the widespread use of
Neurospora as an experimental system, the applicability of this organism to
problems not addressable with other model organisms, the well developed genetic
methods that will permit researchers to exploit the sequence for further
experimentation, and the immediate boost it will provide to research on a large
number of related organisms of economic and biological importance.