* 0406183
* Critical Tests of Stellar Evolution Theory
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Guillermo Torres, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 06/30/2007
* USD 289,653.00

Despite significant advances in recent decades in our understanding of the
evolution and internal structure of stars, many aspects of theory remain
untested or have been shown to disagree with observations. Evolutionary models
are widely used by astronomers to infer various properties of stars such as
their masses, ages, or metallicities, but our confidence in these models is
limited to some extent by those disagreements and by a lack of observational
constraints. The validation of theory is best made through a detailed comparison
with accurate measurements of quantities such as the stellar mass, the radius,
the effective temperatures, or the luminosities, of stars in carefully selected
binary systems of known chemical composition. However these determinations are
not trivial to make with the required precision. In this project, high quality
spectroscopic, photometric, or astrometric observations are being obtained and
analyzed to make the determinations of the absolute stellar properties with
relative errors, in the case of the masses and radii, at the current state-of-
the-art, and to perform "critical tests" of stellar evolution theory. More than
that, the goal is to provide so many observational constraints for a given
binary system that only the most realistic sets of models (if any) may satisfy
all the observations within the errors. Key binary systems are being identified
that provide the best tests of the models, with particular emphasis on low-mass
stars, evolved stars and very young (pre-main-sequence) stars for which
virtually no constraints are available, as well as on stars with chemical
compositions very different from the Sun (metal-
poor).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This project is advancing our
understanding of several poorly known areas of stellar astrophysics such as
convection (mixing length theory, overshooting), internal structure, stellar
rotation, mass loss, and tidal evolution, allowing much more reliable
determinations of parameters such as the ages of stars. These stellar parameters
have profound cosmological implications and provide a more solid framework for
the study of the origin and evolution of substellar objects such as brown dwarfs
and extrasolar planets, subjects of great interest for the public and scientists
alike. The dissemination of the results to the scientific community, mainly in
the form of peer-reviewed publications, is an integral part of this work. It
provides excellent opportunities for training by integrating front-line research
into the experience of learning, allowing students to actively participate in
all aspects of the study of crucial binary systems.&lt;br/&gt;