* 0406384
* NGS:  A Design Environment for Single Chip Heterogeneous Multiprocessors
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Donald Thomas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

Within the next five years, it will be possible to provide enough transistors on
a single chip for on the order of a hundred ARM-equivalent processors. At that
point, individual, programmable processors will be like registers were to early
VLSI design - building blocks within a larger organizing framework. The
investigators refer to this class of devices as Programmable Heterogeneous
Multiprocessors (PHMs), emphasizing that not only will individual processors on
the chip be programmable, but collections of processors on the chip as well as
the chip as a whole must be considered programmable. Applications that might
appear on such devices include that of current cell phones, current personal
digital assistant (PDA) applications, global positioning system (GPS) sensing,
Bluetooth, motion sensing, ad hoc networking, 3-D image
processing,&lt;br/&gt;compression/decompression, security, multimedia and a
broad set of human computer interaction&lt;br/&gt;(HCI) software. Ubiquitous and
pervasive computing will produce newer scenarios with even more complex
functionality. But these possibilities are limited by the ability to design and
technically realize these scenarios in the individual space and power-
constrained computing devices. &lt;br/&gt;The class of single-chip computing
that will leave the desktop in meeting the needs of future computing poses
distinctly different programming and design challenges from board and network-
level heterogeneous multiprocessors because a single chip is a finite resource,
the hardware design will be semi-custom, and coordination of system resources
will be required. All of these speak to levels of optimization that will be
required for consumer electronic devices because of their physical
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate new design
strategies that leverage the next level of design that is enabled as system
performance can be evaluated with reduced modeling detail. The approach will
define novel views of the proposed functionality and multiprocessor
architecture, enabling simulation and optimization of the whole system's
performance. Novel, proposed strategies include the development of design
scenarios, which are the answer to the currently separate views of testbenches
that exercise computer systems and benchmarks that are used to evaluate
programmable designs, and the enabling of novel system-level strategies to save
power by using a larger number of simpler processors that execute at lower clock
rates or with sophisticated multiprocessor-level scheduling strategies. While
ambitious, the project's vision is&lt;br/&gt;enabled because of prior work in
developing a novel simulator that capture the performance interactions of
concurrent software executing on concurrent hardware using a layered
model.&lt;br/&gt;