* 0406999
* SGER: Developing Metal-Tagged DNA Probes for High Resolution Imaging of Microbial Phylotype Distributions and Nanoscale Mineral/Microbe Associations in Environmental Samples
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Rachel Haymon, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2006
* USD 101,302.00

ABSTRACT

High-resolution electron microscope (EM) images greatly magnify microbes and
their microhabitats, and reveal minute features of microbial cells and their
material surroundings. EM images potentially are of great use in studying how
microbes interact with natural and man-made materials. However, the many types
of microorganisms co-existing in natural samples typically cannot be
distinguished from one another based on appearance alone. Furthermore, when
"zoomed out" it is not possible to see the overall distribution of microbes in
EM-mounted samples. A means of visually distinguishing specific genetic types of
microbes in EM images must be invented to fully exploit the potential of
electron microscopy for learning about in situ microbial distribution and
activity in the environment. A grant has been awarded to Profs. Rachel M. Haymon
and Patricia Holden at University of California, Santa Barbara, and to Dr.
Stefan Sievert at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, for development of
metallic "tags" that will attach to DNA sequences of selected microbes. When the
metals are excited by electron beams used to generate EM images, the metals will
emit X-rays and permit unambiguous visual identification of the targeted
organisms at both high and low magnifications. This method will solve the
existing problems in distinguishing spatial distributions and identities of
microbes imaged with electron beams, and will make it possible to understand
associations of microbes and minerals at small scales that are relevant to
microbial life.

Applications of the proposed metal-tagged DNA probes to understanding how
microbes interact with the environment are vast. It is expected that the
proposed method will become a standard tool for studying the function, ecology,
and environmental impact of microbial activities in natural environments. For
example, Drs. Haymon, Holden, and Sievert hope to apply this new technique to
studies of microbes in soils, where microbes are important to biodegradation of
toxic anthropogenic compounds, and in hydrothermal systems, where microbes
interact with geologic materials under extreme thermal and chemical conditions.