* 0406127
* Polymer-Based Nanocomposites: An Opportunity for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Students
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Peggy Cebe, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2007
* USD 132,000.00

This project provides an opportunity for deaf and hard of hearing students to
participate in classroom and laboratory research work in the field of polymers.
A small group of college-age students will perform an internship at Tufts
University for six weeks during the summer. The classroom and laboratory
components address the chemistry and physics of polymer molecules,
crystallization and melting of polymers, the interaction of X-rays and light
with polymers, mechanical properties of polymers, and the connection between
thermal processing, structure, and ultimate properties of polymers. To prepare
the students for participation in the scientific community, a strong component
of pre-professional training is incorporated, including discussion of integrity
in the performance of research and in scholarship. The goals of the laboratory
research component are to: expose the students to the laboratory environment;
introduce them to the concepts of formulating and testing hypotheses; assist
students to conduct systematic studies while controlling variables; illustrate
the use of modern analytical equipment; and demonstrate the connection between
processing variables, structure, and properties. &lt;br/&gt;The students will
make and characterize polymer-based nanocomposite films comprising a
semicrystalline polymer matrix and an organically modified silicate (OMS). This
research will contribute to a fundamental understanding of the effects of OMS on
the structure and properties of semicrystalline polymers.&lt;br/&gt;The program
is aimed at a disadvantaged minority population, of deaf and hard of hearing
college age students. The broader impact will be to bring deaf and hard of
hearing students into the larger scientific community as professionals, by
providing positive scientific experiences at a formative time in their
educational lives. The long-range goal of the proposed program is to increase
participation of deaf and hard of hearing students in science and engineering,
and provide enrichment and mentoring for these students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;