* 0406142
* 9th International Conference on Difference Equations and Applications  (Main Theme: Mathematical Biology)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Robert Sacker, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 27,500.00

Sacker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and colleagues organize an
international conference on&lt;br/&gt;difference equations. This conference,
ninth in a sequence, is tbe first&lt;br/&gt;one with a mathematical biology
theme. The meeting brings together both&lt;br/&gt;experts and novices in the
theory and application of difference equations,&lt;br/&gt;and experts in
mathematical modeling of biological systems. In addition to&lt;br/&gt;presenting
new results, they explore the role of difference equations in&lt;br/&gt;modeling
biological phenomena and the advances in difference equation&lt;br/&gt;theory
stimulated by biological models. The conference features 14
plenary&lt;br/&gt;talks and about 40 shorter talks. Topics covered include
population&lt;br/&gt;biology, population genetics, mathematical ecology,
epidemiology,&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic behavior, stability, and complex nonlinear
dynamics including&lt;br/&gt;chaos. Using the successful model implemented at
the Society of&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Biology conferences, the meeting includes
a mentoring program&lt;br/&gt;for student and postdoc participants. Special
efforts are made to recruit&lt;br/&gt;a diversity of participants from under-
represented groups. Proceedings of&lt;br/&gt;the conference, including a session
on future directions, are published. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Difference equations
are apparently simple ways to describe the changes in&lt;br/&gt;a system from
time to time. They are analogous to differential equations,&lt;br/&gt;which
include derivatives that describe the instantaneous changes of
the&lt;br/&gt;variables of the system. Unlike differential equations, however,
the&lt;br/&gt;changes in variables of a difference equation need not be thought
of as&lt;br/&gt;instantaneous. This makes difference equations well suited to
model a wide&lt;br/&gt;variety of phenomena that occur in distinct stages, such
as changes between&lt;br/&gt;generations of plants or animals. The principal
investigator and his&lt;br/&gt;colleagues organize a conference about recent
advances in the theory of&lt;br/&gt;difference equations, the application of
difference equations to modeling&lt;br/&gt;of biological phenomena, and new
mathematical questions about difference&lt;br/&gt;equations that arise in the
course of this modeling. Emphasis is given to&lt;br/&gt;applications in
population biology, genetics, ecology, and epidemiology. &lt;br/&gt;The meeting
involves students and postdocs, including participants from&lt;br/&gt;under-
represented groups. Proceedings of the meeting are published,&lt;br/&gt;helping
to disseminate more widely the results of the conference. &lt;br/&gt;