* 0406008
* Special Projects:  Acquisition, Preservation and Re-use of Programmatic Knowledge
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Avelino Gonzalez, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 412,058.00

Gonzalez, Avelino J. University of Central Florida Special Project: Acquisition,
Preservation, and Re-Use of Programmatic Knowledge . This proposal, striving to
provide tools and methods to manage essential knowledge in business
organizations, aims at preserving valuable and volatile knowledge in a
knowledge-based medium for ease in re-use. The work represents a controlled
investigation into the process of managing knowledge using as a case study the
programmatic knowledge of NSF's Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers
program (I/UCRC) enabling future re-use of the elicited knowledge. Programmatic
knowledge will be elicited from the subject matter experts at the NSF I/UCRC
program office as well as at various centers. The knowledge will be incorporated
into a knowledge-based system for preservation and reuse. After validating and
verifying the system, training will ensue. Rigorously measuring the benefits, an
evaluation of its projected usefulness will follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit and contributions of the proposed project lie in the long-
term case study about the application of modern knowledge-based techniques in
knowledge management within the real-world domain. Long-term case studies can
provide invaluable experience in knowledge elicitation, representation, and re-
use for the knowledge management community. These studies are scarce in the
published literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact is addressed through
students and potential generalization of the process to other organizations. The
project involves two graduate students in computer engineering addressing
elicitation and development. One, focusing in knowledge elicitation, will reside
in DC/VA area and will attend and follow closely the site visits necessary for
the program. The other, focusing in validation and verification, will receive
the knowledge and contribute in the development of the expert system. Moreover,
the case study will be incorporated into classes in knowledge
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;