* 0406231
* Complex Transient Patterns in Phase-Field Models
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Thomas Wanner, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,002.00

Proposal: DMS-0406231 PI: Thomas Wanner Institution: George Mason University
Title: Complex Transient Patterns in Phase-Field Models

ABSTRACT

Solidification and melting processes can generate complicated and unstable
material microstructures which evolve with time. This project is concerned with
the mathematical study of complex microstructures that can be observed in
fundamental phase-field models for solidification and melting processes. In
addition to classical and thermodynamically consistent models, the study
considers recent stochastic and nonlocal extensions. The latter incorporate the
effects of thermal noise and long-range interactions, thereby addressing two key
shortcomings of the classical phase-field models. The PI obtains a detailed
mathematical description of the microstructure dynamics, which explains both the
formation of the microstructures and key characteristics of their complex
geometry. He studies how noise and long-range interactions influence the pattern
geometry. Furthermore, in collaboration with a graduate student, the PI develops
numerical simulation tools to treat stochastic and nonlocal effects.

In recent years, phase-field modeling has proved to be a valuable tool for
simulating and predicting a variety of processes in materials science. The
proposed research provides tools that can be used for precisely predicting
microstructure changes and therefore is of interest for materials design and the
understanding of small-scale biological and physical processes. Since the
microstructure geometry of modern materials has direct implications for
macroscopic material properties, the results of this project can offer help in
the development of new high performance materials, which is vital to economic
and other national interests. Especially due to the inclusion of thermal noise
and long-range interactions, the study allows for the treatment of more
realistic models. While the proposed research is focused on a specific
situation, its impact reaches well beyond the materials science application.
Immediate applications of the project can be expected in the field of
mathematical biology. Both the formation of complicated protein patterns inside
bacteria and aspects of neural pattern formation are described by phase-field-
type models. In addition, the proposed activities offer an excellent framework
for integrating research and education at several levels, including
undergraduate and graduate research.