* 0406007
* Free Surface Fluid Mechanics and Electromagnetic Scattering: Stable, High-Order Perturbation Techniques
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,08/31/2005
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2005
* USD 90,471.00

Abstract 0406007, Nicholls, University of Notre Dame

Free Surface Fluid Mechanics and Electromagnetic Scattering: Stable, High-Order
Perturbation Techniques

The Principal Investigator (PI) proposes the investigation of fundamental
phenomena in free-surface ideal fluid flows, and electromagnetic and acoustic
scattering. Among the applications are the efficient, stable, high-order
computation of traveling three-dimensional, capillary-gravity water waves, and a
numerical investigation of their dynamic stability. Another problem the PI will
address is the imposition of "non-reflecting" boundary conditions for
differential equations posed on unbounded domains, particularly in the setting
of electromagnetic and acoustic scattering. The PI also proposes a synthesis of
two major areas of his research through the study of backscattering returns of
electromagnetic radiation from traveling ocean waves. A unifying element in this
project, and the principal numerical tool the PI will employ, is a class of
boundary perturbation methods first introduced by O. Bruno & F. Reitich in the
context of numerical simulation of acoustic and electromagnetic scattering
problems. These methods have subsequently been significantly refined and
stabilized by Reitich and the PI for the BVP of computing Dirichlet-Neumann
operators, and approximating scattering configurations. Among these refinements,
the PI & Reitich developed the method of "Transformed Field Expansions" (TFE)
which enables the reliable, high-order, stable perturbative computation of BVP
and FBP. While this method is extremely successful in resolving simulations well
outside the reach of competing methods, it is somewhat disadvantaged in terms of
computational complexity in comparison to other techniques (e.g. boundary
integrals/elements). A final project that the PI proposes is the investigation
of two refinements of this TFE approach to increase its efficiency.

Fixed and free boundary problems arise in all areas of engineering and the
sciences. Two particular instances of relevance in this proposal are the classic
free boundary problem of the motion of surface waves on a large body of water
(e.g. a lake, sea, or ocean), and the fixed boundary problem of scattering of
electromagnetic or acoustic waves from an irregular surface. The accurate and
reliable simulation of surface waves is used not only to model the capabilities
of open-ocean structures (e.g. oil platforms), but also in the study of
transport of pollutants and other substances of environmental interest across
lakes, seas, and oceans. Applications of electromagnetic and acoustic scattering
come in problems of radar, imaging, and sensing to name just a few. Many
numerical techniques are available for the simulation of these problems and one
of the goals of this proposal is the utilization and improvement of a class of
techniques discovered and refined by the Principal Investigator (PI) and
collaborators. In particular, when the problems mentioned above are simulated in
full three dimensions, the computations become quite intensive and the issues
truly become those of high-performance computing.

