* 0406573
* Noncommutative Algebraic Invariants in Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Tim Cochran, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2007
* USD 231,822.00

Noncommutative Algebraic Invariants in Low-Dimensional Topology

This project will discover the topological significance of certain highly
noncommutative algebraic invariants of low-dimensional manifolds. If X is a
topological space and G is its fundamental group, then associated to any normal
subgroup H of G is a covering space of X whose homology groups are modules over
the integral group ring of the quotient group G/H. When G/H is commutative,
these modules have played a central role in the applications of algebraic
topology to the problems of topology. For example, if X is the exterior of a
link L of circles in S3 and H is the commutator subgroup, then these modules are
called Alexander modules of L. This project investigates these "higher-order"
modules in more general situations, especially where the subgroup H is an
element of the derived series of G. Families of modules that generalize the
Alexander module are thus obtained. Although these are modules over
noncommutative rings, they share many important properties with the Alexander
module. If X is a manifold then there are also Hermitian forms and linking forms
defined on these modules, giving additional structure. This project investigates
these structures and their applications. With the help of techniques of
noncommutative algebra and functional analysis, one observes new noncommutative
phenomena in knot theory, 3-dimensional manifolds, 4-dimensional manifolds and
in surface homeomorphisms. In particular the project will find more structure in
the group of topological concordance classes of knots; find structure in the
monoid of all isotopy classes of knots; will investigate this monoid modulo
certain equivalence relations involving "gropes"; will find new information
about the depth of foliations of 3-manifolds, and will find new invariants of
3-manifolds, and mapping class groups.

With the advent of quantum mechanics, scientists in the late twentieth century
have become increasingly aware that describing the structure of the universe
will necessitate noncommutative mathematics. In multiplying numbers, 2 times 3 =
3 times 2. But particles are now known to behave more like matrices, and matrix
multiplication is not commutative, i.e. AB is not in general equal to BA. Yet,
until recently, even in the field of mathematics itself commutative algebra and
linear techniques have played the greater role, simply because noncommutative
algebra is very difficult. To understand the finer structure of 4-dimensional
space-time, of 3-dimensional space and of string theory, it will be necessary to
understand the full role of noncommutative algebraic structures. This project
lays the mathematical f oundations for the use of noncommutative algebraic
topology in the study of 3 and 4-dimensional manifolds and in knot theory. In
addition, since a high percentage of the research assistants of the PI are U.S.
women, and since women are under-represented in the field of research
mathematics, this project will contribute to the increase in the scientific
potential of the United States.

