* 0406143
* Collaborative Research:  Statistical Analysis on Manifolds:  A Nonparametric Approach for Shapes and Images
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Rabindra Bhattacharya, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2007
* USD 162,358.00

The shape or image of an object may be recorded digitally by a finite
&lt;br/&gt;number k of landmarks or positions on the object, called a k-ad. The
space &lt;br/&gt;of orbits under rotation and translation of k-ads is the size-
and-shape &lt;br/&gt;space. If one includes scaling with rotation and
translation, then the &lt;br/&gt;space of orbits under the resulting group of
transformations on the k-ads&lt;br/&gt;is the shape space. These are examples of
Riemannian manifolds, some with &lt;br/&gt;singularities. One approach proposed
here for inference about a &lt;br/&gt;distribution on a general differentiable
or Riemannian manifold M, based &lt;br/&gt;on a random sample from it, is to
carry out a multivariate analysis of the &lt;br/&gt;image under the so-called
Log map on one or more tangent spaces to M. &lt;br/&gt;Apart from this intrinsic
approach, less computation intensive extrinsic &lt;br/&gt;procedures based on
embeddings in Euclidean spaces are investigated. The &lt;br/&gt;project explores
consistency and asymptotic distribution theory on &lt;br/&gt;manifolds for
robust tests and confidence regions from both points of &lt;br/&gt;view--
intrinsic and extrinsic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; One motivation for this study
comes from the need to identify &lt;br/&gt;deformations or shape changes for
purposes of medical diagnosis and &lt;br/&gt;biomorphology. Immediate
applications also arise to machine vision and &lt;br/&gt;pattern recognition.
There are significant impacts of this research on &lt;br/&gt;these and many
other fields. Another important goal of this project is to &lt;br/&gt;train
students in the newly developed methodologies, leading to the
&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of knowledge gained through this research and the
creation &lt;br/&gt;of a body of technicians and experts to apply it.&lt;br/&gt;