* 0406816
* Probing the Remarkable Neighborhood of the Galactic Center's Supermassive Black Hole with Diffraction-Limited Studies of Stars, Dark Matter, and Accreting Gas
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Andrea Ghez, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Katharina Lodders
* 06/30/2010
* USD 990,859.00

Probing the Remarkable Neighborhood of the Galactic Center's Supermassive Black
Hole with Diffraction-Limited Studies of Stars, Dark Matter, and Accreting Gas

ABSTRACT

AST 0406816 Ghez

Dr. Andrea Ghez at the University of California, Los Angeles will undertake a
continuing program of high-resolution studies of the center of our Galaxy. There
are four primary goals to the work: 1) to use short-period orbits of stars near
the Galactic center black hole, to determine an accurate value of the Sun-
Galactic center distance by the end of the proposed study; 2) to investigate how
massive young stars can be present in the central region of the Galaxy, where
strong tidal forces should counteract gravitational collapse that leads to star
formation; 3) to use stellar orbits to derive a limit to changes the precession
of stellar orbits, which could be due to an extended dark mass distribution; and
4) to characterize the innermost portions of the accretion flow onto the black
hole. The proposed research will be done with the Keck telescopes, using a
combination of diffraction-limited imaging from 1-20 microns as well as near-
infrared spectroscopy.

Work on the Galaxy's central black has generated wide coverage, and it is a
resource for education and outreach. Specific efforts associated with this
program will include 1) the creation of material for introductory courses
through textbooks and the internet; 2) documentaries; 3) talks for the general
public; and 4) research opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students. Probing the Remarkable Neighborhood of the Galactic Center's
Supermassive Black Hole with Diffraction-Limited Studies of Stars, Dark Matter,
and Accreting Gas

