* 0406345
* NGS:  A System for Semi-Automatic Application-Level Checkpointing of Parallel Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Radu Rugina, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 10/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

Abstract: CNS-0406345

Executive Summary:

The project will design and implement a pre-compiler and runtime system that
will enable an existing parallel C or Fortran program, which uses MPI or OpenMp
library calls for parallelism, to checkpoint and restore its computational
state. Unlike the checkpoints taken by a system like Condor, the checkpoints
produced by these system will be portable in the sense that they can be used to
restart the application on another machine of a direrent processor type and
conguration. The projects goal is to accomplish this with minimal impact on the
performance and scalability of the application. The project will develop,
whereas a complete system-level checkpoint for the same application on a large
machine will need to save terabytes of data to disk. In a grid environment, the
checkpoints taken by system-level checkpointing are not portable, so
computations cannot migrate to take advantage of changing resource availability.

At present, programmers who wish to use application-level checkpointing must
analyze and instrument their code manually. Our proposal system will automate
this, requiring only minimal input from the programmer. Accomplishing this
requires new checkpoint protocols for process coordination, some of which we
have already developed and implemented. It also requires inter-procedural
program analysis techniques and a sophisticated runtime system, which we will
implement in this project. The approach we are taking requires expertise in
high-performance computing, program analysis runtime system design, and
distributed computing. We believe our project team can rise to the challenge.

