* 0406794
* SGER:    Exploring the Future of Distributed Generation and Micro-Grid Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2004,09/30/2006
* Chanan Singh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 09/30/2006
* USD 50,000.00

With the recent advances in distributed generation (DG) technology and the
recent blackout in Northeast, distributed generation appears to be one of the
solutions to improve the reliability and security of power supply. Low interest
in building new transmission lines will result in a highly stressed transmission
network and reduced levels of reliability. FERC has recognized the importance of
DG and has established policies and forms of contract that can be made between
the utility and DG owners as presented in order 104 FERC 61,104 (July 24, 2003).
The IEEE standard 1547 has been established to govern technical requirements for
the installation of DG units in distribution systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are many arguments and much debate about the future of DG in USA. Producers of
different types of DG are enthusiastic that DG will be widely used by many
customers. Utilities have many concerns such as loosing customers and degrading
distribution system safety and reliability as a result of penetration of DG
units in the distribution system. Customers have their own view points, some of
them look to DG for less expensive power, others see it as clean power source
even if power prices get higher and some believe DG will improve power supply
reliability. Investors are studying the market to find the risks and benefits
associated with investment in DG. In a recent NSF/EPRI workshop on opportunities
for transmission system enhancement [1], one of the recommendations to decrease
transmission system vulnerability is the use of distributed generation. It was
suggested that distributed generation (DG) offers promising solutions that can
release the stress of existing transmission systems. It was mentioned that DG
installed close to loads results in decreased power losses throughout
transmission system, and provides transient stability and voltage support. It is
expected that DG will have an important role in improving distribution system
reliability in the deregulated power industry [2].&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our
exploratory research we want to define and explore the potential problems facing
DG installation, types of relationships between DG owners and utility,
development of tools needed for DG parallel operation with the utility, possible
effects of DG on overall power system reliability, possible role of DG in
facilitating power restoration after a blackout, risks associated with
investment in DG and multi-objective optimized planning for micro-grid power
networks. We want to investigate these problems and explore possible solutions.
It is clear that it will not be possible to solve all the problems in the
framework of this SGER. The intent here is to explore the preliminary solutions
for these problems and identify the future research that will be needed for more
comprehensive solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research should be
considered exploratory particularly due to the uncertainty associated with
advances in DG technology, lack of practical experience in DG working in
parallel with utility and insufficient research studies in this area. On the
other hand DG will continue to penetrate the market and it is important to look
into the future to see the possible impacts and also develop methodologies to
orchestrate the desired effects like enhanced reliability and security of power
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our proposed research we want to objectively
study the role that DG can play in the power market in the future. We will
investigate the optimal operation modes for DG units to achieve maximum benefits
for utility, DG owners and customers. Research results may encourage investors
to consider DG as a low risk investment, encourage utility to consider
developing control strategies and policies for DG operation, and improve
distribution system reliability. SGER grant is suitable for supporting this work
because of the urgent need of this research; the outcomes of this research will
include many recommendations and suggested solution approaches for potential DG
and micro-grid research problems. The results of this exploratory research will
bring many potential problems to focus and encourage more research and
development in this area.&lt;br/&gt;