* 0406060
* The Neumann Problem for the Tangential Cauchy-Riemann Complex and the CR Embedding Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* John Lee, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 107,981.00

SupermanSProposal DMS-0406060&lt;br/&gt;PI: John M. Lee, University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Neumann Problem for the Tangential Cauchy-
Riemann Complex and the CR&lt;br/&gt;Embedding
Problem&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Technical description of the
project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will study existence and
regularity theorems for the&lt;br/&gt;natural Neumann boundary problem for the
tangential Cauchy-Riemann equations&lt;br/&gt;on smoothly bounded domains in CR
manifolds. All known existence results&lt;br/&gt;for this problem work only on
domains with very special defining functions,&lt;br/&gt;namely those that depend
only on the real and imaginary parts of a single&lt;br/&gt;CR-holomorphic
function. The key idea of this research is to use the fact&lt;br/&gt;that such a
defining function provides a codimension-2 foliation (near
the&lt;br/&gt;boundary but away from characteristic points) by compact CR-
submanifolds.&lt;br/&gt;By using known estimates for the Kohn Laplacian on the
compact leaves, one&lt;br/&gt;can reduce the Neumann problem to a (generally
non-coercive) elliptic&lt;br/&gt;boundary problem in a plane domain. These
results are expected to have&lt;br/&gt;applications to such problems as the
local CR embedding problem, local&lt;br/&gt;deformations of CR structures,
characterizing domains on which the&lt;br/&gt;tangential Cauchy-Riemann complex
is solvable, regularity of maps between CR&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, and the
existence of local frames for CR vector bundles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geometry of complex manifolds
(geometric objects in which complex&lt;br/&gt;numbers instead of real numbers
can be used as coordinates) has recently&lt;br/&gt;begun to play a surprisingly
important role in both mathematics and physics.&lt;br/&gt;For example, in string
theory, physicists postulate that the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;particles of matter
are actually "quantum strings" that vibrate inside&lt;br/&gt;sub-microscopic
complex manifolds called Calabi-Yau manifolds. The&lt;br/&gt;principal analytic
tool for studying complex manifolds is the Cauchy-Riemann&lt;br/&gt;equations, a
system of partial differential equations that characterizes,&lt;br/&gt;among
other things, those functions that have complex derivatives. When
one&lt;br/&gt;studies surfaces within complex manifolds (such as the "branes"
that arise&lt;br/&gt;in string theory), the Cauchy-Riemann equations need to be
replaced by a&lt;br/&gt;much more complicated system called the "tangential
Cauchy-Riemann&lt;br/&gt;equations," which we are just beginning to understand.
This proposal will&lt;br/&gt;develop new techniques for studying some deep
analytic questions surrounding&lt;br/&gt;the solvability of the tangential
Cauchy-Riemann equations, which are&lt;br/&gt;expected to be of fundamental
importance in understanding the geometry and&lt;br/&gt;analysis of surfaces in
complex manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;