* 0406832
* RUI: Pulsar Studies of Relativistic Gravitation, the Interstellar Medium, and Radio Emission Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Joel Weisberg, Carleton College
* Continuing grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 06/30/2008
* USD 241,103.00

This Principle Investigator is carrying out radio pulsar investigations of
relativistic gravitation, the interstellar medium, and the pulsar emission
process in Australia and in the U.S. The relativistic gravitation projects
include timing and profile measurements of the double neutron star pulsar
B1913+16 to achieve better precision on the orbital decay rate due to
gravitational radiation emission, information on the geometry of the emission
beam, and a much improved proper motion which has implications for studies of
the evolution and galactic population of these objects. Further precise timing
of millisecond pulsars is being done in order to search for timing
irregularities ascribable to low-frequency gravitational waves emitted in the
early Universe or from binary supermassive black holes. Interstellar medium
investigations include galactic magnetic field studies of the overall magnetic
field structure in the inner and outer Galaxy. Other pulsar studies will yield
additional pulsar kinematical distances essential to calibrating galactic
electron density models. These provide estimates of the distance to all pulsars
contributing to a variety of general pulsar population issues. Work related to
the pulsar radio emission process includes single-pulse and average-pulse
polarimetry and analyses. The new data will be combined with earlier work in an
effort to advance our knowledge of fundamental emission and magnetospheric
propagation phenomena.

Broader impacts. This work promotes the scientific education and training of the
Carleton College students by enabling them to do real research rather than just
reading about it in textbooks. The Carleton group collaborates with colleagues
in Australia, Cornell, Berkeley, and Princeton, exposing them to the latest
techniques, procedures, and ideas from some of the finest investigators in the
field and at some of the finest observatories in the world. The project
director's teaching and public outreach activities are inspired by this work.
The project strengthens Carleton's record as one of the principal undergraduate
sources of future physicists and astronomers, while also educating the broader
public both within and outside Carleton.