* 0406605
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement : Comparative Analysis of Two Anterior Neural Substrates of Language
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Katerina Semendeferi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 06/30/2006
* USD 8,000.00

The principal brain regions involved in language production include the inferior
frontal gyrus and the anterior insula. To date, there have been few
neuroanatomical investigations of these regions in humans and even fewer studies
involving multiple species. Additional neuroanatomical data on humans and their
closest relatives would enhance our scientific understanding of changes in
cognition and language throughout human evolution. Similarly, additional cross-
species data would enhance existing debates concerning possible differences in
cognitive capabilities among primate species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will analyze the inferior frontal gyrus and the anterior insula at
microstructural and macrostructural levels in multiple primate species,
including humans, chimpanzees and macaques. The data from this study will not
only contribute to the understanding of human and primate evolution, but will
also facilitate an understanding of how language is organized in the human
brain. Greater understanding of language organization can aid in the study and
treatment of speech pathologies such as stuttering. Furthermore, the data from
additional species, such as the apes, will facilitate the interpretation of
findings from human imaging studies and those from experimental studies of
macaques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key component of the proposed project is the
training of the co-principal investigator in a variety of techniques (including
stereology, neurochemistry and magnetic resonance imaging) that are important in
the study of neuroanatomy. This learning and training will take place in
selected laboratories in the United States and Germany that have previously
analyzed some of the regions of interest in individual species. These activities
will not only serve to train the co-principal investigator, but will also serve
to enhance collaborative networks and partnerships among several laboratories
currently working on issues relating to primate brain
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;