* 0406193
* Collaborative Research:      Nonlinear PDE's and Integro-Differential Equations in the Complex Plane
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Ovidiu Costin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 01/31/2006
* USD 49,263.00

Abstract: 0406193 O Costin, Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative research on nonlinear PDEs and
integro-differential equations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposal develops and
applies new constructive methods in the study of solutions of nonlinear partial
differential equations, with focus on existence and uniqueness, regularity and
spontaneous formation of singularities. Recent advances in Borel-Laplace
regularization and&lt;br/&gt;summability are used to find global properties of
solutions of&lt;br/&gt;PDEs. There is a wide range of problems where these
questions are&lt;br/&gt;essential, and a number of concrete examples including
thin film&lt;br/&gt;equations, Kuramoto-Sivashinski, KdV and mKdV will be
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural phenomena in physics,
chemistry, material sciences and in many&lt;br/&gt;other disciplines are most
often described by differential equations;&lt;br/&gt;complex phenomena are
frequently modeled by partial differential&lt;br/&gt;equations. The present
project covers a wide range of such equations,&lt;br/&gt;the global properties
of their solutions and their possible blow&lt;br/&gt;up. This resarch is a piece
of an unfolding enterprise to advance a&lt;br/&gt;theory of singular behavior,
of substantial importance in mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and its
applications.&lt;br/&gt;