* 0406100
* SGER:  Approximate Density Functional Theory for Predicting the Structural and Interfacial Properties of Complex Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2005
* Jianzhong Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2005
* USD 96,006.00

Wu, Jianzhong&lt;br/&gt;U of Cal - Riverside&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;"SGER:
Approximate Density Functional Theory for Predicting the Structural and
Interfacial Properties of Complex Fluids"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SGER grant
seeks to establish a unified density functional theory of
complex&lt;br/&gt;fluids based on recent achievements from the PI's group in
molecular modeling of relatively simple systems including polymeric chains and
model colloids. Initial applications indicate that the generalized density
functional theory agrees very well with molecular simulation results for the
density distributions in confined geometries, adsorption isotherms, and pair
correlation functions of bulk fluids including those for highly asymmetric
mixtures of spherical particles and intra- and inter- molecular correlation
functions of polymers. To validate its applications to realistic systems with
attractive forces and electrostatic interactions, the theory will be further
tested with simulation and experimental data for neutral as well as charged
confined fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical approach proposed in this
work is exploratory and substantially novel in terms of its formulations for the
excluded-volume effect and for the chain connectivity as proposed recently in
the PI's group, for van der Waals attractions based on the energy approach, and
for the Coulomb interactions based on a novel variational approach by Rosenfeld.
Besides, it represents the first effort to develop a unified molecular theory
that is applicable to bulk as well as inhomogeneous systems at the same level of
numerical accuracy using a single set of molecular
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed density functional theory will
also be tested by correlation/prediction of the structural and thermodynamic
properties of liquid water and the solvation of small ions and simple
hydrocarbons based on a modified SPC/E model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impacts: Once established, the unified density functional theory can be used for
modeling adsorptions of atomic as well as polymeric fluids in porous materials
or at surfaces that are of importance in gas storage, separations, heterogeneous
chemical reactions, environmental protection, fuel cells, and the design of
porous materials. In particular, development of a reliable molecular model for
water that is applicable to inhomogeneous conditions is of crucial importance in
solution chemistry, biological and environmental sciences. A reliable molecular
theory for atmospheric aerosol formation and gas/particle partitioning of
organic compounds is central to understanding the influence of aerosols on
atmospheric chemistry, human and ecological health, and
climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;