* 0406450
* Smoothness Properties of Harmonic Measures and the Polynomial Inverse Image Method
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Vilmos Totik, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2008
* USD 71,701.00

DMS 0406450&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;V Totik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U of South
Florida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smoothness properties of harmonic measures and the
polynomial inverse image
method&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator proposes a three-year program to&lt;br/&gt;explore several problems
in harmonic analysis and potential&lt;br/&gt;theory with applications to
approximation theory and&lt;br/&gt;polynomial inequalities. The questions to be
considered&lt;br/&gt;are at the core of classical harmonic
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;for they deal with smoothness properties of
the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental objects: harmonic measures and Green's
functions.&lt;br/&gt;These are directly linked to smoothness of solutions of
Dirichlet problems, as well as to different problems in approximation theory and
polynomial inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will widen our
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;how smoothness of harmonic measures and
Green's&lt;br/&gt;functions is connected with the geometry of the underlying
domains. It will also broadens the use of potential theoretical methods in
approximation theory, thereby offering new tools in the latter field. The
research uses different tools from classical analysis, but the main method is
potential theoretic. The results are relevant&lt;br/&gt;to other branches of
mathematics, physics and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;