* 0406220
* Nanocrystallization Kinetics and Induced Anisotropy in Soft Magnetic Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* David Laughlin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 511,983.00

This award by the Division of Materials Research to Carnegie Mellon University
is to study synthesis, structure and property relationships in soft magnetic
nanocomposite materials that show promise for applications in energy conversion
and data storage. With this award, Professors McHenry and Laughlin will study
the following: (1) furthering present understanding of nanocrystallization
kinetics as a tool for controlling magnetic microstructures; and (2) determining
the relationship between microstructure (including magnetic field and domain
structure induced microstructural changes) and soft magnetic properties of
nanocomposite materials. Research studies will develop fundamental understanding
of the synthesis, structure, and property relationships in nanocomposite soft
magnetic materials in terms of: (a) refinement of models of the kinetics of
nanocrystallization; (b) modeling chemical partitioning that occurs during
nanocrystallization and its role in the temperature dependence of intergranular
magnetic coupling; and (c) microstructural observations and magnetic property
measurements aimed at elucidating the microscopic mechanisms for inducing
magnetic anisotropy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These soft magnetic nanocomposites
based on iron-cobalt-M-boron-copper (where the metal could be niobium, zirconium
or hafnium) called HITPERM have promise for application in high temperature,
high frequency inductive devices and inductive components in data storage.
Miniaturization of power electronic components must consider inductive
components and issues of frequency response (power density, losses) and thermal
management. Thermally assisted writing on perpendicular recording media requires
high temperature/high induction magnetic underlayers and write heads and low
noise, soft magnetic layers in spin valve sensors. Magnetic nanocomposite
materials development will benefit from a fundamental understanding of magnetic
nanostructure/property relationships. Scientific interactions include activities
at Georgia Institute of Technology and the National High Field Magnetic
Laboratory on high field nanocrystallization experiments and National Institute
for Materials Research (Tsukuba, Japan) for field ion microscopy. Research
efforts will be coupled to educational initiatives aimed at teaching research
methodology and communicating state of the art to undergraduates. The
investigators at present teach a graduate course on Applied Magnetism and
Magnetic Materials. This course syllabus will be revised so as to offer
undergraduate course credit as an interface to the Magnetic Materials Track as
part of the undergraduate curriculum. Two local industries, Seagate Corp. and
Magnetics, Inc. will be consulted as to course content. This work couples with
U. S. Air Force and NASA funded efforts to develop high frequency, high
temperature inductive devices. &lt;br/&gt;