* 0406074
* Geometric and Physical Aspects of Hyperbolic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Maciej Wojtkowski, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 10/31/2005
* USD 34,999.00

Geodesic flows are standard models of conservative (as opposed
to&lt;br/&gt;dissipative) dynamics. Large classes of mechanical
systems&lt;br/&gt;can be considered as geodesic flows. This point of view is
most&lt;br/&gt;fruitful when the underlying riemannian metric has enough local
&lt;br/&gt;symmetries or when it has negative sectional curvature. The latter
case&lt;br/&gt;belongs to the realm of chaotic dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We study geodesic flows of Weyl connections
(generalizations &lt;br/&gt;of Levi-Civita connections of the riemannian case).
&lt;br/&gt;A linear symmetric connection on the tangent bundle is called
&lt;br/&gt;Weyl if the parallel transport preserves angles between vectors.
&lt;br/&gt;These flows are models of systems out of equilibrium. &lt;br/&gt;They
were originally considered in physics &lt;br/&gt;literature under the name of
gaussian thermostats.&lt;br/&gt;The systems have a forcing term accompanied by
&lt;br/&gt;the thermostatting term based on the Gauss' Least
&lt;br/&gt;Constraint Principle for nonholonomic constraints. &lt;br/&gt;We
revealed the geometric nature of the systems&lt;br/&gt;with gausssian
thermostats. We showed that also in this generality&lt;br/&gt;if the sectional
curvatures are negative the system has &lt;br/&gt;some hyperbolic properties.
However we do not know if it&lt;br/&gt;is enough to force the uniform
hyperbolicity (Anosov property).&lt;br/&gt;To settle such questions we propose
to study Weyl connections&lt;br/&gt;with (local) symmetries. This project has
the potential of &lt;br/&gt;delivering new classes of systems with hyperbolic
dynamics,&lt;br/&gt;and/or classifying homogeneous Weyl connections with
nonpositive&lt;br/&gt;sectional curvatures.