* 0406604
* Electron-Electron Interactions and the Photophysics of  Semiconducting Conjugated Polymers and Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Sumitendra Mazumdar, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2008
* USD 315,000.00

This award supports theoretical research on semiconducting conjugated polymers
and single-walled carbon nanotubes. The award is supported by the Theoretical
and Computational Chemistry Program and the Materials Theory Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four distinct goals. (1) We intend to
develop a comprehensive theory of spin-dependent exciton formation in the
charge-transfer (CT) reaction between oppositely charged polarons in organic
light emitting diodes (OLED's). We will go beyond our previous work, which was
focused on the relative yields of the lowest singlet and triplet excitons, to
determine the overall yields in each spin channel for a wide range of Coulomb
parameters, molecular structures, and relative orientations between molecular
components. (2) We will develop a microscopic theory of bimolecular triplet-
triplet annihilation (TTA). (3) We will obtain correlated electron descriptions
of pi-conjugated polymers with optical gaps in the infrared. (4) Finally, we
plan to construct a theory of excitonic electronic structure and optical
nonlinearity of semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes
(SWNT's).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigations will consist of many-body
calculations within the Pariser-Parr-Pople and extended Hubbard Hamiltonians for
pi-conjugated molecules and polymers. The approaches taken will include exact
diagonalizations, singles and multiple-reference singles and doubles
configuration interaction (SCI and MRSDCI), and the Density Matrix
Renormalization Group (DMRG). The relative yields of competing CT reactions that
occur in OLED's will be determined within a time-dependent Schroedinger
formulation. Our emphasis is on developing conceptual frameworks, and not on
quantitative calculations of materials parameters. Thus the apparent neglect of
electron-phonon interactions is based on the argument that their qualitative
effects can be grafted on once the effects of electron-electron interactions are
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the photophysics of pi-conjugated
systems is difficult, because of the moderately strong electron-electron
interactions in these systems. The present grant poses timely and important
questions, in two different classes of carbon-based semiconductors. We will use
state of the art techniques to investigate these questions. Our exact approach
to the study of CT reactions in OLED's treats intermolecular interactions and
many-electron interactions on equal footing. The research on TTA will be the
first attempt to construct a microscopic theory of this phenomenon. The DMRG
calculations on the small optical gap polymers will give valuable information on
the feasibility of utilizing these and related polymers in emissive or
photovoltaic devices. The research on the SWNT's will give new qualitative
insight on their excitonic electronic structure and their nonlinear optical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past twenty years pi-conjugated
polymers and molecules have evolved from laboratory curiosities to key new
optical materials. Research done here will have strong impact on a broad range
of investigations being pursued by experimentalists, extending from purely
fundamental science to applied aspects. We hope to answer several questions
being probed by experimental colleagues, as well as influence them to venture
out and try new materials synthesis and new experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One key theme here is electron-electron interaction
effects. This is a vital broad area of research. We expect that the knowledge
base created in our studies will impact our understanding of strongly correlated
electron systems in general. As merely one example, we draw attention to our
work on the nonlinear optics of cuprates, whose origin can be traced directly to
our work on optical nonlinearities in pi-conjugated polymers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the research offers an excellent opportunity to
train students and postdoctoral associates in the scientifically and
technologically vital areas of materials physics, chemistry and advanced
computational physics of organic materials and strongly correlated
systems.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt; This award supports theoretical research on
semiconducting conjugated polymers and single-walled carbon nanotubes. The award
is supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program and the
Materials Theory Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past twenty years pi-
conjugated polymers and molecules have evolved from laboratory curiosities to
key new optical materials. Research done here will have strong impact on a broad
range of investigations being pursued by experimentalists, extending from purely
fundamental science to applied aspects. We hope to answer several questions
being probed by experimental colleagues, as well as influence them to venture
out and try new materials synthesis and new experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research offers an excellent opportunity to train
students and postdoctoral associates in the scientifically and technologically
vital areas of materials physics, chemistry and advanced computational physics
of organic materials and strongly correlated systems.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;