* 0406740
* Observations and Theory of Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* John Wheeler, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 06/30/2007
* USD 465,209.00

0406740&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Wheeler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas supernova
group is unique in its focus on both the observations and theory of asymmetric
supernovae. They are continuing to explore Type Ia supernovae with optical and
near infrared spectroscopy and optical spectropolarimetry with the goal of
better understanding the progenitor evolution, the explosion physics, and the
capacity of these supernovae to facilitate accurate cosmological measurements.
Evidence possibly related to the binary nature of these objects has started a
new branch of supernovae research to determine when the photospheres of
supernovae become spherical and to better understand the dispersion in
luminosity and color between objects due to effects of asphericity near
supernova maximum. They are exploring the nature of the collapse of the stellar
core, specifically probing asymmetries in the explosion with spectropolarimetry.
One key factor in determining the physical nature of core collapse supernovae is
the geometry of portions of the ejecta of different composition. This is
determined by careful spectropolarimetry. Dynamical models of core collapse that
generate bipolar and more complex flows are being tested to determine the degree
of fundamental asymmetry in the explosion necessary to imprint different
polarization in different chemical layers of the ejecta. They participate in the
use of the Robotic Optical Transient Source Experiment telescope array to study
gamma-ray bursts, supernovae, and their connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This work integrates research and education by advancing discovery and
understanding, while at the same time educating graduate students and training
postdoctoral researchers. The PI teaches a graduate course on supernova research
that includes as active components many of the developments underway. In
addition, the PI has long made it a practice to incorporate recent research
developments into large classes for non-science majors, classes that are
intrinsically diverse in terms of gender, ethnicity, disability, and geography.
The PI also frequently publishes in the popular science literature and his work
is featured in the new bilingual Texas Astronomy Education Center at McDonald
Observatory. The PI has also worked to enhance the infrastructure of research by
incorporating research on supernovae and gamma-ray bursts into an
astrobiological context. &lt;br/&gt;