* 0406156
* CAREER: Randomized Computations and Probabilistically Checkable Proofs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Luca Trevisan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 12/31/2004
* USD 83,884.00

Summary:

The use of randomness affects computations in dramatic and not yet fully
understood ways: in algorithm design it yields simpler and more efficient ways
to solve computational problems; in complexity theory it suggests new concepts
and models that lead sometimes to unexpected (and far-reaching) results. This
career development project involves a collection of research and educational
activities related to computational randomness.

The research component of this project deals with two main themes. One goal is
the development of general tools that can be used to make randomized algorithms
more robust, so that they can work even if they are implemented using biased,
and limited, sources of randomness. Such tools are randomness extractors,
procedures that convert biased distributions into almost uniform ones, and
pseudorandom generators, procedures that stretch a short random input into a
much longer output that has the property of being indistinguishable (a term that
is given a precise technical meaning) from the uniform distribution.

The other theme of the research component is the study of probabilistically
checkable proofs (PCP), a model of computation that gives a surprising
characterization of NP in terms of efficient randomized proof-checking. The PCP
model is the best known tool to prove results about the complexity of finding
approximate solutions for NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems. The goal
of this project is to look for stronger characterizations of NP in the PCP
model, for more applications to the study of the approximability of optimization
problems and, with special emphasis, for a simplified proof of the PCP
characterization of NP, a result that currently has an exceedingly complicated
proof. The educational component of this project will integrate material on
randomized algorithms, pseudorandomness, and probabilistic proof-systems into
existing courses on algorithms and complexity and into a new course on
cryptography that the principal investigator is developing. A main goal of the
educational component is to give elementary presentations of some results that
have so far been confined to research-oriented graduate courses. This is
unfortunate because they are relevant and entertaining, not particularly hard to
explain, and can have a strong motivational influence. An extensive set of
lecture notes will be developed on this material.