* 0406057
* Poisson Lie groups, integrable systems, and representation theory
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Milen Yakimov, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 10/31/2007
* USD 99,187.00

The primary goal of this project is to investigate the geometry of several large
classes of Poisson structures on Lie groups and their homogeneous spaces. They
include the Belavin-Drinfeld Poisson structures on complex simple Lie groups and
their Poisson homogeneous spaces, and Poisson structures on Kac-Moody groups and
real simple groups. The project is based on employing novel techniques from Lie
theory and ring theory which in particular relate the above geometric problems
to studies of the primitive spectra of universal enveloping algebras of Lie
algebras that are in general neither solvable, nor semisimple. The principal
investigator will work on applications of these problems to the study of
integrable systems (whose phase spaces are symplectic leaves of the above
Poisson structures) and representations of Hopf algebras, e.g. algebras of
regular functions on non-standard quantum groups constructed by Etingof-Kazhdan
and Etingof-Schedler-Schiffmann by explicit quantizations of Belavin-Drinfeld
r-matrices. He will further address applications to combinatorics: the theory of
cluster algebras of Fomin and Zelevisky, and intersections of dual Schubert
cells (related to symplectic leaves of special Poisson structures on flag
varieties). The second part of the project concerns applications of the infinite
dimensional Poisson Lie group of formal pseudo-differential operators to
problems in the theory of bispectrality of Duistermaat and Grunbaum, e.g. using
the corresponding dressing action of Semenov-Tian-Shansky to construct
subalgebras of infinitesimal "additional symmetries" of the KP hierarchy that
preserve manifolds of bispectral wave functions. The project will further
investigate relations between bispectrality and the prolate spheroidal
phenomenon of Landau, Pollak, and Slepian, which first appeared in time-band
limiting but consequently played an important role in random matrix theory as
well. In particular this proposal targets integral operators related to the
infinite dimensional class of bispectral algebras of ranks 1 and 2, all of which
posses commuting differential operators, proved in previous works of the
investigator.

The major problems in many areas of mathematics and mathematical physics are
related to the study of the symmetries (transformation groups) of the objects or
models, under investigation. Recently generalized symmetries (Hopf algebras)
have played an increasingly prominent role in many fields. This project
investigates geometric structures related to deformations of classical
symmetries (algebraic groups) to generalized symmetries (Hopf algebras) and
their applications to problems in dynamical systems, algebra, combinatorics, and
applied mathematics.