* 0406400
* Neutrino Physics at Fermilab
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2011
* Randy Johnson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 01/31/2011
* USD 330,000.00

This proposal requests funds to support a group at the University of Cincinnati
to participate in MiniBooNE, the booster neutrino experiment at Fermilab.
MiniBooNE will search for neutrino oscillations and will check a recent result
from the LSND experiment that suggested anti-electron neutrinos could oscillate
into anti-muon neutrinos. The neutrinos in the LSND experiment were produced by
the 800 MeV proton beam from the LAMPF facility at Los Alamos. MiniBooNE uses
the 8 GeV proton beam from the Fermilab booster. The difference in a factor of
ten in primary beam energy will mean a ten-fold increase in the energy of the
detected signal if the LSND signal is real. If the LSND result is due to an
unknown background, it should occur at the same energy in MiniBooNE as it did at
Los Alamos (a factor of ten below the region for signal events). A correct LSND
result implies that MiniBooNE can expect about 300 oscillation events, a truly
revolutionary result. In addition to the oscillation studies, the experiment
will measure several neutrino scattering cross sections. The very good low
energy neutrino beam and massive MiniBooNE detector will record a significant
number of neutrino interactions enabling the measurement of the quasi-elastic
cross section and a number of inelastic charged current and neutral current
cross sections. Byproducts of these reactions could be a major background for
the oscillation result. The MiniBooNE detector and beamline are complete. The
first neutrino event was recorded in August 2002. The experiment is expected to
collect data for about 3 years.

The broader impact of the research will occur at several levels: (a)
Understanding how matter is constructed and how the forces of nature shape it
into the myriad observed forms is a long standing question that resonates with
scientists and non-scientists alike; (b) The research program poses a set of
questions through which students and postdoctoral fellows will learn not only to
frame crisp tests of the fundamental construction of matter, but also to devise
innovative methods and tools for conducting them. Attacking such problems
provides the rigorously educated young people that our society desperately
needs; and (c) the proposal includes elements of outreach to the broader
community. Since MiniBooNE is a relatively small experiment, there are many
opportunities for undergraduates, professors from undergraduate institutions,
and high school teachers to participate in the research in a meaningful way.
Support provided by this grant allows a post-doc and a graduate student to serve
as Fermilab guides to the public. The PI is the secretary of his local chapter
of Sigma Xi and judges at local and statewide science fairs.