* 0406277
* The 2nd American Conference on Neutron Scattering, College Park, MD, June 6-10, 2004
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* David Belanger, Neutron Scattering Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

The Neutron Scattering Society of America (NSSA) is holding the 2nd biennial
American Conference on Neutron Scattering (ACNS) at the University of Maryland
Conference Center in June 2004. The National Center for Neutron Research (NCNR)
at NIST is serving as the local host institution. The ACNS has a dual role as a
national user meeting and a scientific conference. It provides a focal point for
U.S. neutron users and promotes neutron research in related disciplines.
Potential neutron users come from many fields, including hard and soft condensed
matter, liquids, magnetism, engineering, materials, chemical spectroscopy,
crystal structure, elementary excitations, and fundamental physics. Biology and
advanced instrumentation design are specially targeted groups for the 2nd ACNS.
The goals of the conference include outreach to young scientists, novice users,
and under-represented groups; the Principal Investigator (PI) anticipates more
than 450 participants in total.

The 2nd American Conference on Neutron Scattering features invited talks,
contributed talks, and poster sessions, with introductory talks from the
Department of Energy, the National Science Foundation, and the National
Institutes of Health. Major U.S. neutron facilities are also provided with
opportunities to address prospective users. Two awards are being presented at
the conference, one of which recognizes outstanding student research in the
subject area. Two satellite workshops are being considered separately in
conjunction with this meeting. The 2nd ACNS is being widely publicized,
including promotion through several websites. The Principal Investigators are
also encouraging participation from the Canadian neutron-science community.