* 0406998
* Turning Points and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Weishi Liu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 129,792.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: DMS-0406998&lt;br/&gt;PI: Weishi Liu&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Kansas&lt;br/&gt;Title: Turning Points and Applications
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned
with singularly perturbed systems of differential equations with turning points
and their applications. The goal is to establish a comprehensive geometric
singular perturbation theory for such systems. Singularly perturbed problems
typically involve multiple-scale features that result in non-uniform behavior.
The presence of turning points causes a loss of stability and creates
complications in the dynamical structure. The investigator will use a dynamical-
systems approach to systematically investigate turning-point behavior. The
dynamical behavior depends heavily on the topological structure of the set of
turning points and its relation to the vector field. The investigator will
classify the main structures and apply analytical and geometric tools of modern
dynamical systems theory to their study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple time and
space scales make real-world systems rich and exciting, and understanding real-
life problems is the driving force for the development of mathematical theory.
This project focuses on the study of problems arising from many areas of science
and engineering--such as fluid dynamics, population dynamics, neural networks,
and biochemical processes--and involving multiple time and space scales. The
theoretical study will identify critical parameters responsible for the
complicated structure of such systems and examine mathematical forms of
interactions in the processes. As an important component of this proposal, two
specific fields of applications will be examined: (1) relaxation oscillations in
biological systems such as predator-prey models and epidemic disease models, and
(2) engineered biochemical process of wastewater treatment. These systems
involve vastly different scales, both in space and in time, and demonstrate
complicated behaviors. This project, if successful, will significantly improve
our understanding of physical phenomena with multiple scales and provide insight
for better engineering designs for control purposes. The proposed activity will
also greatly enhance education and training programs in this important area for
students and non-experts because of the intuitive formulation of the approach as
well as the results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;