* 0406328
* NGS:    Grid Harvest Service (GHS):    A Performance System for Grid Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* William Gropp, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 10/31/2007
* USD 63,333.00

Grid computing brings geographically dispersed computing power to meet the ever-
increasing demands. However, representing new and future computing platforms,
Grid is a globally shared, heterogeneous, and autonomous controlled platform. It
is far more advanced, powerful, dynamic and complex than computing platforms in
he past. Such complexity requires new system software technology to efficiently
utilize its computing capacity. Most existing performance technologies are
targeted for dedicated platforms. Recent performance facilities, such as NWS,
only predict short-term (less than five minutes) resource availability, which is
not appropriate for long-term applications. New software technologies are needed
for long-term, application-level performance predication and task scheduling to
alleviate the complexity of Grid. &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results show that GHS
is fundamentally better than existing systems for long-term applications and can
lead to substantial decrease in computing cost. The PIs will collaborate with
researchers at DOE national laboratories and IIT to demonstrate the great
potential of GHS with important national interest applications. &lt;br/&gt;The
research approach is based on the observation that Grid environments do not have
central control and performance efficiency has to be based on resource
availability. GHS will exploit this observation. In particular the project: 1)
will design, implement, and validate stochastic and analytical models to predict
the computing and communication resource availability and their influence on
user applications. 2) will develop, implement, and validate practical and non-
intrusive performance measurement technologies. 3) will design, implement, and
validate task scheduling and rescheduling algorithms to utilize the prediction
given in (1) to reduce user application run-times. &lt;br/&gt;