* 0406665
* U.S.-Czech:  Engineering Metal Nanostructures with Bridging Molecular Linkers for Super-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Martin Moskovits, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 03/31/2007
* USD 43,500.00

The goal of this U.S.-Czech research project between Martin Moskovits of the
University of California-Santa Barbara and Czech partner, Blanka Vlckova of
Charles University, in Prague, is to engineer metal nanostructures (primarily Ag
and Au) which generate strong optical fields when externally excited. This will
be accomplished by bringing together senior and junior U.S. and Czech chemists
with complementary expertise: 1) to refine the theoretical framework for
understanding molecular-surface dynamics and processes and 2) to engineer
systems of Surface-enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) that allow single
detection or at least detection at the level of very few molecules. Results are
expected to lead to molecular assembly approaches that generate SERS-active
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, a more efficient approach for
creating optical field-enhancing nanostructures would enhance our ability to
produce molecules to form bridging links between either bare or chemically
functionalized Ag and Au metallic nanostructures that can serve as building
blocks. The intended building blocks include metal nanoparticles, metal
nanowires and flat metal surfaces. If successful, this research could lead to
interdisciplinary advances in single-molecule sensitivity, with potential
applications in synthesis of materials, advanced nanofabrication, condensed
matter physics, electrical engineering, chemical analysis and surface
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This nano science and technology project fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in
the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. Broader
impacts include the introduction of U.S. students to the international
nanoscience community through work at a Czech institution and direct involvement
in the project's single molecule SERS measurements and nanofabrication systems.