* 0406049
* Curve aggregation and classification
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Marten Wegkamp, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 161,296.00

This research is devoted to aggregation of estimators in
nonparametric&lt;br/&gt;regression models. The motivation is twofold. One is the
existence&lt;br/&gt;of many different methods of estimation, leading to possibly
competing&lt;br/&gt;estimators. In this case one may want to combine the
estimators, rather&lt;br/&gt;than to select them. The second one arises in meta-
analysis type problems,&lt;br/&gt;in which one wishes to aggregate estimators
obtained from different&lt;br/&gt;samples. This research proposes a readily
implementable method that addresses&lt;br/&gt;these questions, using tools from
the theories of empirical processes, minimax&lt;br/&gt;adaptive estimation and
optimization. The proposed procedure yields, via&lt;br/&gt;an oracle inequality,
minimax optimal aggregation bounds for the risk of
the&lt;br/&gt;estimators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has immediate
applications in seismology and clinical&lt;br/&gt;psychology and, more widely,
to any data set that is comprised of curves.&lt;br/&gt;The methods proposed here
are used to develop signature curves for events&lt;br/&gt;of interest. Having a
signature for a seismic wave allows quick&lt;br/&gt;discrimination between
earthquakes and waves produced by man induced&lt;br/&gt;explosions. An EEG based
signature for depression will improve accuracy in&lt;br/&gt;diagnosing the
disease and will permit nuanced classification of further&lt;br/&gt;patients,
according to the severity of the illness. The software that
allows&lt;br/&gt;these analyzes will be made freely available on the world wide
web, along&lt;br/&gt;with a step by step description that will facilitate its
use by researchers&lt;br/&gt;from other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;