* 0406884
* Collaborative Research: Probing Phase-Space Structure in the Galaxy - Kapteyn's Selected Areas
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Terrence Girard, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 06/30/2009
* USD 280,263.00

Recent results from large-area photometric surveys have shown that the Milky Way
outer halo contains accretion-driven substructure. These structures of known or
assumed remnants of satellite accretion, have long-lived, coherent tidal
features that can be used to accurately model the Galactic gravitational
potential, as well as the characteristics of the original satellite. However,
such modeling studies have been limited by the meager available kinematical data
over large angles along the tidal features. While radial-velocity programs have
just recently begun to address this problem for the few known Galactic tidal
tails, no systemic survey has begun to address the transverse (tangential)
velocities (i.e., absolute proper motions), which contain twice as much
dynamical information. Without this information, dynamical models remain poorly
constrained, and therefore limited to describing merely a range of possible
events, rather than providing an accurate description of the real
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative project, Dr. Dana Dinescu at
Yale University and Dr. Steven Majewski, at the University of Virginia, will
undertake a deep, high-precision absolute and relative proper-motion survey that
will sample more than 50 lines of sight in the Selected Areas designated by
Kapteyn for Galactic structure studies in 1906; indeed, the photographic plates
taken at that time by Kapteyn and colleagues will be used as first epoch
material. Current proper-motion programs do not achieve this precision at a
similar magnitude limit, and are thus limited in detecting and characterizing
distant halo substructure. The combination of proper-motion precision,
depth,&lt;br/&gt;and sky coverage of this project will not be surpassed until
the upcoming astrometric satellite&lt;br/&gt;missions GAIA and SIM. The data
from these missions may be available in 2015 and 2020 respectively, while
results from this project will be available in the next 3-4 years. The proper
motions will be complemented by radial velocities, distance and metallicity
estimates from photometric and spectroscopic work as well as from overlapping
surveys like 2MASS, QUEST, SDSS and RAVE. Examples of intended applications of
the data include: 1) Determining the extent and orbital motion of the highly
obscured Monoceros, anticenter structure both above and below the Galactic
plane, 2) Characterizing the transverse motion of the Sagittarius tidal streams.
3) Detecting and characterizing additional substructures in the halo of the
Milky Way. 4) Determining the kinematical properties of the numerous thick disk
and halo stars in the fields as a function of Galacto-centric distance. There
are only a few deep, precise (pencil-beam-type) proper-motion data-sets that are
centered on Galactic field stars rather than on a globular cluster or a dwarf
spheroidal. This project will substantially increase the number of pencil-beam-
type data-sets and therefore systematically probe our Galaxy in more than 50
distinct lines-of-sight. What makes the project possible is the combination of
original 60-inch Mt. Wilson telescope plates taken in 1909 with matching Du Pont
2.5-m plates, thus yielding a 90 year baseline of excellent plate scale
material. This research will contribute to an accurate model of the interaction
of our Galaxy with its former satellites, and help characterize the Galaxy's
satellite system. Also, the kinematical data of debris stars have the potential
of measuring the lumpiness of the dark matter halo. These two issues are
relevant for cold dark matter simulations that currently overpredict, by two
orders of magnitude, the number of dark matter halos relative to the number of
observed satellites of the Milky Way. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;