* 0406038
* Laminations and Dehn Surgery on Knots
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,03/31/2006
* Tao Li, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2006
* USD 92,458.00

There has been tremendous success in studying Dehn surgery on knots
&lt;br/&gt;through the use of taut foliations and essential laminations. For
&lt;br/&gt;example, the property R conjecture, and the property P conjecture for
&lt;br/&gt;satellite knots, have been proved using the methods of taut
foliations. &lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator plans to study Dehn surgery on
knots and links &lt;br/&gt;in 3-manifolds using laminations and branched
surfaces. The success of &lt;br/&gt;the project will advance the understanding
of the topology of 3 and 4 &lt;br/&gt;dimensional manifolds and contribute to
the ultimate solutions of some &lt;br/&gt;central problems in this area. The
investigator also plans to study tight &lt;br/&gt;laminations in 3-manifolds. A
tight lamination is an essential lamination &lt;br/&gt;with a very nice
transverse structure and many remarkable properties. One &lt;br/&gt;goal of the
proposed research is to prove that if a 3-manifold contains an
&lt;br/&gt;essential lamination then it contains a tight lamination. The
&lt;br/&gt;investigator will also continue his work on the classification of
&lt;br/&gt;essential laminations in hyperbolic punctured-torus bundles, and on
the &lt;br/&gt;topological rigidity of laminar 3-manifolds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three-manifolds are objects modeled on the 3-dimensional
space that we are &lt;br/&gt;living in. For instance, the universe is a
3-manifold and recent study &lt;br/&gt;shows that the universe may have an
interesting topological structure. A &lt;br/&gt;natural geometric way of
studying 3-manifolds, which has been proved &lt;br/&gt;extremely fruitful, is to
view a globally complicated 3-manifold as a &lt;br/&gt;collection of simple
3-dimensional pieces glued together along a &lt;br/&gt;2-dimensional object. The
tools used in the proposed research, including &lt;br/&gt;laminations and
branched surfaces, provide such useful 2-dimensional &lt;br/&gt;objects. The
proposed research is related to some central questions in &lt;br/&gt;low-
dimensional topology and knot theory, which impact not only
&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, but also physics and other scientific research. A better
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of 3-manifolds may help us understand the shape of the
&lt;br/&gt;universe, and knot theory is used to study the structure of DNA and
its &lt;br/&gt;biological effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;