* 0406287
* Integrable Geometry, Random Matrices and Matrix Integrals
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Pierre Van Moerbeke, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2009
* USD 210,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0406287&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Mark Adler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at investigating
various connections between&lt;br/&gt;random matrix theory, various statistical
processes,integrable&lt;br/&gt;mechanics and the Virasoro algebra
Specifically,one project is to&lt;br/&gt;study non-colliding Brownian motion a
la Dyson,on the line and on&lt;br/&gt;the circle,including the Dyson elliptic
Brownian motion;the&lt;br/&gt;connection with matrix models in a chain is
particularly relevant&lt;br/&gt;to finding PDE's for the joint probabilities of
the motion.Using&lt;br/&gt;scaling limits arising in the context of random
matrices and&lt;br/&gt;permutations,the Dyson motions above tend to novel
limiting&lt;br/&gt;random processes.The motion of the outmost particle tends to
the&lt;br/&gt;so-called Airy process.Finding stochastic differential
equations&lt;br/&gt;for these processes hinges on intricate statistical
questions&lt;br/&gt;about the universality laws appearing in random
matrix&lt;br/&gt;theory.Another project is to find large time
asymptotics,like&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic covariances,for the Dyson processes and
the limiting&lt;br/&gt;processes as well.The investigators believe that each of
the&lt;br/&gt;universality laws in random matrix theory connects with
an&lt;br/&gt;integrable system and the algebra of Virasoro
constraints.The&lt;br/&gt;problem is to find these sysems and to extract
interesting&lt;br/&gt;information about the distribution functions and
their&lt;br/&gt;differential equations.Finally,the Dyson circular motion has
an&lt;br/&gt;interesting realization in terms of the "Stochastic
Loewner&lt;br/&gt;equation",providing a conformal map realization of
this&lt;br/&gt;motion.Its Ito stochastic differential equation is related-in
a&lt;br/&gt;mysterious way-to the Virasoro algebra,which also naturally
comes&lt;br/&gt;up in questions of non-colliding random walks and
the&lt;br/&gt;Fokker-Planck equations.These connections will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical physics above has
applications in the&lt;br/&gt;statistiical analysis that comes up in many
practical problems&lt;br/&gt;involving a small number of sources ,each
generating lots of&lt;br/&gt;data,like antennas receiving information,analyzing
ecological&lt;br/&gt;data from a small number of sources ,each generating lots
of&lt;br/&gt;data,etc.The point being that in many practical problems
large&lt;br/&gt;rectangular arrays of data come up,which are big in
one&lt;br/&gt;direction,but not the other.The statistical processes that
come&lt;br/&gt;up also seem to come up in lots of growth models that should
be&lt;br/&gt;relevant in industrial processes.In addition the
universality&lt;br/&gt;laws that arise in the random matrix theory arise quite
naturally&lt;br/&gt;in quantum mechanics,in studying large atoms and so may
prove&lt;br/&gt;useful in understanding chemical reactions in physical
chemistry&lt;br/&gt;and hence in manufacturing drugs through simulation
experiments&lt;br/&gt;one day.&lt;br/&gt;