* 0406024
* Random Combinatorial Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2008
* USD 99,999.00

We plan to study several random structures, such as the random graphs and
mappings, the random Young tableaux and the plane integer partitions. While a
tremendous progress has been achieved in analysis of the Erdos-Renyi random
graph process, much less is known about the transitional behavior of the
directed graph version of this process. One obstacle is a dearth of enumeratve
results for directed graphs. In cooperation with Wormald the proponent plans to
work on asymptotic counts of digraphs by the vertex degrees, using some ideas of
their prior research on undirected graphs. The proponent is confident that this
study will result in a detailed description of the phase transition in the
random digraph. The proponent plans to analyze an alternative graph process
suggested by Lovasz, in which the new edges appear with probabilities
proportional to the resulting vertex degrees. This analysis will require solving
a host of natural extensions of classic graph enumeration problems. Inspired by
the work of Propp and Wilson, and Dalal-Schmutz, the proponent plans to study
the collapse time of the compositions of the independent random mappings. The
proponent will continue a study of the likely shapes of random plane and solid
diagrams, and will try to answer open questions formulated in two recent studies
of an optimal partitioning problem, conducted jointly with Borgs, Chayes and
Mertens.

However idealized, the random graph methodology provides a way to describe
dynamics of large evolving networks. We hope that our work on the graph
processes will contribute to a better understanding of an "abrupt change"
phenomenon characteristic for real-life networks, when addition of few
connections leads to formation of a tight "core". Our continued study of the
partitioning problem will provide a deeper insight into critical dependence of
its algorithmic complexity on the relations between the random input parameters.
We believe that this analysis will serve as a model for study of a broader class
of combinatorial optimization problems important in applications, such as the
"knapsack" problem and the "bin packing" problems.