* 0406140
* Quantum Criticallity and Magnetic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* John DiTusa, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2007
* USD 345,000.00

This condensed matter physics project will investigate metallic materials that
exhibit "non-Fermi-liquid" properties. The defining behavior in terms of
conductivity et al., is frequently found near zero temperature magnetic phase
transitions and quantum critical points. However, little is known about the
effect of disorder and low carrier density associated with a nearby metal-to-
insulator (MI) transition. Of interest is the incipient metallic state that is
correlated with itinerant magnetism. This will be probed via experiments in
silicides, germanides, and sulfides in proximity to magnetic and/or MI
transitions. Transport, magnetic, optical, and thermodynamic properties will be
determined in these materials, which have been chosen so that variations in
carrier densities and disorder will allow access to interesting quantum critical
points. The experiments address three questions: (A) Is the non-Fermi-liquid
behavior discovered in strongly fluctuating metals a crossover effect, or does
this behavior signal the formation of a novel ground state? (B) What effect does
the disorder and low carrier concentration associated with a nearby MI
transition have on the properties of materials near quantum critical points?
and, (C) Are there room temperature semiconducting and ferromagnetic phases
among the solid solutions of transition metal silicides or Kondo insulators that
may have technological uses? Undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students,
as well as Teach for America participants will be take part in cutting edge
research and training that will prepare them for careers in academe, industry
and government..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many recent experiments have shown that
the temperature for which a transition to a magnetically ordered state occurs
can be varied with either a change in chemical composition of the material or
the application of external pressure. For a variety of magnetic systems this
transition temperature can be driven downward until it is essentially at the
absolute zero of temperature. The key discovery is that when the transition
temperature is close to zero, the physical properties, such as the response to
electric and magnetic fields and thermal energy, change such that they differ
from any found in a century of research in solids. Although progress has been
made toward understanding these "quantum critical" phenomena, many mysteries
remain, including the range of temperatures and chemical compositions where
these physics dominates the behavior of materials. This project focuses on a
particular category of magnetic systems, magnetic semiconductors, where the
physics of quantum criticality can be investigated. This is of particular
importance since, for example, new technologies based on magnetic semiconductors
have been under development, yet their physical properties have not been fully
explored. This proposal contributes to the development and training of
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students. Teach for America
participants will be recruited to take part in the research, which involves
collaborations with faculty at Southern University, an HCBU, and with faculty in
Europe and Southern Africa.&lt;br/&gt;