* 0406650
* Comparative Planetary Aeronomy:    Venus and Titan Upper Atmosphere Energetics, Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Stephen Bougher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 12/31/2007
* USD 251,974.00

AST 0406650&lt;br/&gt;Bougher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project directed by
Dr. Stephen Bougher, the thermosphere and ionosphere of Titan will be examined
in great detail,making use of in-situ and remote observations provided by the
Cassini Orbiter. In preparation for these observations, fundamental progress can
be made in understanding the thermal, compositional and dynamical processes at
work in the Titan upper atmosphere by making use of multi-dimensional
thermospheric models. The present research effort is devoted to the development,
testing, running, and processing of outputs from a detailed&lt;br/&gt;3-D
thermospheric general circulation model (TGCM) for Titan's upper atmosphere.
This Titan TGCM will incorporate a self-consistent treatment of energetics,
dynamics, composition, plus external forcings (from the Sun and Saturn's
magnetosphere). The objectives for developing this Titan TGCM are to: (1)
construct a 3-D model framework sufficient to capture the feedbacks that link
the temperature, composition, and wind structures of the Titan upper atmosphere
above 600-700 km, (2) generate a prediction tool that can be used later for
Cassini Mission thermosphere-ionosphere data analysis, (3) compare Titan
thermospheric energetic and dynamical processes with those of other non-magnetic
planets (especially Venus), and (4) provide diagnostic interpretation of the
underlying processes giving rise to the Titan thermospheric features simulated.
In particular, both solar extreme ultraviolet-ultraviolet (EUV-UV) and Saturn
magnetospheric forcing (ionization and neutral heating) will be incorporated
into the Titan TGCM and the thermospheric responses examined over the solar
cycle, Titan seasons, and Titan's orbital position within Saturn's
magnetosphere. An expanded understanding of the feedbacks of these Titan
thermospheric processes will be achieved as detailed comparisons are made with
similar processes in the Venus upper atmosphere. The addition of this new Titan
TGCM (with its combined solar plus magnetospheric forcing) will complement the
existing Titan TGCM, and provide extended capability. This research activity
will make a significant advance in the characterization of the Titan upper
atmosphere itself, as well as providing another thermospheric environment for
detailed comparison to the structure and dynamics of the Venus, Earth, and Mars
thermosheres. The team assembled on this project has many years of experience
developing and running TGCM models as well as constructing the detailed inputs
that are required to drive the energetics and dynamics of these planetary upper
atmospheres. Prior TGCM simulations for Venus, Earth, and Mars have been used
extensively in comparative studies, forecasting campaigns, and spacecraft and
ground-based data analysis activities. For the proposed Titan and Venus TGCM
studies, the research tasks are distributed across senior personnel and a
graduate student at the University of Michigan. This approach broadens the
impact of the present research by training new planetary scientists for the
future. Finally, the results from this research will be disseminated through
planned publications as well as the distribution of archival TGCM products
through an existing public website at the University of&lt;br/&gt;Michigan. In
this manner, the exploration and understanding of our solar system will
be&lt;br/&gt;advanced.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;