* 0406939
* Planning Grant for "Imagine That!"  Career Explorations in Science, Technology, and Engineering for Students and Families
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Etta Heber, Chabot Space and Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia James
* 11/30/2005
* USD 9,499.00

Chabot Space and Science Center seeks support to engage in a six-month planning
process for "Imagine That!," a multi-faceted science and technology career
exploration program. In partnership with the Columbia River Exhibition of
History, Science &amp; Technology (CREHST) and the American Museum of Science
&amp; Energy (AMSE), Chabot proposes to fill the gap between well-intentioned
and designed programs and the programs' abilities to really influence/affect
future career choices by participants. "Imagine That!" will familiarize youth
with a wide range of careers in scientific and technical fields through after-
school and summer programs that offer in-depth career exploration and guidance
activities, hands-on experiences that complement science education in school and
an introduction to role models. "Imagine That!" will also provide parents with
resources to support their children as they explore potential careers in
science, technology and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant
will enable the three major science museums, Junior Achievement and government
and business partners to develop the logistics for working together on an
ambitious collaborative program of national scope. "Imagine That!" has the
potential for broad and significant impact. Not only would it create a national
program of career exploration, it will strengthen and diversify the STEM
workforce. The national impact of this project is assured by the inclusion of
geographically diverse partners, regional advisory councils and a robust
dissemination plan.&lt;br/&gt;