* 0406198
* US-Austria Workshop:  Tensor Categories in Mathematics and Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Yi-Zhi Huang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 05/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

0406198&lt;br/&gt;Huang&lt;br/&gt;Various recent developments in different areas
of mathematics and physics turn out to be related when the language of tensor
categories is used as a unifying concept. Tensor categories emerge naturally
whenever a mathematical problem needs an efficient treatment of one or several
products," or when a problem in theoretical physics requires a concise
description of possible couplings. As a consequence, tensor categories provide a
natural unifying language for many interesting problems. Using this framework
has the additional benefit of unraveling structural parallels and therefore
often allows one to apply results and techniques to a given problem that were
originally developed in a different context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI is a
co-organizer of a program, Tensor Categories in Mathematics and Physics, to take
place in the spring and early summer of 2004 at the Erwin Schroedinger Institute
in Vienna. The purpose of this program to bring together researchers working on
different topics in mathematics (such as quantum groups, link invariants, vertex
algebras, or subfactors) and physics (such as topological and conformal field
theory, string theory, or operator algebraic approaches to quantum theory) in
which tensor categories are playing a role, or can be expected to play a role in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contribution from NSF will be primarily
used to support graduate students, junior faculty, women and members of
underrepresented minority groups in the United States to attend the program.
Active participation in such a program will undoubtedly have an important impact
on their future careers. The idea of the program is to encourage interaction
between mathematicians and mathematical physicists of different backgrounds. In
particular, one of the main goals of the program is to make a wealth of
mathematical results and concepts that are ready to use accessible to a larger
part of the theoretical physics community. It is clear that mathematicians and
physicists can all benefit from communicating results between the various
disciplines and from developing a unified language.&lt;br/&gt;