* 0406621
* Enhancing Hydrogen Storage in Carbon Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Sohail Murad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 12/31/2004
* USD 139,993.00

ENHANCING HYDROGEN STORAGE IN CARBON NANOSTRUCTURES&lt;br/&gt;Ishwar K. Puri
&amp; Sohail Murad&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois at Chicago&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal focuses on improving the knowledge base for hydrogen storage in carbon
nanostructures at the fundamental molecular level. The use of hydrogen as a fuel
is limited, in part because of serious problems with its storage and delivery.
Materials that adsorb significant quantities of hydrogen are therefore urgently
needed. The special hydrogen adsorbing characteristics of carbon nanomaterials
make them well suited as hydrogen storage devices. While carbon nanotubes,
carbon nanohorns and porous carbon show considerable conceptual promise,
experimental results have not been as convincing thus far, strongly suggesting
that some modification in the structure may be required for commercial
viability. For instance, target adsorbents have been found to require extremely
high surface areas to approach appropriate storage targets making multilayer
adsorption necessary. In their proposed work, the investigators plan to: (1)
systematically evaluate the hydrogen adsorption limitations of various carbon
nanostructures using molecular dynamics simulations and examine how these can be
further enhanced with modifications such as metal encapsulation; and (2) conduct
a corresponding parallel experimental investigation to aid and validate their
simulations. Metal particle encapsulation shows promise to augment the hydrogen
storage capacity of carbon nanostructures. In their molecular dynamics
simulations the investigators plan to investigate the effects of (1) pressure;
(2) temperature; (3) nanotube (armchair, zigzag or chiral) and nanofiber
(tubular, platelet or herringbone) structure; and (4) metal particle
encapsulation on hydrogen storage in carbon nanostructures. They will synthesize
various graphitic carbon nanostructures, some of which will contain encapsulated
metal particles and conduct a series of experiments to investigate the hydrogen
storage capacities of these and commercially available nanostructures. Their
molecular simulation studies will identify the most promising structures and
compositions for the complementary experimental studies. &lt;br/&gt;The project
will have significant broader impact. There is a pressing need to develop
alternate fuels, such as hydrogen, because of the considerable negative
environmental impact from the continued use of fossil fuels and their limited
future availability. There are significant challenges that must be overcome for
hydrogen usage in automobiles, some due to storage limitations. If these can be
overcome, the widespread use of hydrogen as a fuel will have an enormous
influence on the global economy. This project also has the potential for
synthesizing novel carbon nanostructures, e.g., with encapsulated metal
nanoparticles. For instance, metals that are sensitive to oxidation can be
stored efficiently inside a nanotube, as could various catalytic agents. This
crosscutting effect can lead to the development of nanoreactors. Although
research on carbon nanostructures is a fast-moving field, commercialization is
hampered by the lack of methods to economically produce the material in bulk.
The project will involve the research training of a PhD student as well as
undergraduate researchers. &lt;br/&gt;