* 0406748
* Isotropic Multiresolution Analysis in Multi-Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Donald Kouri, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 313,635.00

This proposal addresses the fundamental challenge of creating a theory
&lt;br/&gt;that gives rise to directionally unbiased, fast processing of images
&lt;br/&gt;and multidimensional data structures. The proposed Isotropic
Multiresolution &lt;br/&gt;Analysis (IMRA) enables decompositions of data
structures without &lt;br/&gt;orientational preference that parallel the
numerical efficiency of one &lt;br/&gt;dimensional MRA-wavelet constructions. A
crucial ingredient of this new theory &lt;br/&gt;is an MRA of radial functions
based on an innovative concept of radial &lt;br/&gt;translations. Together with
a suitable angular resolution, this allows to &lt;br/&gt;replicate all the
beneficial characteristics of classical one-dimensional &lt;br/&gt;MRA-wavelets
in higher dimensions. Therefore, IMRA-wavelets are expected to
&lt;br/&gt;parallel the success of their one-dimensional predecessors in
isolating edges &lt;br/&gt;and separating textures. Compared to previous
attempts of MRA-construtions &lt;br/&gt;in higher dimensions, IMRAs combine
symmetry properties, smoothness, and &lt;br/&gt;compactness of support of
scaling functions and wavelets to an unprecedented &lt;br/&gt;degree. The
proposed theory is anticipated to have a significant impact on all
&lt;br/&gt;areas of digital signal processing in two or more dimensions,
especially in &lt;br/&gt;biomedical image processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
date, digital image processing systems commonly handle data in a row
&lt;br/&gt;and column fashion. Although this pixelized approach is natural for
digital &lt;br/&gt;machines, it is much less natural if the objective is to
extract information &lt;br/&gt;from natural images or more general
multidimensional data structures. In this &lt;br/&gt;proposal, we create a
mathematical theory that mimicks features of retinal &lt;br/&gt;processing by
mammalian visual systems. Retinal processing is known to detect &lt;br/&gt;edges
and textures at different scales of spatial and temporal resolution,
&lt;br/&gt;regardless of their orientation and of the topology of their boundary
contours. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed theory of Isotropic Multiresolution Analysis
(IMRA) offers a way &lt;br/&gt;of digitizing analog signals and of synthesizing
analog signals from digital &lt;br/&gt;data in a manner that is more compatible
with the "digitization" of natural &lt;br/&gt;images performed by our retina.
One particular component of IMRAs is the use of &lt;br/&gt;radial translations,
inspired by the evolving wave pattern created when a rock &lt;br/&gt;falls in a
pond of calm water. To ensure fast numerical processing &lt;br/&gt;capabilities,
we use concepts similar to those in the framework of wavelets, &lt;br/&gt;which
have proved computationally efficient in the processing of one-
&lt;br/&gt;dimensional signals, e.g. audio. The intellectual merit of this work
is that it &lt;br/&gt;delivers directionally unbiased, fast processing
capabilities to all areas of &lt;br/&gt;digital signal processing of two or more
dimensions, in particular to &lt;br/&gt;biomedical image processing. The Fast
Isotropic Wavelet Algorithms resulting &lt;br/&gt;from our theory will be
applied to anonymized medical patient data provided to &lt;br/&gt;us by the
world renowned Texas Heart Institute (THI) in a joint effort for the
&lt;br/&gt;accurate and early detection of the formation of vulnerable plaque in
coronary &lt;br/&gt;arteries. The goal of this effort is an accurate non-
invasive initial screening &lt;br/&gt;test to assess the risk of mycardial
infarcts using CT-scans of the heart. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;