* 0406912
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:  An Investigation of the Effect of Public Deliberation on Environmental Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2004,09/30/2006
* John Gowdy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

The dissertation research will test an assumption pervasive in the field of
Ecological Economics that people make more altruistically-motivated
environmental decisions after participating in structured, group deliberation.
The deliberative environmental valuation research is still preliminary and
inconclusive due to a lack of definitive research results in this area. If group
discussion is shown to affect individuals' environmental values in ways that
better reflect the social good, then economic and other social science
researchers using the survey method to provide input to policy decisions about
the environment and other non-market goods would be well-advised to include
discussion as part of the survey process.

The project will use a current, critical environmental issue as a case study for
the research--whether to allow oil development in the coastal plain of the
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, Alaska. It will involve the random selection of
control and treatment groups in which a broad range of costs and benefits of
coastal plain development will be discussed prior to the completion of a survey
intended to elicit participants' preferences for oil development or wilderness
designation. The work involves travel to Anchorage and re mote bush villages in
Alaska to produce a videotape of interviews with governmental, industry and
environmental spokespersons, and indigenous Alaska Native groups who will be
most directly affected if the coastal plain is opened to oil development. The
video will be used to provide background information to the group participants
in New York, where the survey work is planned, used for teaching and community
outreach, and made available to public television. The research results will be
disseminated in professional journals and summarized for elected officials and
other interested parties.