* 0406512
* A Cross-linguistic Study of Self-repair
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Fay Wouk, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2010
* USD 263,790.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal 0406512&lt;br/&gt;A Cross-linguistic Study of
Self-repair&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Barbara A. Fox, University of Colorado, Boulder
and Fay Wouk, University of Auckland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara Fox of the University of
Colorado, Boulder, will conduct collaborative research with Dr. Fay Wouk of the
University of Auckland, New Zealand. This research project explores the
conversational phenomenon of self-repair in 14 languages. Self-repair is the
process by which a speaker stops the sentence they are producing and then
modifies it in some way. A speaker may repeat a word or phrase just produced,
insert a word or phrase, begin the sentence again in a new way, or modify the
structure in other ways, for example, And she- this girl's fixed up on a da- a
blind date. In this sentence, the speaker stops the utterance and then replaces
the pronoun 'she' with the noun phrase 'this girl'and then continues with the
utterance. Later in the utterance the speaker appears to begin the phrase 'a
date'and then redoes the phrase to insert the word
'blind.'&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-repair is thus a very powerful mechanism for
altering the syntax of a sentence as it is being produced. Although self-repair
may at first seem like the ultimate in disfluency and ungrammaticality, in fact
it appears to be highly organized. We could even say that there is a grammar to
self-repair. Moreover, this "grammar" appears to vary from language to language.
For example, in our exploration of self-repair in Japanese and Korean, we found
that the repetition of whole phrases-as in the above example-is extremely rare,
while it is not uncommon in American English self-repair. A variety of
explanations have been offered for the different "grammars" of self-repair in
different languages. The research team in this project will analyze data from a
wide range of languages, most of them unrelated and from different areas of the
world, displaying a wide range of structures, in the hopes of understanding the
scope of self-repair as a human-language phenomenon and testing past
explanations regarding its cross-linguistic variation. &lt;br/&gt;