* 0406141
* Synthesis of Soil Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning in Victoria Land, Antarctica:     A Workshop; September 8-12, 2004; Jekyll Island, GA
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Diana Wall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 05/31/2006
* USD 71,677.00

This is the first workshop to provide a forum for scientists studying issues
related to soil biodiversity and its role in ecosystem functioning in Victoria
Land, Antarctica. Research assessing the linkages of soil biodiversity to
ecosystem functioning has accelerated globally in the past 15 years, with
scientists from many nations investigating topics such as: the role of soil
organisms in decomposition; their role in the transfer of materials and
nutrients; and the relationships between aboveground diversity and belowground
diversity, at local to global scales. Because the Victoria Land Antarctic system
can be considered a model outdoor laboratory, studies conducted there have made
unique contributions to these and other current important topics in biology,
ranging from evolutionary biology to disturbance ecology. Here, as in few other
ecosystems, scientists can examine how physical and chemical properties
structure communities, and investigate the effects of disturbances such as soil
warming on individual species and communities.&lt;br/&gt;A diverse range of
participants, representing different nationalities, ages, disciplines, and
experiences will meet to consider soils and soil biodiversity in the Victoria
Land Region and to share and synthesize their research findings. They will
assess the current understanding of soil biodiversity at levels that range from
the molecular to the ecosystem and will determine the effects of human impacts
in this region. They will compare and contrast these findings with other
ecosystems and will define future research needs and priorities. &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts and intellectual merits of the workshop include investigating
soil species biogeography and relating it to global biodiversity estimates,
determining if there are key species in this fragile ecosystem, comparing
organism survival strategies, and compiling all information to assess the
vulnerability of soil biota to disturbance in this ecosystem. The workshop will
also link Antarctic soil ecologists with researchers from international and NSF
Long Term Ecological Research sites to provide a basis for comparison to other
ecosystems and to engage new investigators in research at this polar site. Other
broader societal impacts include infusing fresh, new ideas into existing and
future research for understanding how soil species contribute to soil fertility,
soil stabilization and linkages to sediments of streams and lakes. Overall, the
research has ultimate use for soil sustainability. Finally, publications to the
scientific community will be peer reviewed journal articles or a book on soil
ecology in Victoria Land that will further extend the intellectual body of
knowledge obtained through research. &lt;br/&gt;