* 0406346
* Extremal Kaehler Metrics and Geometric Flow Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Xiuxiong Chen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 369,539.00

&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0406346&lt;br/&gt;Title: Extremal Kaehler metrics and geometric
flow equations&lt;br/&gt;PI: Xiuxiong Chen, University of Wisconsin
(Madison)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the early
nineties, S. T. Yau conjectured that the existence of &lt;br/&gt;Kaehler metrics
with constant scalar curvature is related to the stability of &lt;br/&gt;the
underlying polarized manifold. In recent years, striking progress has
&lt;br/&gt;been made in this direction. In 1997, G. Tian proved that any
&lt;br/&gt;Kaehler-Einstein manifold with positive scalar curvature is K-Stable.
In&lt;br/&gt;2001, S. K. Donaldson proved that an algebraic manifold with
discrete &lt;br/&gt;automorphism group and Kaehler metric of constant scalar
curvature is Chow stable.&lt;br/&gt;Very recently, in a joint work with G. Tian,
the proposer proved that &lt;br/&gt;the existence of Kaehler metrics of constant
scalar curvature implies Semi-K&lt;br/&gt;Stability of the K energy with respect
to the given cohomology class. &lt;br/&gt;Inspired by these results, the
proposer wants to study a network of problems &lt;br/&gt;centered around the
existence of extremal Kaehler metrics (which includes &lt;br/&gt;constant scalar
curvature metric as a special case), stability of polarized Kaehler
&lt;br/&gt;manifold, and other related problems. The main ideas of solving these
problems&lt;br/&gt;consist of improving regularity for geodesics in the space of
Kaehler metrics in &lt;br/&gt;the sense of T. Mabuchi, of understanding the
long-time existence of the Calabiflow, &lt;br/&gt;and of the convergence of the
Kaehler-Ricci flow. These ideas are related to different &lt;br/&gt;mathematical
fields but the proposer believes that they are all very promising to solve the
Conjecture of Yau (in particular to solve the problem of the existence of
Kaehler-Einstein &lt;br/&gt;metrics on Fano manifold). The proposer is going to
work on the problems through &lt;br/&gt;these ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
problem of the existence of Kaehler metrics of constant&lt;br/&gt;scalar
curvature, being the key problem in differential geometry, has &lt;br/&gt;strong
impact to other fields of sciences like physics. According to
Albert&lt;br/&gt;Einstein, the theory of gravity can be interpreted as the
geometry of &lt;br/&gt;space-time. Thus the research in differential geometry is
crucially important in &lt;br/&gt;physics and cosmology. The research proposed
also has impact in string theory, &lt;br/&gt;which is the theory of unifying all
four basic forces of the Nature. The &lt;br/&gt;proposer's work, together with
the works of other mathematicians and physicists, &lt;br/&gt;helps in
understanding our Universe.&lt;br/&gt;