* 0406895
* Impact of Surface Wave Dependent Air-Sea Fluxes on Tropical Cyclone Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2009
* Il Ju Moon, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 05/31/2009
* USD 412,162.00

Intellectual Merit: Present bulk parameterizations of air-sea momentum fluxes
used in most hurricane research and forecast models are based on extrapolation
from field measurements in much weaker wind regimes. These parameterizations
predict monotonic increases of the exchange coefficients with wind speed.
However, recent observational, theoretical, and experimental results demonstrate
that air-sea momentum flux at high wind conditions strongly depends on the wave
field and that the drag coefficient ceases to increase and may even decrease at
very high wind speeds. These factors may cause current models to significantly
underestimate surface winds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) have developed a coupled wave-wind (CWW) model, which
provides surface momentum fluxes that are consistent with recent observations.
The model explicitly calculates the wave-induced stress and resulting drag
coefficient for any given wave field, even for complex seas driven by
hurricanes. Numerical experiments using the CWW model clearly indicate that the
behavior of momentum flux at high wind speeds is completely different from that
at weak wind speeds and that the momentum flux varies significantly depending on
the relative position from the storm center due to influence of ocean waves.
These results strongly suggest that proper estimation of momentum flux in
hurricane conditions can be only achieved by incorporating an ocean wave model
and a wave boundary model into hurricane-ocean models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is hypothesized that: (1) Surface momentum fluxes in hurricane conditions
strongly depend on the ocean wave fields varying in time and space. The effect
of breaking waves is significant under hurricane conditions. Momentum fluxes in
hurricane conditions can be predicted accurately by using the CWW model. (2)
Hurricane intensity and maximum wind predictions are significantly influenced by
the parameterization of the air-sea momentum flux. In particular, the
spatial/temporal variability of the drag coefficient has a major influence on
predictions. Therefore, the coupling of the CWW model to a hurricane-ocean
forecast model will result in a systematic improvement of the forecast skill of
hurricane intensity and wind structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these
hypotheses, the PIs will perform four specific tasks: (1) incorporate the
breaking wave effect into the CWW model, (2) develop a coupled wind-wave-ocean
hurricane prediction model by combining the CWW model and the Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory/University of Rhode Island hurricane-ocean model, (3)
investigate how new flux parameterizations affect hurricane intensity, track,
and wind structure predictions using both idealized and actual tropical storms,
and (4) compare model results with existing and newly obtained experimental data
in collaboration with scientists involved in the Office of Naval Research
sponsored Coupled Boundary Layers/Air-Sea Transfer (CBLAST) program and Korean
Ocean Research Development Institute (KORDI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: This research addresses societal need to better forecast and, thereby,
mitigate natural disasters caused by hurricane-generated extreme wind, waves,
and rain. The project involves the education and training of a graduate student
and post-doctoral scientist. The work promotes international cooperation by
using hurricane-observing tower data from KORDI and in turn providing new air-
sea modeling techniques to KORDI. The data from the tower will be brought to
investigate the air-sea fluxes at high wind speeds and their impact on tropical
cyclone predictions through the collaboration with KORDI.