* 0406336
* NGS:  Collaborative Research: Performance Measurement &amp; Modeling of Deep Hierarchy Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Jeff Hollingsworth, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 07/31/2009
* USD 537,375.00

CNS-0406336&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance methods
for understanding the performance of scientific applications. Because of current
architectural trends the performance of applications depends largely on their
interactions with memory and interconnect subsystems of today's large-scale HEC
(High-End Computing) platforms. The dynamics of these interactions are
increasingly complex and subtle; therefore means for understanding them are
needed so that applications can be better tuned to improve time-to-solution, and
future machines can be designed to better meet the needs of applications. The
Principal Investigators (PIs) will carry out a program of research and
development to provide the computational science community with EMPS
(Environment for Memory Performance Studies), an integrated simulation
environment for posing and answering "what if" performance
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capabilities that this project will provide
include:&lt;br/&gt;1. Tools for capturing program's performance data with
special emphasis on memory and communications.&lt;br/&gt;2. Tools for
abstracting and summarizing the essential performance behaviors of applications
from the performance data.&lt;br/&gt;3. Facilities for forming and evaluating
performance models to identify the performance sensitivity of applications to
changes in machine, or algorithm, or implementation.&lt;br/&gt;4. An EMPS API to
enable plug-and play between performance tool components the PIs develop and
also allowing the environment to be extensible to include components developed
by others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;As part of this
work the PIs will develop a science for understanding the performance of
applications running on deep and wide memory hierarchy machines. They will
answer the question "what are the factors that affect the performance of
scientific applications on such machines?" Going a step further, they will
quantify the effects of performance factors, thus increasing the exactitude of
performance models for these architectures. They will also develop predictive
methods to evaluate how the performance of applications would benefit from new
architectural features, and how much performance would improve if different
algorithms and/or optimizations were used- thus to evaluate options and
tradeoffs prior to carrying out expensive development
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
develop a variety of techniques that will permit application scientists to
better understand their applications and allow computer scientists to develop
computers that are better able to accommodate applications. This will
potentially allow faster and better scientific simulations that enable new
research to be done in many scientific disciplines. In addition by providing a
close working relationship between a university, an NSF center, and a major HPC
vendor this project will produce students who are trained in the many facets
that impact HPC system development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;