* 0406254
* Classification problems in foliation theory
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Steven Hurder, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 11/30/2008
* USD 105,000.00

A foliation F of a manifold M is a regular decomposition of the space
&lt;br/&gt;into connected submanifolds, usually with some assumptions that the
&lt;br/&gt;decomposition is smooth, and the decomposition is uniform -- either
&lt;br/&gt;there are no singular strata, or the singular strata themselves have
a &lt;br/&gt;foliated structure. The breadth of the study of foliations includes
&lt;br/&gt;all dynamical systems, an immensely broad topic in itself, so truly
&lt;br/&gt;classifying all foliations is quite impossible. The goal of this
&lt;br/&gt;project is to investigate three approaches to classification: 1)
&lt;br/&gt;classify foliations via categorical (in the sense of Lusternik and
&lt;br/&gt;Schnirelmann) decompositions and other "foliated cell" structures;
&lt;br/&gt;2) classify foliations up to homotopy of their transverse Haefliger
&lt;br/&gt;structure; 3) classify foliations in terms of the ergodic theory and
&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic properties of their leaves. The PI's study of the
relations &lt;br/&gt;between the second and third of these topics -- dynamical
systems and &lt;br/&gt;ergodic theory, and geometric and topological invariants
of group &lt;br/&gt;actions and foliations -- has been ongoing for more than 20
years with &lt;br/&gt;support of the NSF, and resulted in many publications and
advances in &lt;br/&gt;the field. In the past three years, there have been
further decisive &lt;br/&gt;advances in each topic. The study of Lusternik and
Schnirelmann &lt;br/&gt;category of foliations, and its related ideas, is a very
new field, &lt;br/&gt;with great potential for advances. The fundamental
connections between &lt;br/&gt;LS category theory and Morse theory, motivate the
study of the &lt;br/&gt;connections between their foliated versions, and the
classification of &lt;br/&gt;transverse Haefliger structures. Success with this
part of the proposed &lt;br/&gt;research would result in truly fundamental new
understanding of the &lt;br/&gt;structure of
foliations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of foliations of manifolds began as a
subject approximately &lt;br/&gt;fifty years ago. The concept arises very
naturally in many geometric &lt;br/&gt;and topological problems, so it is not
surprising that understanding &lt;br/&gt;properties of foliations has become a
fundamental aspect of the study &lt;br/&gt;of many other subjects in geometry,
topology, dynamical systems, &lt;br/&gt;analysis and various areas of applied
and theoretical physics. The &lt;br/&gt;intellectual merit of the proposed
activity includes advancing our &lt;br/&gt;understanding of the structure of
foliations, and developing new &lt;br/&gt;techniques with broad applications in
many fields. Success with this &lt;br/&gt;research project will not just be
measured by solving the proposed &lt;br/&gt;problems, but also in opening the
field up with new questions. The &lt;br/&gt;broader impact resulting from the
proposed activity includes enhanced &lt;br/&gt;training of undergraduate and
graduate students in mathematics, &lt;br/&gt;collaborative research projects
with postdoctoral investigators, and &lt;br/&gt;international collaborations
promoting research in mathematics. The &lt;br/&gt;PI intends to continue working
with graduate students and postdocs on &lt;br/&gt;projects related to this
proposal, and to promote the field via &lt;br/&gt;conference talks and via the
internet.&lt;br/&gt;