* 0406813
* Periodic Phenomena in Cataclysmic Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Joseph Patterson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2007
* USD 213,481.00

AST 0406813 Patterson

The clockworks of cataclysmic binary stars are rusting away. Most of the
information about these stars comes to us courtesy of the periodicities they
display, and some critical aspects of the physics rely on the accuracy with
which these periods are known. Yet many observers have basically forsaken
period-finding, driven perhaps by the scarcity of telescope time (since a period
minimally requires watching a star do something for a few cycles). And there is
no systematic effort to keep sufficient watch over these clocks to make sure
that an ever-increasing time baseline is available to continue improving
knowledge of the periods and their changes. Dr. Joseph Patterson, at Columbia
University, has been developing the tools to make a strong impact on this
situation. He has found a large fraction of certain classes of currently known
cataclysmic binary stars and about 60% of recent orbital periods (through a
network of collaborations). This includes precise orbital periods for two famous
old cataclysmic variables (CVs), T Pyx and AM CVn, which have stubbornly guarded
their secret from many decades of prior study, and which will now likely yield
fundamental information on the direction and rate of binary evolution. Dr.
Paterson will use this award to pursue tracing out a second main sequence of
binaries with light secondaries driven out of thermal equilibrium, where angular
momentum loss plays the role of nuclear burning familiar in single-star
evolution. He has identified four of these period-bouncer stars, and he has
learned how to find more. This is a major step towards learning how binary stars
end their lives. Finally he will repeat a 1984 study of distances and accretion
rates in CVs, for today's much-expanded roster. This will give improved values
for the lifetime, space density, and scale height of CVs in the galaxy.

Over the last ten years Dr. Patterson and colleagues have assembled a worldwide
network of small photometric telescopes, the CBA, able to study periodic
phenomena with unprecedented thoroughness. This network of (mostly) amateur
astronomers is now a major element in the research interface of amateur and
professional astronomers, and, with proper nutrition, should flourish and expand
beyond the realm of cataclysmic variables. This has been a happy symbiosis of
the amateur's traditional interest in discovery with the physicist's traditional
interest in experiments leading to confrontation with theory. ***

