* 0406385
* Conference: Protein Phosphorylation Workshop to be held December 2003 in Monterey, California
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Susan Taylor, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 11/30/2004
* USD 15,050.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support the attendance of students, post-doctoral
fellows and young faculty at a workshop entitled "Protein Phosphorylation
Workshop" to be held December 11-14 at the Asilomar Conference center. This
workshop is intended to bring together a highly diverse group of laboratory and
computational scientists to consider how to develop interdisciplinary approaches
to understanding the structure and function of protein kinases and how to
integrate these approaches with the development of advanced computational
infrastructure to support experimental work in the area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this meeting is to address key
questions about how databases and computational resources can support
experimental research. Clearly, databases and computational resources are key
elements of our research infrastructure, but few would say that current
resources meet the needs of current laboratory research. How these resources can
be enhanced to deal with the increasingly large datasets and biological systems
models that will be developed in the next few years is an open question that
urgently needs to be addressed. This meeting brings together researchers from
many experimental and computational domains. It will act as a seed both for new
developments in computational infrastructure, as well as for new interactions
and collaborations needed for integrative research on the structure and function
of protein kinases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;