* 0406033
* Analysis of Stationary Solutions and the Pinning Phenomena for the Modeling of Phase Boundary Motions in Materials Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Nung Kwan Yip, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2007
* USD 192,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0406033 PI: Nung Kwan Yip Institution: Purdue University Title:
Analysis of Stationary Solutions and the Pinning Phenomena for the Modeling of
Phase Boundary Motions in Materials Science

ABSTRACT

This proposal strives to understand the energy landscape experienced by
materials phase boundaries. This is a tremendously interesting and important
problem in the regimes of applied analysis and modeling in materials science. It
is due to the fact that phase boundaries, during their formations, will
inevitably encounter complicated microstructures coming from the defects and
impurities embedded in the environment. The investigator will study the stable
and unstable patterns of the phase boundaries. These correspond to the local
minimizers and saddle points on the materials energy functionals. The main
emphasis of this proposal is to study the time evolution of the phase boundaries
on the energy landscape, in particular, the transition from one stable
configuration to another and from the pinning and de-pinning phenomena in
response to some external forcing. The outcome of the scientific activity will
provide a solid mathematical framework for the understanding of the dynamical
response of the materials with respect to the underlying spatial environment and
external parameters. The mathematical techniques involved in this proposal
include variational methods, asymptotic analysis, and bifurcation theory.

The understanding of material properties is becoming more and more instrumental
in modern materials science, especially in the current pursuit of small scale
(nano-)materials. A crucial factor is to relate the materials properties to
their microstructures. The outcome of the proposed activity can help the
description of the stable and unstable pattern formations of the materials phase
boundaries and their dynamical behavior when external conditions changes. This
gives a better understanding of the materials response to the external
environment, which in turn gives better design and manufacture of the materials.
The topic of this investigation is highly interdisciplinary, which can lead to
close collaboration between mathematicians and materials scientists. It also
provides good opportunities for human resources and educational development.