* 0406225
* Local Helioseismology with GONG
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Douglas Braun, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 08/31/2010
* USD 690,568.00

The Global Oscillation Network Group (GONG), recently upgraded to include higher
resolution CCD cameras, is a community-based program to conduct a detailed study
of the structure and dynamics of the Sun using helioseismology. What we now call
global helioseismology has been invaluable for determining the radial structure
of the Sun, as well as the depth and latitude variation of axisymmetric flows,
such as rotation and torsional oscillations. However, global-mode frequencies
are relatively insensitive to azimuthally varying structure, north/south
hemispheric asymmetries, small-scale flows, and meridional flows. New
diagnostics have been employed in recent years to explore the solar interior
from a local rather than a global perspective. The investigators are developing
computational seismic holography as an efficient and versatile tool designed to
image the solar interior to the optimum spatial resolution permitted by wave
diffraction. They are applying phase-sensitive seismic holography to GONG
observations, spanning half a solar cycle, to study the short-term and long-term
temporal properties of flows and sound-speed perturbations throughout much of
the solar convection zone. They will explore the subsurface nature of meridional
circulation, the nature of other subsurface flows and their connection with
magnetic activity, and the local acoustic properties of the tachocline and the
solar poles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project is increasing
our understanding, and hence our predictive capability, of the solar cycle. This
is essential for space exploration, earth sensing, weather forecasting, and
communications that are all impacted by solar activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;