* 0406252
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Paleoepidemiological Studies of the Black Death
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* James Wood, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 06/30/2005
* USD 3,173.00

The Black Death of 1347-51 was probably the most devastating epidemic in human
history. It killed over 30 percent of Europe's population, and initiated
profound social, economic, and demographic changes. Based on a broad similarity
of symptoms, most researchers have accepted unquestioningly that the Black Death
was an outbreak of bubonic plague; furthermore, many have assumed that the
epidemiology of the Black Death was similar if not identical to that of modern
plague. Recently, several researchers have questioned whether the Black Death
was bubonic plague in light of the strikingly different epidemiological
characteristics of the medieval and modern diseases. For example, mortality from
the Black Death, as estimated from historical documents, was as high as 50
percent in affected populations, whereas modern plague mortality is rarely more
than 2-3 percent even in the absence of treatment. Given the ongoing debates
about the Black Death, there remains a need for further studies of the
epidemiology of the disease. This project will investigate the epidemiology of
the epidemic using a sample of almost 800 skeletons from the Black Death
cemetery of East Smithfield, London, and two pre-Black Death cemeteries from
medieval Denmark. The skeletons will be scored for a variety of skeletal
lesions, sex, and recently-developed age indicators; these data will be analyzed
using a multistate model of illness and death. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address several important questions about the Black Death. How high
was the excess mortality associated with the Black Death? How was the excess
mortality distributed by age and sex? Were infants, juveniles, and the elderly
at a higher risk than other age groups, or were all ages at equal risk of death?
Was the Black Death selective with respect to pre-existing health conditions?
That is, were people in poor health at a higher risk of dying from the Black
Death, or did the disease kill people indiscriminately, as is often assumed? By
providing improved estimates of the pattern of mortality using a new statistical
model of illness and death, this project will also contribute to recent debates
over whether the Black Death was actually caused by bubonic plague.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is part of a larger collaborative project,
involving researchers from the US, the UK, and Denmark, that is re-examining the
available evidence on the Black Death. One goal of this larger project is to
introduce a new perspective into historical epidemiology by viewing the
fourteenth-century Black Death as a newly emergent disease. Emergent infections
are those, like AIDS or the Ebola virus, that have just appeared for the first
time or are increasing in incidence and distribution. The present interest in
emergent infections is new, but humans have probably faced such diseases for
thousands of years. A better understanding of the epidemiology of the Black
Death is of great importance for clarifying the role of emergent infections in
human history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;