* 0406726
* Stability and Evolution of Interacting Close Binary Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Ronald Webbink, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 08/31/2010
* USD 258,387.00

AST 0406726

PI Webbink

Unlike the evolution of single stars, which is to a first approximation a
function only of initial mass and chemical composition, the evolution of
interacting binary stars involves at minimum four parameters: the masses of each
of the two stars, their orbital separation (or period), and chemical
composition. The large number of parameters makes it prohibitively expensive to
explore every combination possible. Furthermore, theory is not yet able to
rigorously quantify many critical physical processes, most especially the extent
of mass and angular momentum loss from a binary undergoing mass exchange between
components. Statistical models which attempt to reproduce the distributions of
observable properties of different kinds of close binary systems (population
synthesis models) offer the opportunity for insight to the magnitude of these
effects. These models rely upon simple parameterizations of single-star
evolution models, combined with a broad, but very incomplete, understanding of
how interacting binary stars evolve based on the behavior of the relatively
small number of detailed binary evolutionary models in the published literature.
The research program here is providing a rigorous general framework for
population synthesis models, as well as exploring specific evolutionary problems
of widespread interest to researchers in binary star evolution. The work
encompasses an array of projects critical to progress in binary evolution
theory. Construction of adiabatic and thermal-equilibrium mass loss sequences
for stars spanning the entire range of the masses and evolutionary states will
define mass transfer time scales appropriate to all classes of interacting
binary stars. The evolution of binary stars in physical contact with each other
is explored with a simultaneous binary evolution code, magnetic field coupling
to binary evolution among the magnetic cataclysmic binaries, and the modeling of
wind-fed magnetic cataclysmic variables.

Broader Impacts: This work includes a graduate student, now engaged in
preparatory work for her Ph.D. dissertation, who will also participate in
national and international conferences. Three of the major components of this
research involve international collaborations, with researchers in China,
Australia, and Germany. The numerical results of the stability study are to be
made available in digital form, since it has broad application for all kinds of
binary evolution studies. And finally, the proposed studies of donor star
variability in cataclysmic variables provide the means to test for long-term
stochastic variability among lower-main-sequence stars. This project also
maintains and develops binary star databases.