* 0406681
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Microbial Ecology of Canopy Soils in Temperate Rain Forests of Southern New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Steven Stephenson, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 24,720.00

0244329&lt;br/&gt;Stephenson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support
collaborative research in microbial ecology involving Professor Steven
Stephenson and two undergraduate students of Fairmont State College in West
Virginia together with Professor David Orlovich of the University of Otago in
Dunedin, New Zealand. Recent studies of temperate rainforests on the southwest
coast of the South Island of New Zealand indicate that the biodiversity and
biomass of epiphytic communities in these forests are comparable to or even
exceed those of tropical forests. The mantle of canopy soil is as much as 20 cm.
thick. There have been no published studies of the microorganisms living in this
rich environment. The objectives of this project are to assess the biodiversity
and ecology of specific types of fungi living in the canopy soil microhabitat of
these lowland temperate rain forests and to characterize the assemblages of
microorganisms found there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide an
opportunity for two US undergraduate students to participate in field and
laboratory research in New Zealand and to interact with scientists and students
of the University of Otago. They will gain invaluable experience in
international collaboration as well as working in a rain forest environment not
available in the United States. The research itself will allow a body of
baseline data to be developed on the abundance, biodiversity and general
patterns of occurrence of microorganisms in a poorly known subsystem of
temperate forests in the Southern Hemisphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;