* 0406502
* Control of Defect Interactions for P-Type Doping of ZnO by Ion Implantation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Gabriel Braunstein, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 49,979.00

This is a Minority Career Advancement Award (MCAA) project addressing selective-
area formation of p-type transparent conducting oxides (TCOs), and wide band gap
semiconductors, using ion implantation, with focus on ZnO as a representative
material. The doping approach involves ion implantation at a temperature low
enough to freeze interstitials created by ion beam irradiation so as to avoid
creation of a defect imbalance that precludes proper annealing of implantation-
induced lattice damage. Low temperature implantation will be followed by a very
rapid in-situ heating of the sample, to induce short range, interstitial-vacancy
recombination, and substitutional lattice location of the dopants. An ex-situ
annealing will then be carried out to further an-neal any residual lattice
defects, and enhance electrical activation of the dopants. By controlling the
mobility and recombination of defects, and by carefully monitoring the lattice
location of po-tential dopants, and the electrical transport properties of the
implanted layers, fundamental in-formation is sought regarding mechanisms
responsible for the doping difficulties typically encountered in ZnO, and other
wide band gap semiconductors. Implanted and annealed samples will be
characterized for their structural, compositional, optical, and electronic
transport properties. Measurements of lattice disorder and dopant concentration
as a function of depth, will be performed and correlated with optical and
electronic transport analyses: Rutherford backscattering spectrometry will be
employed to determine stoichiometry, composition as a function of depth, and the
presence of impurities in the films. Ion channeling measurements will be used to
monitor implantation induced lattice damage, and to assess the lattice location
of the dopants (in single crystals). The depth profiles of ion implanted
species, as well as host substrate compo-nents, and impurities, will be studied
with secondary ion mass spectrometry. Optical properties will be analyzed by
spectrophotometry, in transmission and reflection modes. Electronic trans-port
properties will be characterized by Hall effect and conductivity measurements,
as a function of temperature. This research is expected to advance understanding
of the role of defects on the electrical transport properties of ZnO, and other
wide band gap semiconductors, and in the de-velopment of an approach for
spatially controlled doping of ZnO based devices. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses fundamental research issues associated with electronic
materials having technological relevance. An important feature of the project is
the integration of research and education. Broader impacts associated with the
project are exemplified by education and training of undergraduate and graduate
students in materials research topics and methodologies; incorporation of the
materials developed in the research activity in a graduate/undergraduate class
on ion-solid interactions; a strong emphasis on attracting students from
underrepresented groups; establishment of scientific collaborations with groups
from Latin America; fostering of activities for students (graduate,
undergraduate, high school) such as technical symposia and poster session
competitions at the local level (Florida State); development of science
workshops for high and middle school science teachers in collaboration with
Orlando Science Center; and dissemination of scientific information by
publishing the results, and posting on a designated website (within the Physics
Department website: www.physics.ucf.edu). &lt;br/&gt;