* 0406658
* Dynamics of the Base of the Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Norman Sleep, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2009
* USD 160,062.00

The project involves dynamic effects that occur at the base of the lithosphere
or equivalently at the base of tectonic plates. The lack of tectonics in
cratonal continental crust (older than ~2.5 billion years) is a salient feature
of the Earth. Much of the Canadian Shield is one example. Data from xenoliths
erupted from diamond pipes provide hard constraints on physical models. Cratonal
lithosphere approached its present thickness, about 200 kilometers, soon after
it formed before 2.5 billion years ago and has persisted since then. The second
key observation from xenoliths is that the rheologically active boundary layer
(the zone of active flow) at the base of the lithosphere has a temperature range
of less than 200 K. These observations allow application of the fluid-dynamic
formalism of stagnant-lid convection to deduce the physical properties of the
convecting region. Cratonal lithosphere is chemically less dense than normal
mantle and much more viscous. It acts as a lid on the underlying convection. The
project concentrates on geological implications of the chemically buoyant
lithosphere. The first objective is to obtain the scaling relationships for the
temperature range across convection beneath a chemically stable layer. A second
more protracted implication involves basin formation within continental regions.
Platform lithosphere (younger than about 2.5 billion years) that lacks
chemically buoyant mantle is now about as thick as cratonal lithosphere. This
situation did not prevail in the past when the interior of the Earth was hotter.
Stagnant-lid convection was more vigorous beneath platforms and the platform
lithosphere thinner than now. The cooling over time caused platforms to subside
relative to cratons and produced the tendency for sedimentary basins to overlie
platforms. A more subtle effect is that the difference in mechanical strength
between platforms and cratons has waned with time. Continental break-up now
sometimes occurs through cratons, but a systematic effect is not yet evident.
The project involves the effects of mantle plumes beneath basins, platforms, and
ocean basin. One implication is whether plume material ponded beneath interior
basins, like Michigan. Overall plume material is a natural probe for the base of
the lithosphere. Plume material flows laterally from thick lithosphere to thin.
This flow is a widespread but poorly recognized and understood process. Much of
the project is directed toward real examples, which effect surface geology. The
project has broader implications to comparative planetology. Much of the
evolution of animals occurred when the sea went in and out over platforms. This
situation requires the right amount of water in the oceans so that erosion-
deposition and tectonics tune the continents to the same long-term base level.
It is fundamental to the rise of oxygen in our air. Too much water precludes
continental erosion and there is no source of phosphorus in the ocean. Too
little water leaves the ridge axis exposed where ferrous iron in mid-oceanic
ridge basalt is a sink for atmospheric oxygen.