* 0406004
* Microstructures and Residual Stress in Polycrystalline Materials:  Their Nondestructive Characterization and Effects on Mechanical Properties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Chi-Sing Man, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2008
* USD 182,423.00

Proposal: DMS-0406004&lt;br/&gt;PI: Chi-Sing Man&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;Title: Microstructures and Residual Stress in
Polycrystalline Materials:&lt;br/&gt;Their Nondestructive Characterization and
Effects on Mechanical
Properties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many materials
(e.g., rocks and sheet metals) are polycrystalline: they are aggregates of tiny
crystallites of various orientations, sizes, and shapes. The mesoscale structure
of polycrystalline materials, which includes the stereology and orientations of
the crystallites, strongly affect their macroscopic mechanical properties (e.g.,
the formability of sheet metals). A polycrystalline material may also be
prestressed. For instance, through surface-enhancement treatments a thin
subsurface layer of compressive residual stress is artificially imparted on
critical components of aircraft engines to improve their high-cycle fatigue
behavior and material damage tolerance. The effects of mesoscale structure on
various macroscopic properties of polycrystalline solids are often manifested
through some coarsely defined microstructural variables. Identifying such
microstructural variables and delineating their effects on mechanical behavior
of polycrystalline materials are prerequisites for material design and
nondestructive characterization. The objectives of this project are threefold:
(1) By implementing homogenization only over horizontal planes and letting
stress and texture be essentially bounded functions of depth, derive
mathematical formulae for the dispersion of Rayleigh waves propagating in
various directions along the surface of a textured polycrystalline half-space
which carries an inhomogeneous subsurface layer of residual stress. (2) Derive
explicit formulae of plastic potentials of sheet metals that include the
orientation distribution function (which defines crystallographic texture or the
volume fraction of crystallites in each orientation) and the second-order fabric
tensor (which gives a rough description of grain size and shape) as independent
variables. (3) Develop a mathematical theory for determination of grain shape
from measurements of anisotropy in ultrasonic
attenuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturers of aircraft engines are very
interested in incorporating the beneficial effects of surface-enhancement
treatments into life predictions of critical engine components. This can be
accomplished only through development of nondestructive measurement methods
capable of verifying and quantifying residual stress levels. Part 1 of this
project provides the theoretical basis of a possible ultrasound method for
nondestructive inspection of the subsurface residual stress layer induced by low
plasticity burnishing, an emerging surface-enhancement technique. Parts 2 and 3
are motivated by some technical problems in quality improvement and on-line
quality control of continuous cast aluminum alloy sheets, which, as compared
with their counterparts made from conventional direct chill cast ingots, provide
energy savings of over 25% and economic savings of over 14% but often have
inferior formability. Part 2 is devoted to mathematical work that supplements a
joint research project between the PI and his colleagues at Chemical and
Materials Engineering, University of Kentucky; Commonwealth Aluminum Concast,
Inc. (CACI) is the industrial partner of the joint project. Part 3 has its
ultimate goal to develop an ultrasound technique for on-line monitoring of grain
shape in sheet metals.&lt;br/&gt;