* 0406608
* Dynamics Related to the Presence of Canard Solutions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Maciej Krupa, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 140,000.00

The context of this project is singularly perturbed differential equations.
Sample equations to be considered include coupled oscillators and models of
oscillatory chemical reactions. A characteristic feature of singularly perturbed
equations is the presence of slow/fast dynamics. Slow/fast systems often possess
locally invariant slow manifolds, where trajectories evolve on the slow time
scale. As trajectories leave locally invariant slow manifolds they typically
follow fast directions. Canard solutions are exceptional trajectories that pass
from attracting to repelling slow manifolds. It is known that these solutions
separate invariant or locally invariant regions of different dynamic behavior.
For his reason canard solutions provide the key to understanding certain types
of complex oscillatory and/or chaotic dynamics. The goal of the project is to
understand the dynamics related to the presence of canard solutions. The methods
that will be used in the analysis are based on geometric theory of dynamical
systems augmented by a desingularization procedure from algebraic geometry known
as the blow-up method. The need for desingularization is explained by the fact
that canards pass through regions where the slow dynamics is not hyperbolic. An
efficient approach is to break up the analysis into local, near the points of
non-hyperbolicity, and global, where standard methods (Fenichel theory)
apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slow/fast dynamics are observed in the context of a
number of natural phenomena. For example, in the context of the firing of a
neuron, the membrane potential is a fast varying variable, while some of the
other variables, related to the concentration of some of the ions, like
potassium, vary slowly. For a simple oscillator (cell) consisting of one fast
variable and one slow variable there are two basic types of oscillations: small
oscillations, which correspond to uniformly slow motions small in amplitude, and
relaxation oscillations, which are a combination of a slow evolution and fast
jumps. Systems with many interacting separate components are often modeled as
coupled cells, with each component modeled by a simple cell (oscillator) and the
interaction between cells modeled by appropriate coupling terms. Such models
arise in a large variety of applications, including biotechnology, chemical
engineering, and neurobiology. One of the fundamental issues in the analysis of
such systems is to understand the patterns of oscillation. Interesting examples
of such patterns are mixed mode oscillations, which correspond to switching
between small oscillations and relaxation oscillations, localized solutions,
which occur when a cluster of cells performs relaxation oscillations while the
remaining cells perform small oscillations, and multi-periodic solutions, for
which the frequency of the oscillation of some of the cells is a fraction of the
frequency of the oscillation of the other cells. The goal of this project is to
obtain a better understanding of the patterns of oscillation and possibly of
more complicated dynamics by using the structure provided by the existence of
exceptional solutions, called canard solutions, which occur on the boundaries of
regions corresponding to different dynamic behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;