* 0406653
* Dust and the Martian Climate
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Mark Richardson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 273,948.00

AST 0406653&lt;br/&gt;Richardson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project led by Dr.
Mark Richardson will provide new insight into the processes that control the
Martian dust cycle, including the development of global dust storms. A General
Circulation Model (GCM), originally developed to study the Earth's climate, and
subsequently adapted for Martian application, will be used to study the global
dynamics of dust lifting and transport. Data obtained from multiple years of
observations by the Viking Orbiters and the Mars Global Surveyor Orbiter will be
used to constrain model simulations to realistic states. The model will treat
dust injection by small-scale convective motions (such as dust devils) and
model-resolved wind stresses. Dust is transported within the atmosphere by
resolved winds and by diffusion, representing unresolved motions. Gravity is
allowed to act on the dust particles, generating dust settling back onto the
surface. While in the atmosphere, dust modifies the visible and thermal infrared
optical depths, modifying atmospheric heating rates and hence the circulation.
The system is thus highly coupled and non-linear. The model is to be used to
study the processes that maintain the ubiquitous, but seasonally varying
background distribution of dust in the Martian atmosphere. It is currently not
known how important dust devils and convective motions are, on a global basis. A
major goal of this project&lt;br/&gt;is the generation of quazi-variable,
spontaneous global dust storms, which have never&lt;br/&gt;previously been
simulated in a GCM. These studies will focus on the mechanisms of storm
generation and interannual variability of the storms. It is anticipated that
this study will result in the first simulation of the Martian dust cycle to
generate both the seasonal variation of haze and quazi-variable global dust
storms using a completely unprescribed, prognostic dust scheme. More
importantly, exploration of the behavior of the model should yield insight into
the processes operating in the dust cycle that have hitherto not been accessible
to quantitative study. These insights will have implications&lt;br/&gt;for our
understanding of the maintenance of the Martian climate, and how this climate
may have varied over the course of Martian geological
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities associated with this project will
have a major impact on the education and training of the graduate student and
post-doctoral scholar involved. The major tool to be used in this study, the
GCM, provides a useful means for training students in the numerical simulation
of the atmosphere and climate system. Development of this tool provides a
continuing facility for other projects and further research/training
opportunities in the future. Smaller projects spurring-off from this activity
will provide foci for undergraduate research opportunities, through Caltech's
Summer Undergraduate Research Foundation (SURF) program, which the PI has been
involved in during each summer since his appointment at
Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;