* 0406201
* Emerging Scientist Travel Support - The Fourth International Symposium on Radiative Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* M. Pinar Menguc, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 12/31/2004
* USD 12,600.00

The award will provide partial financial support for six emerging scientists to
travel to the Fourth International Symposium on Radiative Transport in Istanbul.
Each invitee will be expected to participate fully in the Symposium, submitting
some aspect of their research activity for review and presentation. The
Symposium is the only global venue for discussion of challenging issues related
to radiative transport and will offer a significant opportunity for young
scientists to establish research relationships with colleagues abroad. As such,
it provides a unique opportunity for teaching, training, and learning for young
investigators just entering the field. Priority for awards will be given to
post-doctoral investigators and to doctoral students, followed by pre-tenure
faculty. The PI's will make a strong effort to identify individuals that will
broaden the base of participation by under-represented groups. Because results
presented at the International Symposia are published and widely cited in the
radiation community, young scientists supported under this proposal are exposed
to the most contemporary, highest quality research in the field; Technological
advances often draw on expertise in radiation transfer to improve world
conditions. Participation of young scientists in such a forum provides
continuity to the knowledge base, as well as inspiring new technology that has
the potential to improve society. This award has been funded by the Thermal
Transport and Thermal Processing of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.