* 0406752
* Fundamental Study on Organoclay Nanocomposites Based on Functionalized Block Copolymer, Functionalized Liquid-Crystalline Polymer, and Functionalized Polynorbornene
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2007
* Chang Han, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/2007
* USD 277,903.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Chang D. Han &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Akron&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0406752&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental issues
concerning the principles and mechanisms associated with achieving a highly-
exfoliated organoclay nanocomposite will be investigated. Diene-based ABC-type
triblock copolymers with a functional group in the endblock C will be
synthesized via anionic polymerization followed by hydroxylation/oxidation
reactions, a functionalized thermotropic liquid-crystalline polymer (TLCP) will
be synthesized via condensation polymerization, and functionalized
polynorbornenes (PNB) with hydroxyl, acetic, or amine groups will be synthesized
via ring opening metathesis polymerization. Then each of the polymers will be
mixed, via melt blending using a micro twin-screw compounder, with chemically-
modified organoclay or oganocardbon nanoparticles to produce nanocomposites with
a high degree of exfoliation. Diene-based, endblock-functionalized ABC-type
triblock elastomers have advantages over the conventional styrene-ran-butadiene
copolymers (SB rubber) in that greatly improved mechanical properties, via a
very high degree of exfoliation, of the nanocomposites can be obtained by
judiciously controlling the microstructure of the diene block in an ABC-typle
triblock copolymer. The basic premise is to provide attractive interactions
between the organoclay or organocarbon nanoparticles and the polymer matrix:
functionalized ABC-type triblock copolymer, functionalized TLCP, or
functionalized PNB. The presence of attractive interactions will be tested using
in-situ Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The degree of exfoliation will
be tested using X-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, and
oscillatory shear rheometry, and the mechanical properties (tensile strength,
tear strength, dynamic modulus, and impact strength) of the nanocomposites will
be investigated. Investigation of the formation, structure, and dynamics of
these nanocomposites can lead to a better understanding of the principles and
mechanisms associated with achieving highly-exfoliated organoclay
nanocomposites, and potentially to the development of novel nanocomposite
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental concepts that will be developed
from this research project should help other researchers to develop new
nanocomposites either by designing and synthesizing new polymer systems or
synthesizing new surfactants that can be used to modify the surfaces of layered
silicates or graphite.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from these activities lie in
two areas: (i) it will stimulate other researchers to develop new generations of
nanocomposites on the basis of sound scientific foundations, (ii) it will help
open avenues for the U.S. polymer fabrication industry to produce new attractive
and cost-effective novel nanocomposites, and (iii) it will help the $40 billion
U.S. tire manufacturing industry to innovate/alter the existing manufacturing
processes for improved tear strength and rolling resistance of tires.&lt;br/&gt;