* 0406584
* RUI:  Studies of the Heating and Sintering of Powdered Metals in Separate Electric and Magnetic Fields Using a Single Mode Microwave Cavity
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Brock Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 05/31/2008
* USD 299,950.00

This RUI award by the Division of Materials Research to Pennsylvania State
University at University Park addresses two questions: first, how metal powder
compacts are heated so efficiently by microwave radiation and, second, if the
initial stage of sintering fits conventional models or does the explanation
require a microwave-specific model? These two questions will be addressed by
Professor Zimmerman and the team at Pennsylvania State University at Altoona on
three fronts: (a) an empirical study of the complex permittivity and
permeability of powder metal compacts as a function of temperature, particle
size, particle oxidation, and packing density using resonant cavity techniques;
(b) identification of the separate contributions of the electric and magnetic
fields to the heating and sintering using a single-mode microwave system; and
(c) evaluation of the first stage of sintering by direct examination of heated
(sintered) samples by inspection with both optical and scanning or transmission
electron microscopy (SEM or TEM). The focus will be on transition metal powders
of copper, gold, and tungsten and ferromagnetic powders of iron and cobalt, due
to the industrial significance of these materials. The knowledge of the
temperature distribution and energy deposition gained from these present studies
would advance understanding of the microwave sintering
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would provide new knowledge on the
electromagnetic properties and microwave heating and sintering of powdered
metals, which could have wide applications in industry. In addition, the project
includes training and development of students and enables professional
development of faculty and a postdoctoral researcher. This work is in a research
environment for undergraduate students who are preparing for graduate studies or
industrial work in the applied sciences and engineering. The universities B.S.
degrees in Science, Electromechanical Engineering Technology and a proposed
degree program in Applied Science of Materials will benefit greatly from this
undergraduate research program. The students will reap educational benefits
while making significant contributions to the success of the research. Their
experience will culminate in the dissemination of results with oral and poster
presentations at regional or national meetings. The studies complement work at
the Materials Research Institute at Penn State University in University Park and
the undergraduate students will benefit from an exchange of ideas with other
students, post- doctoral researchers, and faculty at Penn State University in
University Park.