* 0406351
* NGS:  A Compiler-Enabled Model- and Measurement-Driven Adaptation Environment for Dependability and Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* William Sanders, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,200,000.00

Abstract: CNS-0406351&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation parallel and
distributed computing must be dependable and have predictable performance in
order to meet the requirements of increasingly complex scientific and commercial
applications. The large-scale nature and changing user requirements of such
applications, coupled with the changing fault environment and workloads in which
they must operate, dictate that their dependability and performance must be
managed in an online fashion, reacting&lt;br/&gt;to changes in anticipated and
observed faults, demands placed on the system, and changes in specified
dependability, performance, and/or functional requirements. This project will
create a compiler-enabled model- and measurement-driven adaptation environment
that allows distributed applications to perform as expected despite faults that
may occur. Achieving those capabilities will require fundamental advances in and
synergistic combinations between 1) compiler-based flexible dependability
mechanisms, 2) efficient online model-based prediction and control, and 3)
measurement-driven and compiler-enabled early error detection. The project will
validate and apply the adaptation environment by using it for two important
applications from the scientific and commercial domains: the CARMA (Combined
Array for Research in Millimeter-Wave Astronomy) image pipeline, a data-
intensive Grid application for radio astronomy, and iMobile, an enterprise-scale
mobile services platform.&lt;br/&gt;