* 0406751
* Workshop in Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics (CIG)
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

In order to overcome deficiencies in geodynamics software, the
geophysics&lt;br/&gt;community has been formulating a plan for Computational
Infrastructure for&lt;br/&gt;Geodynamics (CIG), whose purpose will be to
leverage the current state of the art in&lt;br/&gt;scientific computing into a
suite of toolkits and codes that serve the greater
geodynamics&lt;br/&gt;community from pure modelers to users of existing models.
The emphasis is on&lt;br/&gt;developing toolkits that ease model development and
foster the interchange of ideas and&lt;br/&gt;algorithms. If successful, this
effort promises to revolutionize the way our community&lt;br/&gt;computes by
providing tools and services that allow us to focus more on the science
and&lt;br/&gt;less on the science-neutral parts of high-performance computation.
The goal is to&lt;br/&gt;empower a larger community of students, researchers,
educators with the tools for&lt;br/&gt;quantitative hypothesis
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to continue to broaden participation from
the geophysics community as the&lt;br/&gt;vision for and structure of CIG are
finalized and the proposal to fund it are prepared, we&lt;br/&gt;propose to hold
a workshop, open to the entire community January 16-17, 2004.
By&lt;br/&gt;holding the workshop at this time we are hoping to strike a balance
between our desire to&lt;br/&gt;maintain momentum in the CIG initiative with the
need for continued engagement with&lt;br/&gt;the community. Our objective is for
participants to expend as little time as possible&lt;br/&gt;traveling to the
workshop venue. It is for this reason that we propose to hold the two-
day&lt;br/&gt;workshop in a hotel with appropriate conference facilities
immediately adjacent to the&lt;br/&gt;Los Angeles International Airport (LAX).
Our hope is to have about 50 scientists at the&lt;br/&gt;workshop with the
majority of the participants spread through the
computational&lt;br/&gt;geodynamics community in such a way that we maintain
balance between the various sub&lt;br/&gt;disciplines as well as between junior
and senior scientists. In addition, we also plan to&lt;br/&gt;invite members of
the computer science and computational science communities who we&lt;br/&gt;hope
to engage in our planning. Their participation will allow the geophysics
participants&lt;br/&gt;to better understand how they can take advantage of
advances in information technology&lt;br/&gt;and computational
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this
workshop are likely to be substantial. We&lt;br/&gt;believe that this workshop
will allow the geophysics community to come together in a&lt;br/&gt;final push
to advance CIG. CIG will likely alter geophysics by strengthening
the&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure available to all researchers. CIG will also
substantially alter the way&lt;br/&gt;graduate students in computational
geophysics are trained in the US.&lt;br/&gt;