* 0406883
* Optics and Dynamics of Interstellar Dust
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Bruce Draine, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Lodders
* 06/30/2010
* USD 341,399.00

Our knowledge of interstellar dust is derived primarily from the absorption,
scattering, and emission of electromagnetic radiation by dust grains. To test a
dust model, or interpret observations, we must be able to calculate the
scattering and absorption properties of model grains. In addition, scattering
and absorption of light exerts forces and torques on dust grains, with important
dynamical consequences. Dr. Bruce Draine will direct a project to further
develop the discrete dipole approximation as a technique for calculating
scattering and absorption by grains at wavelengths from the ultraviolet to the
infrared. Efforts will be made to improve the fundamental approximations, and
also to implement algorithmic improvements to accelerate the required numerical
calculations. Dr. Draine will include these improvements in a new release of
DDSCAT, a publicly-available software package for calculating electromagnetic
scattering and absorption by general target shapes. A separate code will be
developed to use anomalous diffraction theory to calculate scattering and
absorption of X-rays by grains with arbitrary shape. This code will also be made
publicly-available. These codes will be applied to various grain geometries,
including fluffy aggregates and irregular compact shapes, to calculate
absorption and scattering at wavelengths from infrared to X-rays. The objective
is to investigate the possibility that such shapes may be representative of
interstellar dust. Improved grain models will be developed, based on
observational constraints including infrared emission and wavelength dependent
extinction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microwave emission from dust has been
detected, and observational knowledge of the spectrum is increasing. This
intensity and spectrum of this emission appears to be consistent with rotational
emission from rapidly-rotating very small dust particles. Dr. Draine will study
the rotational dynamics and electric dipole emission from very small grains with
the aim of producing models that are in better agreement with recent
observations, including observed regional variations in the microwave emission.
The polarization of starlight by aligned dust grains has been known for more
than half a century, but has not yet been satisfactorily accounted for. Torques
exerted by starlight are known to play a major role in the grain dynamics. This
work will include an extensive study of the rotational dynamics of irregular
grains subject to both starlight torques and internal thermal fluctuations. The
objective is to determine whether, with the grain dynamics as we now understand
it, a population of irregular dust grains illuminated by anisotropic starlight
will become partially-aligned, with the degree of alignment vs. grain size
consistent with observations of the wavelength-dependence of polarization. If
the grain model does develop alignment consistent with observations, the enigma
of aligned interstellar grains will at last be solved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dust plays an important role in the thermo-, chemo-, and
hydrodynamics of the interstellar medium and the formation of planets and stars,
it attenuates the optical and ultra violet spectra of galaxies, and it emits
from microwave to I-band. A better understanding of interstellar dust therefore
has broad impact across astrophysics. The optics of small particles is important
in many scientific fields, including atmospheric science, ocean science,
planetary science, combustion science, and nanoparticle studies. DDSCAT has
already been applied by users in all of these areas. DDSCAT will continue to be
improved and made available via the WWW. The research program includes a
graduate student component, and undergraduate involvement is anticipated. The
proposed research thus contributes to training future scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;