* 0406809
* Planetary Nebulae as Agents of Neutron-Capture Element Enrichment of the Galaxy
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Harriet Dinerstein, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 07/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

Planetary nebulae have been recently shown to display a range of chemical
enrichments in light neutron-capture elements synthesized within their precursor
stars during the so-called Asymptotic Giant Branch evolutionary phase. New
spectroscopic tracers of the four elements in the atomic number range from Zinc
to Krypton have been identified through infrared, optical, and ultraviolet
spectroscopy, and their abundances derived. Some planetary nebulae show
enhancements of up to factors of 10 to 20, while others show normal (solar
system) values. By determining the enhancements of neutron-capture elements in
planetary nebulae, we measure directly the composition of enriched material that
is flowing into the interstellar medium from intermediate-mass stars, an
important agent in driving the process of galactic chemical evolution. We also
learn about the efficiency of dredge-up of nucleosynthetic products in evolved
stars. This investigator is undertaking a multi-wavelength spectroscopic study
that will more fully explore and establish the demographics of neutron-capture
enrichments in planetary nebulae. The project involves both extending
observations of the already identified optical and infrared lines to larger and
more representative samples of these objects and searching for new lines from
additional ions and elements. This study is testing current models for the late
stages of stellar evolution that include crucial new physics such as convective
overshoot and rotation (which also affect the stars' evolution in other ways,
e.g. evolutionary tracks) and clarifying the nucleosynthetic sites for the first
few neutron-capture elements, that lie between the iron-peak region and the
heavier neutron-capture elements that are well-studied in
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project addresses a key question
identified in a 2002 report by the National Academy of Sciences Committee on the
Physics of the Universe: How were the elements from iron to uranium made? The
planetary nebula study establishes the end-point of enrichment after multiple
dredge-up episodes, and, because it provides access to a nearly unexplored
region of the periodic table, the project also provides unique data for the
field of atomic spectroscopy, e.g. by determining precise energies for low-lying
energy levels of poorly-studied ions, values for collisional cross-sections, and
related atomic parameters. From the ratios of different elements, it may be
possible to test nuclear reaction cross-sections, as well as to constrain the
conditions under which the nucleosynthesis occurs. The project is also having an
impact on the development of future scientists and a scientifically informed
population. Two graduate students receive financial support, and undergraduate
students, including ethnic minorities and women, are trained in specific
techniques so that they can work on well-defined small projects. The excitement
of this work is conveyed to middle and high school students, who are just
becoming acquainted with the idea of chemical elements, through coordination
with local schools with magnet science programs, and involve either a graduate
or undergraduate student in this effort.&lt;br/&gt;