* 0406030
* Collaborative Research: Methodology for Computer Experiments with Special Application to Biomedical Mechanics
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Donald Bartel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 70,000.00

Motivated by problems of biomechanical engineering, this collaborative research
project develops and implements statistical tools for the design and analysis of
computer experiments that have particular application to prosthesis design.
These tools are used to create ace tabular cups designs that are resistant to
pelvic osteolysis in a 3D model finite-element model for bone adaptation in the
pelvis. A second specific biomechanical task is to validate/calibrate the
computer codes for polyethylene wear in knee components from mechanical knee
simulator studies. More generally, this work provides a suite of implemented
tools that allow cost-effective and rapid engineering development of a wide
range of product applications. It helps merge the statistical and engineering
design communities by forcing the former to address fully articulated design
problems and the latter to anchor the solution of these problems in rigorous
stochastic and statistical methodology. The methodology may also prove useful in
the analysis of other large computer models such as the climate, exposure, and
pollution models used in environmental science. On the statistical front,
exploratory designs are developed for computer experiments that allow better
estimation of extreme outcomes, important for assessing the frequency of
dangerous high stress-strain situations in a given patient population when a
given prosthesis-design is used. This objective can be thought of as a
robustness assessment tool for the given prosthesis design. Second, sequential
designs are devised for constrained optimization problems, which are important
in prosthesis design where multiple, competing outcomes occur frequently. On the
analysis front, predictors are developed that give more accurate assessment of
optima of predicted surfaces; these are used to produce faster (in the sense of
requiring fewer evaluation of time-demanding computer code) solutions of
constrained optimization problems. Finally, prediction methodology is developed
for computer codes that use both qualitative and quantitative inputs.

This project develops and implement statistical tools for the design and
analysis of computer experiments that have particular application to prosthesis
design. Computer experiments are cost-effective in rapid engineering development
of a wide range of product applications. The project develops both statistical
and mathematical tools that are useful outside of the current application of
prosthesis design.

