* 0406951
* Relativistic Fields with Point Defects
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Kiessling, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2008
* USD 186,000.00

This project is divided into a classical and a quantum physical part. The
classical part is concerned with the rigorous analysis of the classical limit of
a new dynamical theory of relativistic electromagnetic fields with topological
point defects that represent point electrons. This theory combines the nonlinear
Maxwell-Born-Infeld field equations with a novel Hamilton-Jacobi type law of
motion for the point defects. The most important issue here is the special
relativistic radiation reaction problem, which can now be investigated without
any a priori regularization or renormalization. The principal investigator will
also develop a general relativistic extension of this theory, which promises
progress on the problem of motion of so-called naked singularities of space-time
and the gravitational field. The theory has already been partly quantized; the
quantum part of the project now is concerned with the completion of the
quantization. In particular, the implementation of the physically important
quantum effects of spin and photon are the primary goals. So far the theory is
free of any of the notorious divergence problems that plague the prevailing
electromagnetic theory (QED), and it is expected that the final theory will also
be entirely well-behaved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electromagnetism is the most
widely applicable part of fundamental physical theory. It touches everything
from atomic physics, chemistry, and condensed matter physics to electronics and
electrical engineering. The orthodox theory has certainly been hugely
successful, yet it has also been plagued by infinities that have stood in the
way of further progress on a number of issues. The research in this project
involves a new formalism which is designed to overcome the problems of the
orthodox electromagnetic theory and which has already overcome some of these. As
a result of the new mathematically well-defined formalism under development,
better quantitative, rigorous, computational simulation of electromagnetic
phenomena may be expected. The classical version of the theory covers, for
instance, the physics of high temperature plasma, with applications to space and
laboratory (thermonuclear fusion) phenomena. A promising application of the new
quantum theory is to positronium physics, which in particular may have medical
applications in positron emission tomography. &lt;br/&gt;