* 0406827
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Spatial Analysis of Effective Size and Genetic Structure in Desert Breeding Anurans
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Kelly Zamudio, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

The maintenance of genetic diversity has important consequences for population
differentiation, persistence, local adaptation, and divergence. Organismal
ecology, behavior, and demography influence temporal changes in genetic
diversity at local scales and can have important consequences for patterns of
genetic structure at larger scales by increasing the role of random evolutionary
processes relative to non-random evolutionary processes. This project integrates
ecology and population genetics to assess the importance of particular species-
specific traits in the preservation of genetic diversity. To disentangle the
mechanisms shaping distributions of genetic diversity at multiple spatial
scales, this research uses molecular population genetic tools to compare genetic
structure in two desert breeding toads with similar ecologies, but very
different life-histories.

This research will reach beyond the scope of this specific system by
contributing to conservation biology as well as education outside of the
classroom. The long-term persistence of populations relies on genetic diversity
for adaptability to changing environments. By examining how species traits
affect the maintenance and distribution of genetic diversity we can better
predict the consequence of particular environmental changes and perturbations on
population stability and persistence. The field and laboratory components of
this research will involve students and community members of all ages and
nationalities from a diverse array of backgrounds.