* 0406987
* The Diffuse Interstellar Medium:  Magnetic Fields, Physical Parameters and Morphology
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Carl Heiles, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 05/31/2008
* USD 464,942.00

AST 0406987 Heiles

This project directed by Dr. Carl Heiles concentrates on measuring physical
parameters of the diffuse interstellar medium, which is the matrix within which
molecular clouds reside and the medium that soaks up the energy from massive
stars as they rapidly evolve to their deaths. Accordingly, it is the medium
through which the feedback processes linking stellar birth and death must
operate. His interest is clarifying these processes by determining the physical
aspects of the diffuse atomic hydrogen (HI) using the radioastronomical
techniques with which he is expert. These techniques provide unique information
on magnetic field strength, temperature, kinematics, and morphology. He will
cover a wide range of size scales, from small dense molecular clouds to the
global galactic scale. These studies, together with their comparison with the
relevant theories, are crucial for understanding the thermodynamics,
magnetogasdynamics, and dynamo processes of the interstellar gas. The present
time is particularly appropriate for these studies because the Green Bank
Telescope (GBT) has become operational and Arecibo, with its filled aperture and
high angular resolution, provides excellent maps. At Arecibo, the mapping will
be greatly enhanced by the multifeed array, called ALFA, which should come on
line midway through the period covered by this award.

In the past Dr. Heiles has worked closely and intensively with the national
radio observatories, NRAO and NAIC, performing calibrations in the realms of
fundamental beam properties and polarization. Without these efforts, these
observatories would not have polarization capability. This tradition will
continue. At the GBT the spectral correlator will become usable for polarization
work, and Dr. Heiles will calibrate it and develop software for its use. At
Arecibo, he will continue his deep involvement with technical details of
calibrating the multifeed array system. Also, he will continue our cross-
fertilization of undergraduate education and research.