* 0406633
* Spectral Schemes for Stochastic Partial Differential Equations for Surface Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* David Horntrop, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2008
* USD 144,963.00

Scientific problems coming from a wide variety of disciplines including
materials science, polymer science, and fluid turbulence are commonly described
as multiscale problems since small scale, molecular level behavior can greatly
impact large scale, observable features of such systems. A common means of
incorporating these small scale effects in mathematical model equations
involving larger scale quantities is through the use of stochasticity or
randomness to represent the small scale quantities. One increasingly important
class of such random models are stochastic partial differential equations. Such
equations have proved to be difficult to solve using mathematical analysis; thus
computational methods will be valuable tools in the study of stochastic partial
differential equations. The main goal of this research is to develop new
accurate and efficient spectral numerical schemes to study stochastic partial
differential equations. This new computational method will be applied to the
class of stochastic partial differential equation models known as mesoscopic
models for surface processes, with special emphasis on problems from engineering
and biophysics. In particular, a better understanding of the effect on a
reaction of the distribution of a catalyst on a surface can lead to improvements
in the overall efficiency of catalytic surface reactors. The labeling of the
positions and types of proteins on the surface of a biomaterial is important in
determining the structure of subcellular components. The application of the
spectral scheme to the mesoscopic models for these problems will make possible
numerical studies of a much greater size and scope than is currently feasible
using existing numerical techniques. Given the nature of these applications, the
further growth and development of interdisciplinary collaborations is an
important aspect of this research.