* 0406306
* NGS: Providing and Maximizing Quality of Service in Utility Computing Servers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Yan Solihin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 319,925.00

This work proposes new run-time, operating system, and performance modeling
techniques that enable Quality of Service (QoS) through providing performance
guarantee and contention minimization for user jobs in future utility computing
servers. Utility Computing is an IT business model where users outsource
computing to a vendor that manages computing resources and charges its customers
based on the actual computing that they use. Utility computing servers will
likely simultaneously run many user jobs with varying performance guarantee
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
need to provide performance guarantee in high performance servers. The proposed
work seeks to address. The proposed work will make revolutionary advances to the
current state of the art technology in batch job submission system, OS job
scheduling, and performance modeling. More specifically, the proposed approach
consists of three new components: (1) Job Admission Strategy that accepts or
rejects jobs based on the servers' ability to meet the requested QoS, (2) Job
Scheduling Strategy that boosts the system throughput by minimizing the
contention among multiple jobs, and (3) Contention Prediction Model that
predicts the degree of contention and its impact on job execution times for a
given job schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work takes QoS issues from their
traditional area in computer networks to a new area in servers, run-time systems
and operating systems.