* 0406533
* NUE: Linking Introductory Physics Laboratories with Modern Technology by Restructuring Service Courses Around Investigations at the Nanoscale
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Kurt Vandervoort, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,862.00

The proposal for this award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Education (NSEE) announcement, NSF 03-044, Nanotechnology
Undergraduate Education (NUE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators at California
State Polytechnic University Pomona recognize a unique opportunity to offer
students in introductory service courses the chance to use industrial grade
research equipment in ways that will elucidate fundamental physics concepts at
the nanoscale. Physics service courses serve large numbers of students from a
multitude of disciplines that require physics for their major. Specific modules
will be designed for these service courses around an atomic force microscope, a
microscope capable of imaging atoms. Each module will be designed to illustrate
the measurement or observation of a physics concept at the nanoscale that will
complement student investigations of these concepts at the macroscale.
Applications will span all areas of science and engineering and examples
include: microscopic friction on bacteria cell membranes to complement existing
labs on macroscopic friction of a mass on an incline; microscopic magnetism
exhibited by magnetic stripes on videotape to complement existing labs on
magnetic forces between currents in wires and the magnetic field of a solenoid;
microscopic topography of smooth glass, rough glass, diffraction gratings and
butterfly wings to complement existing labs on reflection and interference of
light; microscopic capacitance and electrostatics to complement existing labs on
mapping macroscopic electric fields. Once these core modules have been
implemented into the introductory courses, they will be revised to allow
implementation into more advanced junior and senior level courses and student
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this award is provided by
the Division of Physics in the MPS Directorate and the Division of Earth
Sciences in the Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;