* 0407596
* 2005 NSF Design, Service and Manufacturing Grantees and Research Conference; Scottsdale, Arizona, January 3-6, 2005
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2003,03/31/2008
* Jesus Villalobos, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2008
* USD 416,079.00

This award provides funding for the conduct of the annual National Science
Foundation Design, Service and Manufacturing Research Conference. This
conference brings together researchers in all program areas within the Division
of Design, Manufacture and Industrial Innovation (DMII), and researchers from
related programs in the Divisions of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC),
Electrical and Communication Systems (ECS), Civil and Mechanical Structures
(CMS), Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS), Materials Research (DMR),
International Programs (INT), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Research
(SBE), specifically the Innovation and Organizational Change Program (IOC).
Grantees will present their research in poster sessions and attend sessions
covering topics that extend beyond their immediate area of research. Ongoing
research in manufacturing related research activities are presented by the
grantees from the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (CONACyT), Mexico,
and grantees from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC)
and the National Research Council (NRC), Canada. The conference seeks to ensure
that the individual researchers supported by NSF are informed about the ongoing
activities of their colleagues, eliminate duplication of efforts and foster a
higher degree of cooperation among researchers. In addition, the conference
allows all Principal Investigators to meet each other and to meet with their
respective NSF Program Officers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
conference are: (1) to broaden the outlook of all participants; (2) promote
transfer of ideas and technology from one area of research to another; (3) to
allow those working in a related area of research to get to know their peers so
as to avoid duplication of research and to encourage cooperation, and (4) to
allow personal contacts from the collective research community, the NSF,
CONACyT, NSERC, and NRC program staff to discuss manufacturing research in
detail, clarifying issues and problems in ongoing projects.