* 0407000
* Topology of Orbifolds, Vertex Algebras and Quantum Cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Arkady Vaintrob, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2008
* USD 108,000.00

The first part of the project is concerned with topological and string-theoretic
invariants of orbifolds. Based on physical predictions, Chen and Ruan introduced
a new cohomology theory for orbifolds. The object of study here will be
algebraic structures on the orbifold cohomology and relations with other
cohomology theories. Applications and generalizations of the chiral de Rham
complex, a canonical sheaf of vertex algebras associated to a manifold, are in
the focus of the second part of the project. In particular, vertex algebras and
modules related to general orbifolds and their relation with orbifold
cohomology, elliptic genus and quantum cohomology will be investigated. The aim
of the third part of the project is to study geometric and algebraic structures
related to cohomological field theories of spin type and the corresponding spin
analogs of quantum cohomology and Gromov-Witten invariants. This part is related
to a conjecture by E.Witten stating that the generating function of intersection
numbers on the moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces with r-spin structures is a
tau-function of the r-KdV hierarchy.

Ideas coming from physical models of quantum field theory are responsible for
many exciting recent developments in mathematics, in particular in topology and
geometry. This project studies several geometric problems inspired by string
theory, the current candidate for the theory unifying all kinds of physical
forces. Because of lack of experimental tools, physicists working in string
theory are testing their methods on sophisticated mathematical models, and their
results often indicate the existence of conjectural ties between various
seemingly remote mathematical objects. The goal of the current project is a
mathematical study of some of these conjectures and interactions. Besides
producing new mathematical results, it may lead to a mathematical foundation for
some physical models and a justification of physical ways of analyzing them.