* 0407152
* The True Shapes of Elliptical Galaxies
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Thomas Statler, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Linda S. Sparke
* 05/31/2008
* USD 159,489.00

AST-0407152 Statler

The problem of determining the intrinsic shape distribution of elliptical
galaxies is an 80-year-old unsolved problem of classical astronomy, as well as a
crucial issue for theories of galaxy formation and evolution. Recent
developments in modeling and instrumentation mean that a solution is now
possible. Maps of the stellar velocity fields of 25 elliptical galaxies observed
with a powerful new spectrograph will be modeled by an approach developed by the
principal investigator. Firstly, by enabling the measurement of the velocity
field at all points of a galaxy simultaneously, the new SAURON spectrograph
operating on the 4.2m William Herschel telescope can finally produce data of the
quality and coverage needed by the modeling. Secondly, a new approach developed
by the principal investigator enables these data to be modeled in a reasonable
amount of time with current computational capacity. This technique, the only
practical method for constraining intrinsic shapes, has already been applied
successfully to two of the full sample of 25 elliptical galaxies. Modeling the
rest, and comparing the numerical technique to new analytical solutions, will
enable a proper estimate of the distribution of intrinsic shapes.

The project sets up a new international collaboration with a leading multi-
institution European team (Sterrewacht Leiden, Obs.de Lyon, Oxford University).
The principal investigator and his team will spread scientific and astronomical
understanding amongst a traditionally under-served community, by virtue of Ohio
University's location in the Appalachian foothills and the use of a monthly
popular radio program.