* 0407783
* Ho'okahua - Maui Community College
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Debra Nakama, University of Hawaii
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 05/31/2010
* USD 1,999,215.00

Maui Community College (MCC) will use this NSF Tribal College Undergraduate
Program (TCUP) proposal to implement an institution-wide effort to restructure
and strengthen introductory mathematics and science courses. &lt;br/&gt;MCC will
increase significantly the number of students entering, persisting, and
succeeding at high levels in science, mathematics and STEM degree programs, with
particular focus on Hawaiian students. The name and .spirit. of this project,
Ho.okahua-- .to lay a foundation.-- wil strengthen science and mathematics
learning and establish the foundation upon which STEM students can succeed. The
Ho.okahua project is based on research indicating that schools that establish
high expectations for all students.and give them the necessary support to
achieve them have high rates of academic success (Benard, 1995). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a variety of strategies including .bridge.
programs for high school students, STEM faculty development in interactive
teaching strategies and problem-based learning techniques, mathematics and
science course/curriculum improvements, and new and enhanced student support
systems and organizations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;MCC will implement three major
improvement components through the Ho.okahua TCUP Project: &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;(1) Provide faculty development and curriculum development
opportunities to restructure and strengthen &lt;br/&gt;science and mathematics
offerings by adapting and infusing the Interactive Mathematics Program (IMP)
&lt;br/&gt;model into MCC.s curriculum and by strengthening content in
introductory science courses, including integrating indigenous knowledge into
the courses/curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Increase incoming student preparedness
for STEM courses and programs through a series of .bridge. &lt;br/&gt;programs,
increased faculty involvement in these programs, better alignment between the
high school curriculum and the introductory science and mathematics curriculum
at MCC, enhanced student outreach, and greater visibility for students
succeeding in STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Increase student success in STEM
courses and programs by establishing Student Cohort Groups, a STEM
&lt;br/&gt;Student Development/Counseling Office, and a STEM Computer-Assisted
Study Center through which the project staff will mentor and tutor STEM
students. &lt;br/&gt;