* 0407649
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Influence of Natal Habitat Type on Dispersal and Habitat Selection Behavior of Brush Mice (Peromyscus boylii)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2006
* Judy Stamps, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 03/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

Dissertation Research: Influence of natal habitat type on dispersal and habitat
selection behavior of brush mice (Peromyscus boylii)

PI: Judy Stamps and Karen E. Mabry

Landscapes are composed of a variety of different habitat types, and while some
species may be found in more than one of these habitat types, individual animals
may choose to move through or settle in a particular habitat type. Habitat
variation is often assumed to affect the movement and settlement patterns of
animals, but the potential influence of experience with a particular habitat
type on dispersal and habitat selection behavior has been unexplored. Do animals
born and reared in a habitat type tend to move through and/or settle in that
habitat type (a phenomenon known as habitat preference induction, or HPI)? The
goal of the proposed research is to determine the effects of habitat type
variation and natal habitat type on the behavior of brush mice (Peromyscus
boylii) as they leave their mother's home range, search for, and settle in a new
home range. The proposed field study will use a combination of methods,
including live-trapping and radio-tracking, to observe the movement and
settlement behavior of naturally dispersing mice, and fluorescent powder
tracking to follow the movements of mice that are experimentally translocated to
different habitat types. Radio-tracking will be used to assess animals'
responses to habitat types (large scale habitat variation), and fluorescent
powder tracking will be used to determine how animals respond to features within
a habitat type, such as downed trees (small scale habitat variation). This
research has implications for conservation issues such as wildlife corridor
design, ecological restoration, and the viability of animal populations living
in human-altered habitats.

