* 0407087
* RUI:      Proto-Planetary Nebulae - High-Resolution Studies with Enlarged Sample
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Bruce Hrivnak, Valparaiso University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 05/31/2009
* USD 204,250.00

&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this program is to better understand proto-planetary
nebulae, objects in transition as evolved stars from the asymptotic giant branch
to the planetary nebula phase, by determining their physical properties. These
objects represent an important but poorly understood phase in the evolutionary
cycle of stars. The project is enlarging the sample of confirmed proto-planetary
nebulae, to carry out high-resolution spectral and spatial observations of them,
especially using molecular hydrogen emission, to investigate their properties.
The results of a unique, decade-long NSF-supported study of pulsational
variability in these objects, a study being continued and extended, are being
analyzed and prepared for publication. The program here involves the following:
(1) an analysis of an enlarged sample of proto-planetary nebulae candidates
chosen with different properties from most of those studied thus far; (2) high-
resolution spectroscopy of molecules to study the chemistry and dynamics of the
circumstellar envelopes; (3) high-resolution infrared imaging of proto-planetary
nebulae to study the dust directly from its thermal emission; (4) a high-
resolution chemical abundance study of the central stars to investigate the
effects of nucleosynthesis on the asymptotic giant branch; and (5) analysis and
continuation of the unique light variability study of proto-planetary nebulae
being carried out at Valparaiso University. A significant amount of the
observational data is already in hand. Additional data will be acquired with
telescopes and instruments at the national astronomical
observatories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This activity has a very
positive impact on the training of science students, the education of liberal
arts students, and on the infrastructure for science at Valparaiso University.
Three students each year serve as research assistants on the project. They are
trained in the use of modern astronomical equipment, taught to carry out the
observations and reduce the data, and learn how to analyze the data and prepare
the results for dissemination. They experience almost all phases of a research
program and present their results at conferences. Women and minorities are
actively sought as participants, and the project director has a strong record of
having women students participate in his research. The excitement of this
research project is integrated into the general education astronomy classes and
some of the real data used in laboratory research experience. The research
infrastructure at Valparaiso University, an undergraduate institution, is
enhanced by the continued vitality of the astronomy program that this project
provides. The program provides a more modern CCD detector and new computers for
data