* 0407473
* Federation of Materials Societies 2004  Biennial Conference, "Materials Education for the 21st Century Workforce"; Washington, DC; May 23-24, 2004
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Aristos Christou, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 01/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

This grant supports the 2004 Biennial Conference of the Federation of Materials
Societies to be held in Washington DC in May 2004. The conference is titled
"Materials Education for the 21st Century Workforce". It helps establish the
education needs in materials science for the 21st century and focuses on all
aspects of materials education including K-12, undergraduate and graduate
education, and continuing education. The scope of the conference will be in six
areas: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The changing undergraduate and graduate materials
curriculum (including issues related to accreditation and continuous
improvement), &lt;br/&gt; Programs to enhance K-12 education in materials and
technology, &lt;br/&gt; Continuing education and the role of the community
colleges, and education for the non-materials professional, the national
infrastructure for research and development, &lt;br/&gt; Meeting the needs of
industry in metals, metallurgy, microelectronics and &lt;br/&gt;soft materials,
&lt;br/&gt; The present status and future needs of local and national facilities
as a &lt;br/&gt;resource for the education of future materials scientists and
engineers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The venue of the conference and workshop will
include one distinguished plenary session, invited presentations covering the
above topics, panel discussions with recorded recommendations. Participation
from industry and academia will be sought. &lt;br/&gt;This proposed conference
has national importance since materials education will be critical in advancing
technology and enhancing the nation's economy, security and health. The
conference will concentrate on defining educational requirements for a workforce
which will solve industrial and societal needs that require materials
development in the new century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;