* 0407772
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing Hypotheses of Tropical Diversification in Leafcutter Ants (Atta spp.)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Ulrich Mueller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2007
* USD 12,050.00

This study will test three hypotheses concerning the processes that drive
diversification of tropical organisms. These hypotheses have been widely
discussed and have specific predictions that should be broadly applicable to
tropical organisms. Dr. Ulrich Mueller and Scott Solomon will use three species
of leafcutter ants in the genus Atta for this project. Specimens will be
collected throughout the geographic range of each species, and genetic analyses,
conducted in the United States and in Brazil, will test each prediction in
turn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first to test these
hypotheses with invertebrates, a group that comprises the majority of diversity
in many tropical ecosystems. Furthermore, leafcutter ants are a fundamental
component of many tropical habitats, and some species are major agricultural
pests. By documenting genetic diversity within three such species, this analysis
that could reveal the presence of new, cryptic species. Finally, the elucidation
of the patterns by which new species are formed is critical for the
establishment of effective conservation strategies, since the goal of
conservation is to preserve not only existing diversity but also the processes
by which diversity is generated. &lt;br/&gt;