* 0407787
* Transforming Navajo Education:  A Sustainable Plan for the 21st Century
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2011
* Elmer Guy, Navajo Technical University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 01/31/2011
* USD 2,422,335.00

This grant would allow CIT to capacity build in the STEM curricular areas as we
develop &lt;br/&gt;the breadth and depth of assorted associate degrees. Student
recruitment and retention &lt;br/&gt;will be enhanced through innovative
strategies applicable to a population that has &lt;br/&gt;historically been
excluded from opportunities in mainstream STEM programs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Scientific/Intellectual Merit: The learning laboratory, classrooms,
and science labs will &lt;br/&gt;be equipped with scientific and technological
equipment that will make the educating of &lt;br/&gt;students in STEM courses
possible and allow CIT to become a more noticeable presence &lt;br/&gt;on the
Navajo Nation. The grant will provide enhancement of existing and development
&lt;br/&gt;of new learning and teaching strategies such as internships,
cooperative exchanges, paid &lt;br/&gt;research experiences, and research
exchanges with federal labs and universities. &lt;br/&gt; Faculty research
capacity capabilities will be developed now that CIT is a &lt;br/&gt;candidate
for accreditation and strives to become accredited. Such progress would allow
&lt;br/&gt;CIT to compete for additional funding from research agencies and
organizations in the &lt;br/&gt;future. Existing unique programs such as
veterinary technician, nursing, dental assistant &lt;br/&gt;and environmental
sciences will be able to reach full accreditation by their professional
&lt;br/&gt;organizations as well. Funding from the NSF/TCUP program will assure
that these &lt;br/&gt;programs will be successful. The Institute.s programs fill
a unique vocational/technical &lt;br/&gt;niche in the educational opportunities
available to Native American Indian students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Chief
Manuelito, a Navajo Leader of the 1860s, is on record as having spoken of
&lt;br/&gt;education as a ladder toward a brighter and more prosperous future.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Program Impact: The NSF funded project would allow CIT to
develop badly needed &lt;br/&gt;infrastructure to meet its mission of providing
a quality technical/vocational education to &lt;br/&gt;its students. The
capacity building embedded in this proposal would move CIT into a
&lt;br/&gt;leadership capacity by allowing us to broaden degree and certificate
program offerings. &lt;br/&gt;Also we would be able to address the critical
shortage of students entering into STEM &lt;br/&gt;content fields through better
recruitment and retention efforts.