* 0407237
* NUE: Nanotechnology: Content and Context
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Kristen Kulinowski, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2007
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Rice University
supports Dr. Kristen M. Kulinowski, Department of Chemistry, for her work to
develop and implement a new course on nanotechnology. The course, entitled
"Nanotechnology: Content and Context," aims to introduce the essential
scientific and technical content of nanotechnology and the essential ethical,
political and social contexts of nanotechnology research through a one-semester
multi-disciplinary undergraduate course. Science/engineering majors and social
science/humanities majors alike will benefit by learning about both the specific
technology and the social impacts and cultural meaning of science and technology
in the same class. Students will engage directly with both working scientists
and with the heated public debate over its potential impacts on society. They
will be asked to acquire a technical understanding of nanotechnology (e.g., the
methods of visualization, experimentation, manufacture, and the evaluation of
what is and is not technically feasible) as well as a nuanced understanding of
scientific and technical research as a social and political process (issues of
ethics, regulation, risk assessment, history, funding, intellectual property,
controversy and conflict). By combining these skills in the classroom the
proposed work will cultivate a critical and civil discussion of science and
technology in an emerging field amongst a younger generation. Dr. Kulinowski is
joined in this work by Professor Chris Kelty in the Anthropology department and
several other faculty members from the schools of science, engineering and
social science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was received in
response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education announcement, NSF
03-444, category NUE and was jointly funded by the Divison of Engineering
Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the
Division of Social and Economic Sciences (SES) in the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).