* 0407340
* NUE:  Development of Freshman and Sophomore Level Courses for a Nanotechnology Minor
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Ramesh Agarwal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 01/31/2007
* USD 97,696.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Washington
University in St. Louis supports Dr. Ramesh Agarwal and Dr. Da Ren Chen,
Department of Aerospace & Mechanical Engineering, to develop freshman and
sophomore level courses for establishing a nanotechnology minor that will be
offered by several departments in the College of Engineering. There are already
existing courses in nanotechnology at junior and senior level. This project will
bridge the gap between nanotechnology research and undergraduate training, and
eventually lead to an excellent undergraduate science and engineering curriculum
in the nanotechnology arena.

The nanotechnology curriculum development at WUSTL will have significant impact
on undergraduate education at WUSTL as well as in the St. Louis region and
throughout the state of Missouri. Additionally, local industry (e.g. Boeing) is
very interested in not only in having a trained engineering work force in this
area but also in sending their current employees to take courses at WUSTL in
this field. Since WUSTL has a significant number of underrepresented minorities,
the impact of this project in attracting this group of students to choose a
career in this field will be significant.

The proposal for this award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Education announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE and was funded
by the Division of Electrical and Communications Systems (ECS) in the
Directorate for Engineering.

