* 0407752
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics, Colony Form Evolution and Phenotypic Plasticity within the Family Hydrodictyaceae (Sphaeropleales, Chlorophyta)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Louise Lewis, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 06/30/2006
* USD 10,516.00

The green algae (Chlorophyta) comprise five major groups that occur in marine
and fresh waters, as well as terrestrially in soil and snow. They are
morphologically diverse and ubiquitous, yet only 17,000 species have been
defined for this group. The classifications within Chlorophyta have been based
on morphology, and few studies incorporate additional data to define species and
assess diversity. Algae of similar appearance have traditionally been grouped
together, but with the availability and use of DNA (molecular sequence data) to
reconstruct evolutionary relationships (phylogenies), it has been found that
morphology can be misleading when defining species boundaries, resulting in
incorrect interpretations of relationships and disparate species designations.
This in turn leads to inaccurate assessments of biodiversity, water quality and
paleo-indicator value, therefore the need is great to test morphological species
and their relationships using multiple forms of data. This study will combine
molecular and morphological data to resolve evolutionary relationships and test
species boundaries within the freshwater green algal family Hydrodictyaceae
(Chlorophyta), which consists of four genera, Hydrodictyon, Pediastrum,
Sorastrum and Euastropsis. Multiple species within the Hydrodictyaceae will be
collected from Australia to better assess the diversity within this group, and
to test whether there is geographic variation between species of the Northern
and Southern Hemispheres. DNA sequences will be analyzed from species collected
in Australia and compared to those that were obtained from the Northern
Hemisphere. Computer-based methods will be used to analyze the sequences and
determine the evolutionary relationships between these species and the results
will form the basis for hypotheses regarding trends of dispersal and
morphological evolution. Because it has been found that some freshwater green
algae can change their appearance due to environmental cues (phenotypic
plasticity) such as nutrients, light levels, and temperature, and therefore
leading to incorrect species definitions, this project includes a growth
experiment varying these parameters to examine the stability of the
morphological characters used to define species of Pediastrum. Because
Pediastrum is found in the fossil record and particular species are used to
reconstruct past lake water biotopes, the combination of an increased geographic
sampling, and knowledge of plasticity, will assist in the interpretation of
morphological species and may also be of use to palynologists who rely on this
set of organisms for interpretation of past lake conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Testing the morphospecies and resolving the evolutionary
relationships of the Hydrodictyaceae taxa will contribute a better understanding
of morphological evolution and overall diversity of the green algae
(Chlorophyta), and collections of new isolates will greatly expand the number of
taxa publicly available to other researchers. Results will also lead to better
assessments of indicator value for paleoecological reconstructions and increased
accuracy of biodiversity estimates in freshwater ecosystems. The proposed
research provides opportunities to collaborate with scientists in Australia, one
of which is a specialist in green algal ultrastructure and microscopy.
Furthermore, this study involves training of a female graduate student in
several fields of organismal biology, including microscopy, molecular and
culturing techniques. This knowledge will be disseminated through instruction to
students involved in phycological studies.&lt;br/&gt;