* 0407235
* Interdisciplinary Workshop on Modeling of Macromolecules to be held March 17-20, 2004 in Hilton Head, SC.
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Rahmi Ozisik, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 02/28/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract CTS-0407235 R. Ozisik, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

The Division of Polymer Chemistry of the American Chemical Society is sponsoring
a meeting entitled Molecular Modeling of Macromolecules in Hilton Head Island,
SC, on March 17-20, 2004. Prof. Rahmi Ozisik of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
and Prof. Gregory Rutledge of Massachusetts Institute of Technology are
organizing the workshop, which is the third in a series of highly successful
events that brings together leading scientists from the U.S. and abroad for a
serious exchange of ideas concerning the specialized area of modeling of
macromolecules including both synthetic polymers and biomaterials (proteins).
The international program will feature 45-minute talks addressing many aspects
of the modeling of materials such as nanocomposites, biomaterials, multiscale
modeling, and thin films and glass transition temperature. The program will
begin on Wednesday evening with an opening reception and a plenary overview
lecture, followed by two and a half days of invited lectures. The conference
will also feature an extensive poster session on Thursday evening, which will
permit even more individuals to present their latest research and stimulate
further interactions between the academic and industrial participants. There
will be opportunity for the attendees to use commercial modeling software. With
15 invited speakers and 60-100 registrants expected, this workshop represents an
important and timely effort to address needs for continuing education geared
towards the scientific and technical community involved in or interested in
learning about the state of the art in modeling of macromolecular systems. The
web site of the workshop is at the following addresses: http://www.polyacs.org/
http://www.polyacs.org/arcmeetings/molecularmodeling.404.shtml

The format of the workshop is similar to that of the Gordon Research
Conferences, with morning and evening technical sessions, afternoon informal
discussions and poster session, and common meals. Attendance is open to the
community, and participants are encouraged to contribute through discussion and
poster presentations. All 15 invited speakers are leaders in their fields.
Majority of the speakers are from academia and two of these speakers are from
France and Greece. In addition, one speaker is from the Air Force Research
Laboratory and one speaker is from the industry (DuPont). Students and post-
doctoral researchers are particularly encouraged to attend, as this will give
them an opportunity to meet the leading scientists in the field and establish
relationships that they can use in their future career. The participants will
also be able to present their work through a poster session, which will enable
further discussions between the speakers and the students and junior
faculty/researchers. The workshop is open to all individuals and every effort is
made to accommodate persons with disabilities.

