* 0407218
* NUE:    Integrating Nanoscale Science and Technology into Introductory Computer Science Courses
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* John Lusth, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2008
* USD 105,107.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER.: 0407218&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of
Arkansas&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: NANOTECHNOLOGY UNDERGRAD EDUCATION
(NUE)&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Deaton, Russell J.&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
TITLE: NUE: Integrating nanoscale science and technology into introductory
computer science courses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, by writing programs in their first two courses that simulate important
molecular properties, freshmen Computer Science students are introduced to
emerging technology in Nano-scale Science and Engineering. In the first course,
students write programs that design DNA molecules for forming structures and
doing computations. In addition, the biological role of DNA in the cell is
introduced and reinforced through programming work. In the second course,
students will learn about quantum computation by simulating the random placement
of nano-scale dots. In both courses, fundamental Computer Science knowledge is
related to research questions in nanotechnology, and the interdisciplinary
nature of the research is emphasized. The main goal of the project is to get
students interested in nano-scale research early in their college careers, and
to have the students participate in research through their classroom
experiences. The course material developed will be publicly available for use by
other institutions through the Internet and CD-ROM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal for this award was received in response to the Nano-scale Science and
Engineering Education announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;