* 0407932
* Scaling and Dynamics of Boundary Layer Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2005,10/31/2005
* Joseph Klewicki, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 10/31/2005
* USD 178,999.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0407932&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: JOSEPH C.
KLEWICKI&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: UNIVERSITY OF
UTAH&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCALING AND DYNAMICS OF BOUNDARY LAYER
TURBULENCE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is motivated by the direct
empirical observations derived from measurements at very high Reynolds number at
the Surface Layer Turbulence and Environmental Science Test (SLTEST) facility in
Utah's west desert, and upon the newly developed theoretical foundation for
turbulent wall flow based directly on the properties of the mean momentum
equation. With regard to both of these, a central technical theme has been the
understanding and characterizing behavior of the motions involved in generating
Reynolds stress gradients. With the new insights derived from this information,
a set of experiments were designed to address fundamental unresolved issues
concerning wall turbulence, as follows: 1) the inner/outer interaction, 2) the
connections between coherent motion dynamics and mean momentum transport, and 3)
the connections between mean flow structure and the scaling of turbulence
quantities. The effort will focus on the latter item with a primary component
devoted to further measurements at the SLTEST facility. The greatest impact of
the newly developed theory will most likely be related to an improved capacity
to scale turbulence statistics. Experiments at the SLTEST facility have very
broad and long-term impact. The breadth stems from the efforts of the PI to
encourage others to join the yearly field experiments, and thus gain a high
level of efficiency relating to both the technical benefits associated with
collaborations, and in terms of high research productivity. The long-term impact
derives from the fact that the facility offers unique capabilities to produce
well-resolved turbulence measurements at high Reynolds numbers which are
unavailable in any current laboratory facility. In addition to graduate student
researchers, the PI anticipates involving undergraduate students funded under
the REU program. Undergraduates have proven to be an especially important
component to the yearly field trial research effort. The results will be
disseminated and widely accessible to the research community via a web site
developed under an NSF ITR grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;