* 0407966
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Implications of Production Constraints for the Function of Vocal Performance in Mate Choice
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Stephen Nowicki, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 04/30/2006
* USD 10,000.00

A primary function of male bird song is to attract females as mates. However,
not all songs are equally effective at achieving this goal. For example, females
are more likely to mate with males that produce longer songs or more kinds of
songs, presumably because a male's ability to do so corresponds to some aspect
of his quality as a potential mate. This project investigates a new mechanism by
which females use song to assess males as potential mates: the ability of males
to produce songs that are hard to sing. When birds sing they produce pure tone
sounds by opening their beaks to produce high frequency tones and by closing
their beaks to produce low frequency tones making it difficult to produce
trilled songs that are both broadband and rapid. "Vocal performance" refers to
the ability of males to cope with this difficulty and may reflect male quality.
This project proposes to test the hypothesis that females use vocal performance
to choose mates because it reflects male quality, to investigate a mechanism by
which females are able to discriminate such subtle features of song, and to test
a key prediction of how beak movements affect vocal performance. The broader
impacts of this project are to foster the professional development of women in
science, disseminate science to the public and provide biological data important
for conservation of an endangered habitat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;