* 0407742
* People, Plants, and Landscapes in Prehistoric Ecuador: A Look at the Causes and Consequences of Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Deborah Pearsall, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 26,998.00

With National Science Foundation support, Deborah M. Pearsall and colleagues
will undertake a pilot project to study the antiquity of maize in prehistoric
coastal Ecuador, and the interplay of environmental and social factors for the
emergence and development of agricultural societies. Using environmental coring,
the project will study changes in vegetation, land-use practices, and
subsistence associated with the emergence of
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southwestern coastal Guayas Province has been
proposed as a center of domestication of cotton, lima bean, squash, and
jackbean, and is part of the region in which chili pepper, cocoyam, lleran,
arrowroot, Canna, and sweet potato originated. Many of these crops appear during
the Preceramic (9800-6700 BP) and Early Formative (5500-3500 BP)
periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence that maize was introduced late in the
Preceramic, and was present at the Early Formative Real Alto site, constitutes
one of the earliest dates for this crop in South America. It is difficult to
assess the importance of maize in Formative subsistence, and the role it played
in the emergence of complex societies on the coast, on the basis of available
data, however.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of transformation of societies
from fisher-gatherers to agriculturalists has significant impacts on local
environments. In order to test fully hypotheses concerning the causes and
consequences of agriculture, and the role of maize and other crops in this
process through the "window" of human impact on the environment, environmental
records of 8000 years are needed.&lt;br/&gt;Pearsall and colleagues will attempt
to retrieve such records from lagoon environments by vibracoring in three
locations in southwest Guayas province with early archaeological sites. Core
sediments will be sampled for pollen, phytoliths (plant opal silica), and
sedimentary analysis, and organic material will be removed for carbon-14 dating.
A limited number of pollen and phytolith samples will be processed after the
summer 2004 field season to assess the quality of preservation. If the pilot
project is successful, a new proposal will be submitted to complete the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current and future paleoenvironmental research in
southwestern Guayas will contribute significantly to our understanding of the
causes and consequences of agriculture. It will provide a case study of
agricultural evolution in a lowland, dry tropical forest region that will be
useful for scholars world-wide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dry tropical forests, such
as those that once characterized southwestern Guayas, are among the most
endangered ecosystems in the New World because of the advantages they hold for
modern agriculture. Evidence is accumulating that such habitats were also the
focus of prehistoric agriculture, and home to many crop plants. Was agriculture
sustainable in dry tropical forests prehistorically? The broader impacts of the
study will be insights gained into the nature of human impact on forests through
time, and practices that permitted populations to use these habitats for
thousands of years. These findings may have application to the contemporary
issue of sustainable uses of tropical forests.&lt;br/&gt;