* 0407675
* Support of ACS Symposium:    "Friction, Lubrication, and Adhesion in Micro- and Nano-Scale Devices"; March 28-April 1, 2004; Anaheim, CA
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2004
* Scott Perry, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 08/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

0407675&lt;br/&gt;PI - Scott Perry, University of Houston&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symposium Title&lt;br/&gt;"Friction, Lubrication,
and Adhesion in Micro- and Nano-Scale Devices"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose
of this symposium is to bring together two groups of researchers-those studying
the basic science of tribology on the small scale and those making practical
small devices where such tribological phenomena are important-in a forum where
they can exchange information and results. This exchange should have a broad
impact on the fields of nanoscience and nanotechnology by fostering stronger
ties between researchers working in different subcommunities of these fields.
This proposal requests funds for the support of scientists and engineers
traveling to this symposium.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In recent years, nanoscience
and nanotechnology have dominated much of the cutting edge activities of the
scientific and engineering research communities. Within nanoscience, the
subfield of nanotribology has been an ongoing activity over the last few
decades. Numerous researchers have been elucidating how the tribological
phenomena of friction, lubrication, wear and adhesion occur at the atomic and
molecular level. This focus on understanding tribological phenomena at the small
scale has revitalized the field of tribology, converting it from a black art
into a cutting edge scientific field. This has led to a tremendous increase in
the predictive power tribology science, particularly for phenomena on the
submicron scale. Better collaborations are&lt;br/&gt;needed, however, between
the chemists, physicists, and material scientists doing fundamental research and
technologists trying to capitalize on these results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
nanotechnology, researchers try to build devices where one or more components of
have dimensions on the nanometer scale. For devices where components move
relative to each other, such as microelectromechanical systems (MEMS),
nanotribological phenomena often govern how well they work. Much could be gained
if the nanotechnologists who make small devices learnt what the nanotribologists
already know. Further nanotribologists could better focus their research efforts
if they understood better the practical tribological problems encountered by
nanotechnologists.&lt;br/&gt;