* 0407137
* NUE:  Integration of Nanoscience into the Undergraduate Curriculum:  From Fabrication to Practical Applications of Nanodevices
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Claudio Guerra-Vela, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to the University of
Puerto Rico at Humacao supports Dr. Nicholas Pinto, Dr. Claudio Guerra and Mr.
Juan Gonzalez, Department of Physics and Electronics, to introduce new
experiments into the undergraduate curriculum. Both the pedagogical theoretical
concepts and modified experiments based on recently discovered techniques in the
field of nanoscience, technology and engineering will be incorporated. The
topics to be discussed fall in the fields of Physics, Chemistry, Biology and
Electrical Engineering and are thus truly interdisciplinary. New experiments
related to the latest developments in nanotechnology, science and engineering
will be included as part of the undergraduate curriculum. The intellectual scope
of this proposal is that it will train students early in their careers in the
field of nanotechnology. Also, opportunities to conduct research level
experiments while enrolled in a core course is also proposed and this will give
the students a flavor of how research is conducted together with the ups and
downs in doing experimental research.

The proposed projects will enhance intradepartmental collaboration which is
vital for a small Department like that at UPR-Humacao to stay competitive as an
undergraduate institution in the areas of research and education. All of the
experiments proposed will lie within the intellectual grasp of undergraduates.
This has the broader impact of having a strong influence on the students desire
to pursue higher education. Finally, having a strong research and teaching base
at UPR-Humacao will have a broader impact on undergraduate education in the
South-East part of the island in addition to increasing the number of
underrepresented students in academic and research environments dedicated to
nanoscience.

The proposal for this award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Education announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE and was jointly
funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the
Directorate for Engineering and the Division of Materials Research (DMR) in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS),

