* 0407815
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny and Comparative Analysis of Salinity and Silicic Acid Uptake in the Thalassiosirales (Bacillariophyceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Edward Theriot, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,500.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diatoms are microscopic organisms
that form the basis of the food web in rivers, lakes and oceans. Although
diatoms are found in nearly every permanent and temporary water body on earth,
how they enter and flourish in new habitats is unknown. The most difficult
invasion seems to be from saltwater to freshwater. The diatom group studied,
Thalassiosirales, provides an excellent opportunity for understanding the origin
and evolution of diatoms in marine and freshwater habitats. Thalassiosirales
species from marine and freshwater habitats differ fundamentally in utilization
of dissolved silicathe primary component of diatom cell walls, and the second
most abundant element in the earth's crust. The objectives of this research are
to 1) reconstruct the phylogeny of the centric diatom order Thalassiosirales
based on DNA sequences from the nuclear, chloroplast, and mitochondrial genomes,
2) use the phylogeny to test competing hypotheses about the relationship between
marine and freshwater species by determining the number of transitions between
these 2 habitat types, and 3) test whether the salinity optima and efficiency of
silicic-acid uptake are correlated for species of Thalassiosirales. The
phylogeny will indicate the number of transitions between marine and freshwater
habitats, and the experimental data will reveal physiological changes that
potentially facilitated these transitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diatoms are
critical to sustaining life on earth. Primary production (creation of organic
matter and free oxygen molecules through photosynthesis) by marine diatoms alone
accounts for approximately 25% of the earth's oxygen more than all of the
world's rainforests combined and sustains much of the world's ocean and
freshwater fisheries. Besides their importance to the oxygen cycle and food
webs, diatoms are also important to processing of silicon, the second most
abundant element in the earth's crust. They use silicon (in the chemical form
called silica) to make their cell walls. Many diatom cell walls fall to the
bottoms of lakes and oceans, forming vast deposits of diatomaceous earth. This
is mined for many industrial purposes, can form a reservoir for petroleum, and
records changes in earth history. The creation of such deposits, and the amount
of carbon, oxygen and silica cycled by diatoms depends on conditions affecting
their growth. Diatom production is often nutrient limited, so understanding how
diatoms utilize nutrients such as dissolved silica is a necessary first-step
towards understanding the patterns of primary production observed in the world's
oceans. Diatoms also are one of the few groups that successfully occupy marine
and freshwater habitats, and evidence suggests that salinity greatly affects the
metabolism of silica by diatoms and also diatom production. There is basic
scientific value in understanding how and why organisms overcome barriers
through evolutionary processes. From a practical standpoint, understanding how
diatoms made the difficult transition from saltwater to freshwater can help us
understand the mechanisms by which diatoms adapt to these different
environments, and so help us understand and perhaps better predict how
environmental change caused by humans and nature might affect the distribution
and production of diatoms, and so cycling of carbon, silica and oxygen.
&lt;br/&gt;