* 0407332
* NUE:     A Hands-On Short Course on C60 Molecules Fullerenes (Buckyballs), Nanotubes, and Other Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Harry Dorn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2006
* USD 101,400.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Professor Harry
Dorn at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University is made by the
Division of Chemistry to support a short-course for undergraduates involving
over thirty small colleges in the Appalachian Region (with the Appalachian
College Association). The course will focus on hands-on preparation and
characterization of the new carbonaceous nanomaterials discovered during the
last twenty years. The course on the preparation, properties, and applications
of these new nanomaterials will be conducted at both Virginia Tech and Emory and
Henry College with visits to local nanotechnology firms. The course will
demonstrate how new nanomaterials can be prepared and purified with very simple
equipment that can be transferred to any of the small colleges involved in the
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbonaceous materials, such as fullerenes
"buckyballs," endohedral metallofullerenes, and nanotubes are evolving as
important new building blocks in nanotechnology. This project endeavors to
educate and train undergraduates in the Appalachian region in the newly emerging
field of nanotechnology as part of an effort to spur economic development in the
area. One of the participating nanotechnology firms, Luna Innovations, is
planning to build a new plant in Southwest Virginia to manufacture fullerenes,
trimetaspheres, and nanotubes. The course is designed to interest and train a
new, better qualified, workforce and to educate undergraduates for advanced
academic degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was received
in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education announcement, NSF
03-044, category NUE. &lt;br/&gt;