* 0407293
*  Structure of the Milky Way from Kinematical Databases
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* William Van Altena, Yale Southern Observatory, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2008
* USD 496,622.00

Structure of the Milky Way from Kinematical Databases

ABSTRACT

AST 0407293 van Altena

Dr. William van Altena, at the Yale Southern Observatory, Inc., will initiate a
program to use the Southern Proper Motion (SPM) Survey to investigate the thick
disk and halo of the Milky Way. The goal for this research is to produce interim
catalogs of proper motions, while collection and reduction of data that will
form the second epoch for the SPM continues. The SPM program will provide
absolute proper motions and broadband photometry for approximately 100 million
stars in the southern sky. The recently completed DENIS and 2MASS surveys
provide infrared photometry for essentially all of the SPM stars. Through
ongoing efforts to collect spectra of stars in the halo and thick disk, and a
collaboration with the Radial Velocity Experiment (RAVE) in Australia, about 15
million of the SPM stars will have determinations of radial velocities and
chemical abundances. The PI will establish an Internet-accessible database for
use by the astronomical community. It will contain the 100 million SPM absolute
proper motions, as well as photometry, spectroscopy, and radial velocities for
stars in common with the SPM. This database will provide the "raw material" for
numerous research programs.