* 0407134
* Spectroscopy of SDSS Vestalikes and Iannini Family
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* David Nesvorny, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 05/31/2009
* USD 362,579.00

AST 0407134&lt;br/&gt;Jedicke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Robert Jedicke will carry
out a spectroscopic survey of selected Main Belt (MB) objects that will yield
new and critical information on differentiation processes within planetary
systems.&lt;br/&gt;There are two primary and related goals. The first is a
search for evidence of differentiation of MB objects and a dependence of the
differentiation process on heliocentric distance and the size or type of object.
A deep targeted search for MB objects with Vesta-like spectra that are not
members of the Vesta complex will be performed. Vesta-like spectra are
consistent with a basaltic crust on the object. Only one such non-Vestoid is
currently known. Likely targets for spectroscopy will be selected from the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey's (SDSS) Moving Object Catalog (MOC). It provides a database
of five accurate photometric colors for over 10,000 known asteroids. This
database is 5-10 times larger than existing color databases and samples
asteroids at much smaller sizes. It should allow a much better selection of
Vesta-like candidates than has been achieved by earlier studies. The second goal
is to obtain spectra and determine the taxonomic classification for many of the
members of the interesting Iannini family. None of the members of this extremely
young asteroid family currently have measured spectra or a well-determined
taxonomic classification. As one of the youngest identified asteroid families a
precise&lt;br/&gt;determination of the mean colors of the members of this family
will nail down the space&lt;br/&gt;weathering rate for S or C type asteroids.
Observations will likely take place using either the ESI spectrograph at Keck II
or the WFGS2 spectrograph at the UH 2.2m on Mauna Kea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Jedicke and other contributing members on this project have been active in
public&lt;br/&gt;education in astronomy and physics through speaking to various
community groups&lt;br/&gt;and through providing TV, radio, newspaper and
magazine interviews and articles. The&lt;br/&gt;graduate student involved with
this project will have the opportunity of learning state of&lt;br/&gt;the art
spectroscopic techniques at a premier telescopic facility. The reduced spectra
will be made available to the astronomical community through the Planetary Data
System nodes (http://pds.jpl.nasa.gov/about-pds.html) and all results will be
announced in a timely fashion through publication in peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;