* 0407826
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Interspecific Competition and Facilitation Among Avian-dispersed Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Alexander Cruz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,998.00

What we refer to as plant communities are composed of diverse plant species,
many of which use animals, wind, and other vehicles to spread their seeds and
ensure their survival. Seed dispersal-the spreading of seeds away from parents-
is important in maintaining species diversity, and fruit-eating animals are key
to the dispersal of many plant species' seeds. Often, within a plant
neighborhood comprised of multiple individual plants, many plants share the same
animals as seed-dispersers. The fact that different plant species are sharing
the same species of animal to disperse their seeds may affect how much dispersal
takes place for each plant individual. Neighboring fruiting plants of different
species may help each other by attracting more seed-dispersing animals to their
area, or they may hamper each other's seed-dispersal by competing for the
animals. We will conduct experiments using three bird-dispersed plant species
(Solanum americanum, Cestrum diurnum, and Rivina humilis) to examine how they
affect each other's seed dispersal when occurring as neighbors. We will
construct experimental neighborhoods of different combinations of the three
plant species in open fields in Puerto Rico. First, we will evaluate the effects
of neighboring plant species on how much fruit birds eat at each neighborhood
type. Second, we will measure the number of dispersed seeds and their distance
from the parent plant in each type of experimental neighborhood. This study will
contribute to a better understanding of how plant species interact with each
other and how some plant species may affect the abundance and distribution of
other plant species.