* 0407950
* Dissertation Research: Sources of Neotropical Bat Diversity: Have Cave-Rich Areas Been Centers of Cave-Bat Speciation?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Nancy Simmons, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 05/31/2006
* USD 9,585.00

In the face of an impending global biodiversity crisis, understanding the
natural processes involved in the origin and maintenance of biological diversity
is a crucial step toward the goal of preserving the genetic reservoirs and
ecological stability of the planet. In Latin America, a region that combines the
richest concentration of biological species and one of the highest rates of
habitat destruction on earth, research aimed to identifying the origins of
diversity has been extensive but the explanations have remained controversial.
One the most historically powerful hypothesis, the "Pleistocene refugia
hypothesis", which maintains that regions of high rainfall have functioned as
centers of evolution and preservation of biological species, has been recently
challenged by abundant paleoecological data. Therefore, the effectiveness of
current conservation strategies with a focus on wet areas for the preservation
of biodiversity has been cast into doubt. This project will t est the
alternative hypothesis that regions of high geologic complexity have been
important centers for the origin of species, at least in the case of mammals.
The study will use the funnel-eared bat family (Natalidae) as a model group,
given that these animals are among the most widespread mammal groups in the new
world tropics that depend on geomorphologic surface features (caves, crevices)
for their survival. A robust reconstruction of the evolutionary history
(phylogeny) of Natalidae will test whether the evolution of this bat family has
been tied to the historical availability and distribution of caves in the new
world tropics, making possible, in turn, to test whether areas of high
complexity in surface geology have functioned as centers of speciation for these
bats. The phylogeny will be inferred by comparing morphological and genetic
traits of species of natalids deposited in museum collections in the US and
Latin America.

This project will be the first to test whether cave regions have functioned as
centers of bat speciation in the New World, thus representing potentially
important sources of species diversity in tropical America. If this hypothesis
is supported by our findings, this study will have a significant impact in the
design of future conservation strategies aimed to protect centers of biological
evolution in Latin America, as important repositories of the genetic wealth of
the planet. The study will also have a broader impact in the understanding of
cave biogeography in general, not only in tropical America but also in other
regions of the world rich in caves and cave fauna. At a local scale, it will
detect geographically restricted species of funnel-eared bats that may risk
extinction and will promote their conservation, particularly of those that range
into economically important areas and provide crucial natural control to
agricultural pests.

