* 0407746
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Testing Limits of Coexistence in Paleotropical Cryptic Bat Species
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

Several species that have been traditionally defined on the basis of morphology
recently have been discovered to consist of two or more genetically distinct
groups each. These findings raise fundamental questions about how "cryptic"
species coexist when an animal's morphology is used to define its ecological
niche. Theory predicts that no two species should occupy the same niche at the
same time and place. In this study Dr. Thomas Kunz and Susan Murray will
investigate the separation that allows coexistence, by comparing morphology,
feeding ecology, roosting habitats, and population genetic structure between
morphologically cryptic bat species (bicolored leaf-nosed bats) in peninsular
Malaysia. The research will help us understand ecological and evolutionary
processes that lead to similar morphologies of coexisting species, and why some
animal assemblages are more species-rich than others. Recognition of cryptic
species may also affect estimates of biodiversity and how conservation
priorities are determined.

The broader impacts of this research include new training opportunities for
Murray, establishment of new collaborations with Malaysian, Indonesian, and
British researchers, and providing research opportunities for Malaysian
undergraduates. Educating and training indigenous and local peoples on the
ecological importance of bats and how to protect delicate cave ecosystems will
be an important part of this project.