* 0407943
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecological and Evolutionary Significance of Locomotor Performance in Collared Lizards (Crotaphytus collaris)
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Stanley Fox, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Ecological and evolutionary significance of locomotor performance in collared
lizards (Crotaphytus collaris)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stanley F. Fox and Jerry F.
Husak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of morphological and physiological
traits has, in large part, been examined by studying the performance of whole
animals, mostly in the laboratory. Although most scientists agree that
morphology affects performance, then performance affects an individual's ability
to survive and reproduce (fitness), no study has shown how all three elements--
morphology, performance, and fitness--are linked. More importantly, little is
known about how or when maximal performance may be used. How often is
laboratory-measured maximal performance used in nature, and in what ecological
contexts? This study addresses this deficiency for the first time by determining
how performance affects fitness in a territorial lizard species, while
simultaneously considering alternative hypotheses. Data on maximal sprint speed,
field-realized sprint speed, hormone levels, social behavior, and mating success
in collared lizards will reveal to what degree each contributes to the fitness
of males and females, and test how natural and sexual selection (natural
selection on traits that improve mating success) may act differentially on
performance. The intellectual merit will be a better understanding of how
selection is acting on performance and the morphological and physiological
traits that constrain it. The broader impact of this investigation is the
training of undergraduates in research techniques.&lt;br/&gt;