* 0407923
* Dissertation Research:  Maintenance of a Color-pattern Polymorphism in Green Swordtails, Xiphophorus helleri: Natural and Sexual Selection
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* B. Rosemary Grant, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2006
* USD 10,338.00

&lt;br/&gt;Animal and plant species are remarkably variable in many characters,
e.g., body coloration in snow geese and petal color in morning glories. A
fundamental question in biology is how genetic variation is maintained in wild
populations. Many species in the fish genus Xiphophorus show uniformly gray
forms as well as forms with different black pigment patterns; this variation has
a simple genetic basis. In this study Dr. Rosemary Grant and Christiane Meyer
investigate the maintenance of spotted and gray forms in X. helleri with field
surveys of natural populations as well as laboratory experiments testing
hypotheses on the interplay of mate choice, predation, and season-dependent
visibility. X. helleri is a suitable model system because these fish are easily
bred in the laboratory and can also be studied in the clear, shallow waters of
their natural habitat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The color pattern in Xiphophorus
provides a tangible link between the external characteristics of an organism and
their underlying genetic mechanisms, and furnishes a tractable system with which
to explore fundamental biological phenomena. This project will educate
laypersons, grade schoolers and college students in theoretical and practical
aspects of the research and train research assistants, both in Belize and New
Jersey. &lt;br/&gt;