* 0407502
* Rings of Differential Operators and the Hadamard Problem
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Yuri Berest, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2009
* USD 129,988.00

Berest proposed research stands at a crossroads of various questions of
mathematics and math-&lt;br/&gt;ematical physics. A unifying principle is that
most of the problems we study involve the global&lt;br/&gt;algebraic and
geometric properties of rings of differential operators. The complex Weyl
algebra A1&lt;br/&gt;(defined by the relation [p; q] = ih) is the prototypical
example of such a ring which will be of special concern in the present project.
It is perhaps the simplest and the most important example of a noncommutative
algebra that finds applications in many areas of mathematics, physics and
natural sciences. (For example, it plays a fundamental role in quantum mechanics
underlying the famous Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle.) His work so far has
obtained essentially new results about this algebra. These mostly concern the
structure of projective modules (ideals) and the automorphism group of A1. In
the proposed research we intend to address still deeper questions about A1 and
to give generalizations of our results, especially to higher dimensions. The
mathematical results sought in the main part of the project are motivated by and
applied to the theory of wave propagation which is one of the fundamental
problems in classical mathematical physics. Of special interest (both from
practical and theoretical point of view) is the question of when the waves may
propagate without diffusion to allow the possibility of transmitting `clean-cut'
(sharp) signals. Well studied in homogeneous spaces this question remains wide
open in general. One of the goals of this project is to develop new mathematical
tools and techniques to investigate this difficult problem in inhomogeneous and
anisotropic media. The results sought in this direction are of fundamental
interest and significance in mathematical theory of wave propagation and may
have applications in related physical disciplines including the theory of
electromagnetic and acoustic waves, space communication technologies,
magnetohydrodynamics, crystal optics, etc. As a broader impact, it is expected
that the interdisciplinary nature of this work will stimulate communication and
collaboration between specialists in the various areas involved, as indeed this
work so far has already begun to do. Moreover, several students, both graduate
and undergraduate, as well as a postdoctoral fellow will collaborate in this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;