* 0407073
* NUE:      Unconventional Patterning at the Nanoscale:      Bottom-up Synthesis Meets Top-Down Fabrication
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Uma Venkateswaran
* 06/30/2008
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award by Divisions of
Materials Research (MPS) and Engineering Education and Centers (ENG) to
Northwestern University supports Professors Teri W. Odom in Chemistry and
Vinayak P. Dravid in Materials Science and Engineering to develop two research-
based courses on nanoscale patterning for undergraduate students in their second
year. The course contents include: (i) hands-on research experience on top-down
fabrication and bottom-up synthesis; (ii) training in nanoscale characterization
tools; and (iii) the design of research projects using advanced and bench-top
nanoscale patterning. These inquiry-based courses are designed to integrate
concepts and methods in science, engineering, and system design for students at
the early stage of their academic development. Students will work with their
peers on group research projects and design independent ones using the course
content. The course content developed by this award (web-based modules, multi-
media presentations, and interactive lab manuals) will be integrated in to core
classes and distributed through web resources. Relatively simple and cheap
experiments that are being developed by this award could be used in teaching
nanotechnology at institutions, which don't have the infrastructure for
nanotechnology. Strong models that are being designed by this award could be
adapted elsewhere, and would generate better-trained science and engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;