* 0407653
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Herbivore Pressure, Inga Chemistry, Toxicity and Defensive Ants: Comparison of two Tropical Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 11/30/2006
* USD 8,160.00

Plants and the animals that eat them make up 50% of the organisms on earth and
the interactions among them have profound implications for the diversity and
dynamics of natural forests. Plants have evolved an astounding array of chemical
defenses to deter herbivores, and herbivores have countered with detoxification
mechanisms. This reciprocal selection is believed to be responsible for the
great species diversity of tropical forests. However, we know little of the
mechanisms shaping the strength of selection for effective plant defenses. This
study will examine differences in the defensive chemistry of a widespread
Neotropical genus, Inga, by comparing sites in Panama and Ecuador. We predict
that herbivore abundance, and hence the selection for plants to defend
themselves will be greater in the more diverse and non-seasonal forest in
Ecuador. At each site we will quantify herbivore pressure, diversity and
abundance of Inga, investments in non-protein amino acids and flavonoids (the
main classes of chemical defenses in Inga), toxicity of defenses to herbivores
in laboratory trials, and rates of damage to leaves in nature. Despite the
presumed importance of reciprocal selection by herbivores and plants on the
evolution of chemical defenses, very few studies have addressed this in complex
natural communities.