* 0407958
* Nanoscale Self-Organization of Metallic Alloys under Ion  Irradiation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Robert Averback, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 06/30/2008
* USD 440,000.00

This award from the Division of Materials Research to University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign is to improve fundamental understanding how relaxation in
systems that are driven away from equilibrium leads to self-organization and the
selection of preferred length scales. This project will be based on a general
theoretical framework for driven systems that has been developed over time by
Professors Averback and Bellon, the PIs of this award. Engineering materials are
traditionally processed using time and temperature as control variables. In many
advanced processing schemes, or in service, materials are also subjected to a
sustained external forcing, for example, thin films processed by ion beams or
materials undergoing frictional wear. These dynamically driven materials are no
longer constrained to follow kinetic paths controlled by equilibrium
thermodynamics. There is now a large base of work showing that phases that would
be metastable, or even unstable under equilibrium conditions, can be stabilized
under dynamical forcing. An important new development has been the prediction
that, under appropriate conditions, the composition and the chemical order in
driven materials can self-organize at the nanoscale. Analytical models and
atomistic computer simulations suggest that specific length scales introduced by
the external forcing are at the origin of these self-organization reactions.
Some preliminary experiments support the conclusion that compositional
patterning can be triggered by both irradiation and plastic deformation, but the
critical experiments that could provide validation of these new models are
lacking. The central idea of this research is to perform such experiments,
critically and systematically testing the model predictions. The focus is on
materials irradiated by energetic ion beams, as the advanced understanding of
the physical processes involved during irradiation makes it possible to perform
experiments with excellent control. By varying the irradiation conditions the
length scales introduced by the external forcing are systematically varied, thus
allowing for quantitative tests of the model predictions. In parallel to this
experimental work, atomistic computer simulations are developed to include the
role played by interstitial atoms and surfaces. Indeed, when interstitial atoms
couple selectively to one chemical species, the interstitial diffusion distance
before its recombination with a vacancy or its elimination on a sink becomes a
relevant length scale for the evolution of the alloy. Surfaces not only provide
a well-defined sink, but also add the interesting new dimensions of equilibrium
and non-equilibrium segregation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has broad
impacts for advancing scientific understanding. There is a wide range of
materials phenomena that can be described within the framework of driven
systems, including fatigue, severe plastic deformation, frictional wear, and
dealloying. As the general validity is established for the irradiation of alloys
as a model system, these other behaviors become better understood as well. In
addition, the research offers educational opportunities for graduate students
who will be trained on advanced instruments for materials characterization. The
present work will be integrated into teaching activities, exposing undergraduate
students to the potentials and the challenges offered by nanostructured
materials. The investigators plan to introduce a "Materials Van" for local high
schools that would offer materials science demonstrations to increase the
awareness of students to the daily use of materials in our technological
society.