* 0407720
* The Effects of New Urban Developments Compared to Conventional Low Density Developments on Natural Hazard Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Yan Song, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2009
* USD 397,899.00

New Urban developments are a higher density, more compact urban form than
conventional developments (sprawl). High density developments like New Urban
forms place more people, buildings, and infrastructure at risk than conventional
developments on an equivalent land unit exposed to hazards, and thus pose a
potentially greater threat. Despite the rapid expansion of New Urban
developments in hazardous areas, no studies have analyzed the effects of New
Urban design on hazard mitigation. The research will contribute to understanding
the impacts of New Urban design on integration of mitigation practices into
developments. To make this contribution requires an investigation of whether New
Urban developments are at least equally disaster resilient to conventional
developments, or whether New Urbanism contributes to increased vulnerability to
life and property. The study will also evaluate the effects of choices that
planners and others make in designing mitigation plans and implementation
programs regarding their influence on integration of mitigation practices into
New Urban developments.&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute to knowledge about
how Smart Growth programs and New Urban developments can be designed to attain
the benefits of New Urbanism without increasing the threat from hazards. The
study will yield guidelines for local governments on how to prepare
comprehensive hazard mitigation plans that identify and prioritize mitigation
policies focused on New Urban developments; identify site design practices to
safely build New Urban developments; and suggest factors that need attention for
supporting mitigation involving enforcement, citizen support, and staff
capacity. Because federal and state governments have significant roles in
promoting mitigation, the study will also provide guidelines on how to influence
local governments and developers to support use of mitigation practices in New
Urban developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;