* 0407527
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Developmental Ecology of Solitary and Colonial Ascidians
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Richard Strathmann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 05/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Ascidians are a globally distributed group of marine invertebrates which may be
solitary or colonial. Colonialism has evolved multiple times in the ascidiacea,
along with an associated suite of reproductive characters. Strathmann &amp;
Jacobs will investigate the evolution of reproductive strategies by comparing
the ecology and development of solitary and colonial ascidians. Their study
promises to make several important contributions. First, preliminary data on
early growth and survival of solitary and colonial ascidians question basic
paradigms of life history strategy, including predicted relationships between
egg size, energy content, and offspring fitness. Ascidians are common invasive
species worldwide, and the energetics portion of this study will be a timely
investigation of potential larval lifespan and hence of dispersal potential.
Second, preliminary development data suggest that solitary ascidians, previously
thought to be in developmental stasis during dispersal, are capable of an
unsuspected degree of differentiation and morphological change while they are
competent larvae. This discovery has the potential to change our understanding
of how development works in this increasingly important model system and close
relative of vertebrates. Finally, this study is one of very few to combine
investigations of important developmental transitions with studies of the
functional ecological consequences of those changes. This integrative approach
could serve as a model for future studies in reproductive ecology and the
evolution of development.