* 0407870
* Dissertation Research:  Evolutionary Diversification of Encelia Based on Multiple DNA Sequences
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Thomas Ranker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2006
* USD 9,905.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines geographic patterns of
genetic variation in a group of Sonoran and Mojave Desert plants in order to
address two objectives. The first objective is to assess genetic relationships
among three genera of the sunflower family in order to discern if speciation is
correlated with geographic isolation, resulting from the formation of the Gulf
of California. The second objective is to assess genetic relationships among
populations of brittlebush, one widespread member of the genus Encelia, in order
to understand how plant populations in these deserts were affected by climate
change during the last glacial period. A phylogeographic approach, which makes
use of DNA sequences, will be used. This approach first estimates relationships
within and among species, and then examines these relationships in the context
of the geologic and geographic history of the species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is significant for two reasons. First, these data will be important for
understanding how glaciation, geographical isolation, colonization, range
expansion, fluctuations in population size, and gene flow influence genetic
structure in plant populations. Second, very few studies have examined genetic
structure and phylogeography in plant species of the Sonoran and Mojave Deserts.
Furthermore, the approach proposed here is entirely novel for species in this
area and is an important approach to develop and advance in the field of plant
evolutionary genetics. This project will also provide important training to a
female graduate student and, thus, will contribute to the advancement of women
in science.&lt;br/&gt;