* 0407096
* NUE: Incorporating Nanoscale Science and Engineering  Experiments and Demonstrations into First-Year Undergraduate Courses
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2006
* Paul Wanda, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 03/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Southern Illinois
University Edwardsville supports Professors Eric J. Voss (Chemistry), Michael J.
Shaw (Chemistry), Paul E. Wanda (Biological Sciences), Nader Saniei (Mechanical
Engineering), and Mark G. Bolyard (Biological Sciences and Office of Science and
Math Education) to incorporate nanoscale science and engineering experiments and
demonstrations into introductory courses at the University. Introductory courses
to be modified include an Honors Scholars freshman seminar course, a
contemporary chemistry course, four general chemistry for scientists courses,
two general chemistry for engineers courses, and a senior-level
interdisciplinary nanoscale science and engineering course. These courses form
the foundation of the science curriculum at the University, and as a result of
this project, approximately 1000 science and engineering students each year
would be introduced to nanoscale topics. This student body would also include
future pharmacists, veterinarians, dentists, and
physicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Nanoscale science and engineering experiments
and demonstrations will be introduced into introductory courses. Student
learning objectives include excitement and enthusiasm for science thinking,
awareness of nanotechnology and nano applications of scientific thinking, 3-D
manipulation of concepts, and improved quantitative reasoning, problem solving,
analysis, and synthesis. The project will also involve an annual one-day
Teachers Exploring the Nano world, professional development workshop for high
school science educators from Southwestern Illinois and the Metro East St. Louis
Region. Teachers attending this workshop would be able to incorporate examples
from nanoscience into their curricula, resulting in college and university bound
students, who are aware of nanoscience. In addition to the local and regional
impact, educational materials resulting from these efforts would be broadly
disseminated through the web-based Nanoscale Video Lab Manual and Nanoworld
Cineplex of Movies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was
received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education
announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE and was jointly funded by the Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Directorate for Engineering.