* 0407794
* Qeraryaraliluta - Academic and STEM Bridge Building in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2009
* Mary Pete, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 11/30/2009
* USD 2,442,663.00

To make STEM education available to the Yup.ik residents of the Y-K Delta, we
propose to do the &lt;br/&gt;following to establish an academic program that
effectively trains Alaskan Natives for STEM &lt;br/&gt;careers and bridges these
students to the main campuses in Alaska: &lt;br/&gt;- A suite of proven models
will be utilized. These models include (1) the Treisman model for
&lt;br/&gt;effective methods of teaching mathematics, (2) the ANSEP model for
recruitment,retention &lt;br/&gt;and matriculation, (3) the ESP (Emerging
Scholars Program) model for retention and &lt;br/&gt;guidance, and (4) the TRIO
model for recruitment and intensive course delivery. &lt;br/&gt;- The models
will be modified and combined to most effectively serve the Yup.ik students in
the &lt;br/&gt;Y-K Delta. For instance, elements of the Treisman model and the
ANSEP model will be &lt;br/&gt;directed at recruiting and training non-
traditional and under-prepared students as well as &lt;br/&gt;Yup.ik students
with strong academic records. This program will broaden the scope of
&lt;br/&gt;recruitment and retention beyond what has previously been done in
other programs. &lt;br/&gt;- An integrated program of new course offerings in
mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology &lt;br/&gt;and information technology
will be developed at KuC. This suite of courses will give students
&lt;br/&gt;options in the programs they enter at KuC, will enable students to
receive two years of STEM &lt;br/&gt;education at KuC before matriculating to
the four-year campuses at Fairbanks and &lt;br/&gt;Anchorage, and will allow
them to locally receive professional certifications and associate
&lt;br/&gt;degrees with emphasis in STEM areas. &lt;br/&gt;- using modified
forms of the TRIO/Talent Search and the ANSEP models, both non-traditional
&lt;br/&gt;and high school students will be recruited. Summer intensive camps
will be offered to involve &lt;br/&gt;students in science, technology and
mathematics. One-month intensive courses in &lt;br/&gt;mathematics, science and
computer technology will be offered in order to give prospective
&lt;br/&gt;college students stronger backgrounds in these areas before enrolling
in college. Students &lt;br/&gt;will also participate in TALPA, where they
design and build their own computer. The purpose &lt;br/&gt;of these summer
intensives is to create interest in and excitement about STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;- The summer intensives are followed by distance-delivered
videoconference courses to high &lt;br/&gt;school students to keep them involved
in the program and to continue their STEM training. A &lt;br/&gt;number of
distance-delivered courses in ITS will also be used for this purpose.
&lt;br/&gt;- In conjunction with the summer intensives and recruitment
activities, the ESP and ANSEP &lt;br/&gt;faculty will engage in a proactive
advising and guidance effort to involve the students in &lt;br/&gt;college
activities, build cohort groups, a strong sense of community among the students,
and &lt;br/&gt;improved student self image. The advising center and STEM faculty
will likewise maintain &lt;br/&gt;contact with high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;- Upon enrolling in KuC, students continue to receive advising,
guidance and rigorous STEM &lt;br/&gt;training, and they continue to work within
their cohort groups. Bridging will be accomplished &lt;br/&gt;when they
matriculate to the four-year campuses.