* 0407117
* NUE:    Integration of Nanotechnology into the Core Chemistry Curriculum at Mount Holyoke College
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Wei Chen, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Professor Sean M.
Decatur at Mount Holyoke College is made by the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Division of
Undergraduate Education in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources to
increase the experience of students in nanoscale science and to enhance their
perspectives on the social, political, and ethical considerations regarding
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to integrate topics on
nanotechnology throughout the core chemistry curriculum and to involve
undergraduates in research on phenomena at the nanoscale, while engaging the
broader community in critical issues regarding nanotechnology. The project has
four primary goals: (1) Developing new lab experiences for undergraduate
courses. (2) Involving undergraduates in nanotechnology research. (3) Engaging
the broader community in critical analysis and discussion of nanotechnology. (4)
Creating a cross-disciplinary faculty working group on nanotechnology. Faculty
involved in the project will meet regularly to read and discuss new literature
related to nanotechnology from a variety of fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is designed so that students learn to make connections between the
macroscopic and atomic level descriptions of matter by relating bulk properties
to molecular structure through techniques for imaging and manipulating molecules
at the nanoscale, such as atomic force microscopy (AFM) and directed self-
assembly. These tools will be introduced in courses for the first two years of
the chemistry curriculum (general and organic chemistry) and expanded upon in
the advanced courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will sponsor a series of
seminars involving nanotechnology, including speakers, who will address
questions concerning the social, political, ethical, and historical implications
of nanotechnology for a broad, interdisciplinary audience. Units on
nanotechnology will also be added to a new interdisciplinary course on the
History of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was
received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education
announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE. &lt;br/&gt;