* 0407946
* Stochastic Automata Networks in Cell Biology -- Modeling, Computation and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* David Finifter, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,999.00

Mathias has worked extensively in numerical linear algebra and matrix analysis.
About a year ago he started collaborative work with Gregory D. Smith, a
theoretical cell biologist, on modeling intra-cellular calcium ion channels. The
stochastic automaton network (SAN) model that they developled and used was able
to recreate the observed excitability of the intra-cellular calcium ion
concentration. The use of the SAN approach allowed modelling on a much larger
scale than had previously ben done. Mathias will spend an&lt;br/&gt;immersion
year in mathematical biology learning the biological background required for the
modeling of ion channels and other problems in mathematical biology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical biology is a relatively new field. It brings
mathematical modeling methods to bear on a wide range of biological problems
from the intra-cellular level, for example modeling the variation of the
&lt;br/&gt;concentration of calcium over time within a cell, to the whole organ
level, for example, modeling the action of the heart. It is part of a general
trend in science to investigate physical phenomena through mathematical models
in addition to experiments. A reliable mathematical model can provide scientific
insights more quickly, and is more effectively than a traditional scientific
experiment. Mathias will immerse himself in mathematical biology for one year,
so that in the future he will be able to use his training in mathematics to make
research contributions in mathematical biology--with obvious benefits to
society.