* 0407108
* NUE:      Introducing Nanoscience to Education and Student Research at Jackson State University
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Tigran Shahbazyan, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 04/30/2007
* USD 80,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Jackson State
University supports Professors Shahbazyan, Hagelberg and Walters to lead a
collaborative interdisciplinary effort to integrate nanoscience research and
education in Jackson State University. The main educational component of the
project involves a development of Nanotechnology Laboratory course with
accompanying comprehensive manual, which will complement the already established
Introduction to Nanoscale Science and Engineering lecture course for the first
and second year undergraduates. The new interdisciplinary laboratory course will
be open to undergraduate students from all departments of the College of
Science, Engineering and Technology, and will bridge the gap between students'
education and research activities by providing opportunities for hands-on
training in advanced materials research. The research component of the project
will also include computational and theoretical studies of nanostructured
materials such as carbon nanostructures, encapsulating metal atom clusters and
metal nanoparticles with molecular adsorbates. The outreach activities will
include Nanotechnology Seminar and Nanotechnology Summer
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was received in
response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education announcement, NSF
03-044, category NUE and was jointly funded by the Divisions of Materials
Research and Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
and the Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;