* 0407816
* Dissertation Research: Mechanisms Underlying Complex Interactions Between Plants, Herbivores, and Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* James Bever, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,960.00

Studies of insect herbivore impacts on plants in nature and agriculture have
primarily focused on the direct interactions that occur between an herbivore and
a plant. However, we know that soil organisms such as beneficial mycorrhizal
fungi (which promote nutrient absorption by plants) can alter plant growth and
the outcome of plant-plant interactions. Therefore, we expect that these soil
organisms can also change the outcome of a plant-herbivore interaction. The
research tests two novel hypotheses for predicting the outcomes of interactions
between herbivores, plants and mycorrhizal fungi. The Nutrition Hypothesis
suggests that increased nutrition from a plant's association with mycorrhizal
fungi will directly translate into increased herbivore growth, and the
Modification of Defense Hypothesis suggests that mycorrhizal fungi alter the
production of plant defenses such that herbivores feeding on mycorrhizal plants
experience a decrease in growth compared to herbivores feeding on non-
mycorrhizal plants. Two experiments will be conducted to examine herbivory on
plants associated with mycorrhizal fungi. These experiments will examine three
plant defense responses; measure herbivore responses to the presence of
mycorrhizae; and measure mycorrhizal responses to herbivory, thereby determining
which hypothesis is most consistent with the responses exhibited by this system.
Knowledge of mycorrhizal-plant-herbivore interactions will provide a predictive
tool for understanding the impact of herbivores in agriculture as a function of
mycorrhizal fungi in the soil community. Through work on these experiments, the
PI will continue mentoring minority and female undergraduates. These students
will assist with the implementation of these experiments while developing and
conducting their own projects; they will improve their analytical skills, and
broadened their academic preparation to enter a variety of scientific
fields.&lt;br/&gt;