* 0407732
* The Cauchy Problem for the Einstein Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Lars Andersson, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2008
* USD 138,067.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0407732&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Lars Andersson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
investigate the Cauchy problem for the&lt;br/&gt;Einstein equations. Several
aspects will be studied, including&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear stability of cosmological
spacetimes, as well as the&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear stability of various versions of
the Einstein equations&lt;br/&gt;for spacetimes with one spatial Killing field.
Studies of the&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic behavior near spacetime singularities will
be carried&lt;br/&gt;out, with particular attention to aspects of the BKL
proposal and&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic silence. Here a combination of numerical
and&lt;br/&gt;analytical methods will be used. Elliptic gauge formulations
for&lt;br/&gt;the Einstein equations will be investigated. These are
of&lt;br/&gt;interest for large scale numerical computations, as well as
for&lt;br/&gt;the Cauchy problem for rough initial
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Einstein equations describe the geometry of
spacetime, which&lt;br/&gt;in turn determines the motion of bodies (planets,
stars,&lt;br/&gt;galaxies) in space, as well as the dynamics of fields
and&lt;br/&gt;particles via their respective field theories. The geometric
view&lt;br/&gt;of the universe provided by the Einstein equations has led
to&lt;br/&gt;some of the most fundamental and paradoxical features of
our&lt;br/&gt;picture of the universe, including the initial
spacetime&lt;br/&gt;singularity or Big Bang and black holes. The mathematical
study&lt;br/&gt;of spacetimes in extreme conditions such as near the Big
Bang&lt;br/&gt;singularity or near the singularity in black holes has led to
a&lt;br/&gt;far reaching conjecture called ``Cosmic Censorship'',
which&lt;br/&gt;implies that phenomena which violate the intuitive notions
of&lt;br/&gt;causality must be hidden (censored) from observers. In
this&lt;br/&gt;project, problems related to cosmic censorship are studied
using&lt;br/&gt;a combination of computer based and analytical techniques, with
a&lt;br/&gt;particular focus on the evolution of geometry from
initial&lt;br/&gt;conditions.&lt;br/&gt;