* 0407361
* Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis of Bending Nanotubes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Dmitry Golovaty, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2008
* USD 274,185.00

Proposal: DMS-0407361&lt;br/&gt;PI: John P Wilber&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Akron&lt;br/&gt;Title: Modeling, Simulation and Analysis of
Bending Nanotubes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigators propose to develop material models of multi-walled
carbon nanotubes. The research combines continuum mechanical modeling with
molecular dynamics simulations to develop a multiscale procedure for analyzing
bending. The continuum models are formulated within the framework of nonlinear
shell theory. A novel feature is the inclusion of van der Waals interactions
between the walls of the nanotube. The resulting systems of nonlocal partial
differential equations are studied under various assumptions on the precise form
of the nonlocal interactions. The predictions for the global geometry of full-
length multi-walled nanotubes are then used to conduct molecular dynamics
simulations of the localized high-strain regions. The simulations, in turn,
verify the constitutive assumptions of the continuum model and are used to
develop and refine the models for the inclusion of the non-local forces at the
continuum level. Upon its completion, this research yields accurate material
models of multi-walled carbon nanotubes and techniques for using these models to
analyze the response of nanotubes to applied bending loads. The mostsalient
features of the proposed work---namely, the formulation and analysis of
equations with terms representing the nonlocal interactions between walls in
multi-walled nanotubes and the integration of continuum mechanical modeling with
molecular dynamics simulations---represent a significant step in the study of
the mechanical properties of nanotubes.Soon after the discovery of carbon
nanotubes in the early 1990's, researchers realized that these materials,
because of their novel structural, chemical, and electrical properties, could be
used to engineer light-weight, high-strength composite materials, chemical
andbiochemical sensors, micro-electronic devices, etc. So far the practical uses
of carbon nanotubes remain very limited because the efficient technologies for
their mechanical processing and underlying models have not yet been fully
developed. Although a great deal ofexperimental data has been collected during
the past decade, few mathematical models have been suggested that can predict
either the mechanical behavior of multi-walled nanotubes or their physical-
chemical properties after mechanical manipulation. In particular, few models
exist to describe the process of bending of multi-walled carbon nanotubes. The
proposed research addresses this shortcoming by developing mathematical models
and computationaltechniques for describing the bending of multi-walled
nanotubes. These models focus on incorporating the effect of nonlocal
interactions between the individual walls of a multi-walled nanotube. A better
understanding of the mechanical properties of nanotubes andof how these tubes
bend contributes to the development of techniques for producing composite
materials and for manufacturing nano-scale devices incorporating carbon
nanotubes. In addition to its scientific impact, the proposed program enhances
graduate and undergraduatetraining in the disciplines of mathematics, physics,
and engineering. The students participating in the program are exposed to
interdisciplinary research involving sophisticated atomic through macroscopic
mathematical modeling and are trained in working within a multi-disciplinary
environment.&lt;br/&gt;