* 0407019
* Comprehensive Study of Atomic & Molecular Gas in Taurus:    Evolution of the Interstellar Medium and Star Formation
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Paul Goldsmith, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 07/31/2010
* USD 291,402.00

AST 0407019 Goldsmith

Dr. Paul Goldsmith will carry out a major study of the Taurus molecular cloud
complex. It will result in the largest images in 12CO and 13CO of a molecular
cloud yet obtained. This project will also produce the first fully sampled high
angular resolution map of atomic hydrogen in the 100 square degree region. The
combination of the atomic and molecular data sets will, in conjunction with
existing data on the dust distribution and young stars in Taurus, provide a
unique tool for studying key aspects of the life cycle of molecular clouds and
star formation. Acquiring the data to address these important questions is only
possible due to recent developments in radio astronomical imaging technology.
The molecular maps will be obtained using the Five College Radio Astronomy
Observatory 13.7m telescope and 32 element Sequoia focal plane array: observing
time has already been allocated. The HI data will be obtained using the 305m
Arecibo telescope and the 7 element dual polarization ALFA focal plane array
system. Prior to the availability of these instruments which provide an order of
magnitude increase in mapping speed, it was not realistic to cover the required
solid angle with the angular resolution needed to be sensitive to structure over
a range of scales exceeding 100:1. The greatly enhanced capability permits this
project to address the following key questions. 1. The relationship between the
atomic and molecular components of Taurus, including the evolutionary history of
the region, will be addressed by comparing the hydrogen emission and absorption
line profiles and column densities, and by determining the ages of cloud cores
from their residual atomic gas content; 2. The role of turbulence in dark cloud
complexes -- both in the atomic/molecular transition and in the formation of new
stars -- will be studied by the Dr. Goldsmith and collaborators through
identification of critical scales for turbulent support based on Principal
Component Analysis; 3. Critical parameters for star formation, including the
threshold of column density and/or density, the association between molecular
clouds and stars, and the role of large scale processes versus local effects in
star formation will be identified; 4. The impact of young stars on molecular
clouds and subsequent star formation will be evaluated by carrying out a
complete census of molecular outflows, the energy that they have returned to
molecular clouds, and their effect on cloud structure.

This work will have an impact on a wide range of areas in astrophysics and star
formation research, especially (1) numerical simulations of atomic and molecular
cloud hydrodynamics including the transition between these two key phases; (2)
time dependent astrochemistry based on gas phase reactions and grain surface
formation of molecular hydrogen; (3) the overall energetics of molecular clouds
including dissipation and regeneration of turbulence. This work will integrate
research and teaching. Various portions of the data will be ideal for
investigation by undergraduate students. Inasmuch as the formation of solar type
stars is of considerable interest to the public, and that this kind of mapping
project really does produce images to which people can relate, it is ideally
suited for both talks and to be the focus of exhibits being contemplated for
local science education facilities.