* 0407447
* NUE:  A Tour in Nano-Land and Understanding the Nano-Landscape: Developing Multidisciplinary NUE Courses
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Andrew Mason, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to California State
University-Long Beach (CSULB) supports Dr. Tulin E. Mangir, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Dr. Chuhee Kwon, Department of Physics and Astronomy,
and Dr. Andrew Z. Mason, Department of Biological Sciences for their work to
develop lower division classes at CSULB in the areas of nano-sciences and nano-
technology.

This proposal requests funding to enable CSULB to pro-actively expand and
develop curricula for both, undergraduate major and non-major students, and also
to add a teacher training component to increase general awareness and promote
career options to fill the vacant capacity in this rapidly growing discipline.

The proposal aims to accomplish the following goals: 1) development of an
interdisciplinary survey course on nano-technology designed for engineering and
science majors in their sophomore and/junior year; 2) development of a
junior/senior course with a combination of lecture and laboratory that provides
students with an in-depth understanding of the techniques used in nanoscale
science and engineering; and 3) generation of web-based resources and
interaction modules designed for distance learning aimed specifically for
science and engineering teacher preparation classes. The courses will cover
specific application examples in life sciences, biotechnology and medicine,
physics, materials electronics environmental monitoring, and expose students to
use of instrumentation such as AFM, SEM, X-Ray Microscopes, Remote Monitoring of
Robots (Tele-robotoics) and Nano-robots, web-based laboratory modules.

The proposal for this award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Education (NSEE) announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE and was
jointly funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG)and the Division of Materials Research (DMR) in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).