* 0407002
* Luminescence dating of Late Pleistocene/Early Holocene archaeological sites in Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* James Feathers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2006
* USD 115,043.00

The question about when humans first colonized the New World has been debated
by archaeologists since the 19th century. Until very recently, the argument has
centered on North American evidence, since the presumed entry point is through
North America and the earliest lithic tradition that is widely accepted, Clovis,
is confined to North America. The growing acceptance of pre-Clovis dates for the
Monte Verde site in southern Chile has focused attention on the South American
evidence. The South American record as a whole suggests an early technology and
adaptation quite distinct from Clovis and not likely descendent from it. This is
a compelling argument for occupation in South America at least contemporary with
if not earlier than Clovis, but documentation of this evidence is much poorer
than that for North America. Particularly problematic is the dating of this
early evidence.&lt;br/&gt; With funding support from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. James Feathers of the University of Washington will over the
next two years be conducting a luminescence dating program targeting late
Pleistocene/early Holocene sites in central Brazil. Much of this work is in
collaboration with archaeologists and physical anthropologists from the
University of Sao Paulo, who have been conducting a systematic study of early
sites in the Lagoa Santa region of Minas Gerais, north of Rio de Janeiro. This
is a karstic region renowned for limestone rockshelters containing more than 100
human skeletons believed to date to this early period. Like the famous Kenewick
Man from Washington state, these skeletons differ anatomically from modern
native Americans and may indicate an early migration to the New World from south
Asia.&lt;br/&gt; Luminescence dating is founded in solid state physics and is
able to date sediments to their last exposure to light, usually when they were
deposited. The ability to date single grains by luminescence allows the method
to identify and potentially date mixed or disturbed sediments. Stratigraphic
integrity is often a problem at early sites. The work will provide training for
students from both the University of Washington and the University of Sao
Paulo.&lt;br/&gt; There are many competing arguments for how and when people
first arrived in the New World. The long term goal of this research is to
provide some solid evidence from South America to allow evaluations of these
various arguments. Results from this work will be published in international
journals and disseminated to the popular press as well. &lt;br/&gt;