* 0407462
* Design and Processing of Novel Electronic Composite Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Jiping Cheng, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2008
* USD 525,000.00

This award by the Division of Materials Research to Pennsylvania State
University, University Park is to design synthetic approaches and gain
understanding of novel electronic composites that will exhibit unusual
properties that are not observed in the constituent materials and/or that their
magnitudes are out of range accountable by their constituent phases or
compounds. With this award, Professors Bhalla, Cheng and Guo will apply novel
processing approaches to synthesize micro to nanoscale microstructured composite
materials that have unusual magnetoelectric properties. Special processing
approaches that will be used for the preparation of the composites are: i)
microwave sintering in a single mode cavity with electric-magnetic field
separated heating processing, which permits rapid densification of metal:ceramic
nanostructure; and ii) laser heated pedestal growth to obtain highly dense
diphasic or eutectic micro- and nano-structures in forms of single crystal
composite fibers. As ferroelectric-ferromagnetic properties are highly
antagonistic to obtain in a single host material, by introducing a high
permeability into a strong ferromagnetic, a high permittivity into a strong
ferroelectric, and coupling them elastically, through piezoelectric and
magnetostrictive interactions, it is possible to achieve the necessary
magnetoelectric symmetry and to generate ferroelectric:ferromagnetic
MetaMaterials improvement over the present single phase. The proposed studies
will also be directed towards understanding and modeling of one of the
associated features, namely the dielectric loss in these materials and in
ferroic materials in general. The modeling studies, in addition, will be
extended to predict the directions of the high electromagnetic
coefficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the possible outcomes of this award
would be to provide novel and improved functional materials in electronic
sensors, actuators and a number of other applications. New knowledge on
electronic materials that would be developed by this award including their
processing and characterization will be beneficial to graduate students,
scientists and engineers. Penn State University has a long history in
contributing to the science and engineering educational needs of the country,
and this award would augment these activities and would continue their
commitment to educational outreach.