* 0407378
* NUE:     Nanoscience Based Supplementary Items for ACS Exams Institute Assessment Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Thomas Holme, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 100,894.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Professor Thomas A
Holme of the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee is made by the Division of
Chemistry in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the
Division of Undergraduate Education in the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources to develop multiple choice assessment items that test student
knowledge of chemistry content found in traditional subdisciplines, but uses
nanoscience examples. These items will be collected into a supplementary
nanoscience-based items booklet to be published by the Examinations Institute of
the Division of Chemical Education of the American Chemical Society. These
booklets will be printed and provided free of charge to educators that order
traditional exams in General Chemistry, Organic Chemistry, Physical Chemistry
and Inorganic Chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To facillitate the use of these
questions as complements to or supplements in the traditional exams, an
interactive web site will also be developed that allows users to determine norms
for exams adjusted by the use of the nanoscience based items (based on items
statistics for all items involved.) The intellectual merit of this project lies
largely in the development and analysis of these items. The major task of
writing and editing the items will be carried out by a committee of volunteer
educators. Once items have been written they will be trial tested, and the
results of these trials will be subjected to statistical analysis. These
analyses will allow for determination of what types of nanoscience content
provide difficulties for student and the determination if any items operate
differentially within definable subgroups of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the project is related primarily to this differential item
functioning (DIF) analysis. As part of the development of the proposed
assessment instrument, DIF will be investigated, and, if found, studied further
to elucidate ways in which nanoscience related content presents learning
barriers for definable ethnic or gender groups. Such information can help
address issues of underrepresented minorities in science by determining better
ways to present nanoscience related content for these groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was received in response to
the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education announcement, NSF 03-044,
category NUE.&lt;br/&gt;