* 0407570
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenetic Persistence of Modularity of the Rodent Skull
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Philip Myers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 05/31/2008
* USD 11,995.00

The developmental architecture (DA) of complex morphological structures causes
traits to develop as integrated units or independent modules. Persistent
questions are whether DA influences the divergence of morphological features
that often accompanies organismal diversification, and whether DA itself
evolves. The aim of this research is to address such issues by comparing DA over
a large group of organisms for which a robust phylogeny is available. Finding
that more closely related, morphologically distinct species share a common DA
would argue for its persistence. For the present study, the DA of the
craniomandibular complex will be compared across an extensively sampled group of
ecologically and morphologically diverse rodents, the Sigmodontinae, to
determine whether DA persists despite diversification. The comparisons will be
based on a quantitative analysis of DA, being DA revealed by statistical
covariances among traits. The structure of those covariances provides an
estimate of a group's DA. Such covariance structures will be contrasted across
species, using an approach that compares them to models deduced from hypotheses
of developmental mechanisms. Should all species within a lineage fit the same
model, that will be taken as evidence for the persistence of DA. These broadly
comparative analyses will be based on samples of adult specimens. The hypothesis
that developmental information persists until the adult stage will be tested by
comparing samples of specimens on different developmental stages. A novel
approach will be employed in these analyses to compare the effects of processes
that generate or eliminate variation through development.