* 0407075
* NUE: An Integrated Approach to Teaching Nanotechnology and Society
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Clark Miller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Lopez
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,987.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ESI-0407075&lt;br/&gt;Clark Miller, University of
Wisconsin, Madison &lt;br/&gt;NUE: "An Integrated Approach to Teaching
Nanotechnology and Society"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement and
evaluate an interdisciplinary program in undergraduate education in
nanotechnology and society, filling an important curricular gap in nanoscale
science and engineering education at UW-Madison as well as elsewhere around the
country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed program will
create small, first-year undergraduate seminars, composed of students from
across campus, that will integrate the technical and social dimensions of
nanoscale science and engineering. These courses will be taught by advanced PhD
students, who will participate in a rigorous training program to teach them how
to teach critical thinking about nanotechnology and society. Throughout the
process, an interdisciplinary group of faculty mentors will provide coordination
and oversight of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The program
will directly impact several hundred undergraduate students, providing them with
an in-depth understanding of the societal, ethical, legal, and policy
implications of nanoscale science and engineering. It will: (1) enable students
in the sciences and engineering to learn about what happens when science and
technology leave the laboratory and get taken up into society; (2) expose
students in the humanities and social sciences to how social choices shape the
design of technological systems and how these systems structure social
interactions and human wellbeing; and (3) prepare students in all fields to make
informed choices as consumers and citizens about technology. It will provide
training to advanced PhD students who intend to become future faculty, giving
them the skills and expertise to integrate research and teaching, to build
evaluation of student learning into all aspects of their teaching, and to work
together across disciplinary boundaries to teach students to think critically
about nanotechnology and society. The project training program, syllabi, and
curricular materials will be disseminated widely within the nanotechnology
research community, the broader STEM community, and among science and technology
studies educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;