* 0407183
* NUE:      Introducing Nanoscale System Design into the Undergraduate Electrical and Computer Engineering Curriculum
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Christopher Berndt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2007
* USD 105,762.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER.: 0407183&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: State University of New York at
Stony Brook&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: NANOTECHNOLOGY UNDERGRAD EDUCATION
&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Pacelli, Andrea&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE:
NUE: Introducing nanoscale system design into the undergraduate electrical and
computer engineering
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is
rapidly making the transition from the experimental stage to practical
application. Nanoelectronic systems have the potential to revolutionize
information technology, by achieving unprecedented storage and computation
capabilities. However, past experience shows that harnessing the power of a new
technology requires designers to appreciate its strengths and limitations, and
adapt design methodologies to it. Therefore, to tap the potential of nanosystems
five or ten years in the future, it is necessary to educate engineers now to
appreciate the principles of nanotechnology and to take advantage of it. This
interdisciplinary project has the goal of introducing basic concepts in
nanoscale circuit and systems design into the undergraduate electrical and
computer engineering curriculum, integrating education and current research. An
instructional module and supporting CAD software will be developed.
Nanoelectronics concepts will be presented from a designer's point of view,
stressing the impact on information technologies rather than physical and
fabrication aspects. Emphasis will be placed on the typical figures of merit of
information processing systems: Computational throughput, power consumption,
reliability, and cost. A research agenda will be carried out both in the
classroom and in projects, exploring the design potentials of current and future
nanoelectronic approaches and comparing them to the dominant silicon
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was received in
response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education announcement, NSF
03-044, category NUE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;