* 0407968
* Dissertation Research: Contributions of Adaptation and Genetic Drift to Reproductive Isolation in an Annual Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Alice Winn, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2006
* USD 5,430.00

Surprisingly little is known of the mechanisms that generate and preserve the
Earth's tremendous biological diversity at the level of species. The goal of
this research is to measure the relative contributions of adaptation and chance
to the initiation of new species using an annual plant, Diodia teres, as a model
system. The degree of divergence due to adaptation to different environments and
the amount of genetic differentiation due to chance alone will be measured for a
set of six populations of an annual plant. The degree of reproductive isolation
among populations, a measure of the extent to which they constitute different
incipient species, will also be measured. Analysis of the relationship of
adaptive differentiation and chance differentiation among populations to the
amount of reproductive isolation will be used to quantify the contribution of
each process towards the formation of new species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will contribute to our ability to predict the
consequences of anthropogenic disruptions such as habitat fragmentation and of
longer-term processes such as global warming for the process of the generation
of new species. This award will also contribute to the training of a graduate
student who is a member of a group that is underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;