* 0407302
* RUI:  Probing the Interstellar Medium Using Pulsar Scintillation
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Dan Stinebring, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 06/30/2008
* USD 189,319.00

The scintillation, or intensity variation, of pulsars can be used to probe the
interstellar medium on size scales similar to that of the solar system. Since
scintillation is caused by multi-path scattering off of density variations in
the ionized component of the interstellar gas, a detailed study of pulsar
scintillation yields information about how the interstellar gas is clumped,
whether or not it exhibits turbulence, and how the density variations are
initiated and sustained. These questions are central to an understanding of the
dynamics of our galaxy and, hence, of other spiral galaxies like ours. During
the previous grant period, Dr. Daniel Stinebring discovered that a crisscross
pattern that had been noticed for decades in dynamic spectra has a much clearer
signature in transform space. His group has now studied this scintillation arc
phenomenon extensively, using high dynamic range observations of pulsars,
primarily obtained with the Arecibo radio telescope. The research carried out
with this new award will explore this phenomenon in detail using high-
sensitivity observations from the Arecibo radio telescope and other large
telescopes. Detailed substructure, including inverted subarcs, will be explored
fully and their timescale and frequency behavior will be determined. The goal of
this work is to connect the detailed observations of scintillation arcs with the
physical characteristics of turbulent gas in the ionized interstellar
medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will involve undergraduate
students in the excitement of exploring a new phenomenon and piecing together
parts of a bigger puzzle: how does large scale stirring of the interstellar gas
create small scale turbulence which is eventually dissipated as heat? By working
closely with Dr. Stinebring and his collaborators, the students will gain a
broad range of technical skills as well as further develop their ability to
independently explore problems. Using state-of-the-art electronics and computers
at the largest radio telescopes in the world, the students will gain confidence
in their ability to tackle large and complex problems. Opportunities to
collaborate with scientists in the U.S. and abroad and to report their work at
conferences and in publications will enhance students research experience and
prepare them for graduate training or other roles in the technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;