* 0407281
* NUE:     Development and Dissemination of a Sophomore Course in Nano-Science, Engineering and Technology
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Gary Skuse, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2009
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to the Rochester
Institute of Technology supports Dr. Sergey E. Lyshevski, Department of
Electrical Engineering along with colleagues from Microlectronic Engineering,
Department of Physics and the Department of Biological Sciences to develop,
evaluate and disseminate a course Nano-Science, Engineering and Technology
(NanoSET). This course will integrate six core areas: (1) fundamentals of nano-
science and engineering; (2) new physical and chemical phenomena at nanoscale;
(3) nanomaterials and nanofabrication; (4) molecular-, carbon- and silicon-based
nanoelectronics; (5) nanosystems and biomimetics; (6) hands-on nanoFab and
nanoCAD laboratories. In addition, ethics, social issues, economic impact,
leadership and entrepreneurship topics will be introduced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed course integrates vital components of
nanoscale science and engineering in a unified interdisciplinary nanotechnology
setting. Faculty from the Colleges of Engineering, Science and Liberal Arts will
be involved in development and teaching this course. Class notes, experiments,
assignments, manuals as well as other course materials and teaching tools will
be develop and disseminated. As a part of the dissemination efforts, an
interactive web site summarizing the course and allowing free downloading of all
course materials will be developed and effectively maintained. We will utilize
the best practice and enhance the existing courses in nanotechnology,
nanoscience and nanoengineering of different successful Nanotechnology
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was
received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education
announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE and was jointly funded by the Division of
Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for Engineering and
the Division of Education and Human Resources in the Directorate for Education
and Human Resources.