* 0407208
* NUE:     Nanoworlds:     An Innovative Undergraduate Curriculum Using a Scalable Web-Based Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* David Smith, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2007
* USD 120,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Case Western
Reserve University supports Dr. Alexis Abramson, Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, Case Western Reserve University to develop "Nanoworlds" -
a durable, scalable, content-rich, multi-level, user-negotiable, web-facilitated
seminar format for the learning of and discussion of nanotechnology. This
undergraduate seminar to be offered at Case will present nanotechnology from the
points of view of the scientific, technological, social and economic impact
perspectives. Nanoworlds is an early years undergraduate course suitable for
general audiences, which uses material in a co-developed digitally archived web
encyclopedia resource known as the Nanopedia. The Nanoworlds seminar will enable
learning of an elemental core of nanoscience and nanoengineering concepts.
Additionally, class members will explore various paths in the Nanopedia (and
beyond) according to their interests for general discussion and in-depth
reporting. These electronic paths of the Nanopedia include the evolving business
portfolio triggered by the nanoworld, public policy issues, nanotechnology in
emerging everyday products, limits to technology's reach, the science and art
museums of nanotechnology, etc. The encyclopedia functions as a highly
interconnected resource for both core and elective topics. Nanopedia content
will be multiply-authored and multiply-edited, and content contributions will
sought from acknowledged experts in the field as well as from the course
professors. Additionally, the Nanopedia, as further developed under this award,
will be used as a complementary resource for the engineering core courses
offered at Case to facilitate integration of concepts relating to nanoscience
and nanoengineering into these more traditionally oriented courses.

The proposal for this award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Education announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE and was funded
by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate
for Engineering.

