* 0407005
* Collaborative Research:  Herbig-Haro Flows as Probes of Early Stellar Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Bo Reipurth, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 05/31/2010
* USD 232,000.00

Star formation is the only remaining major phase of stellar evolution that is
still poorly understood, especially the very earliest evolutionary stages when
the nascent stars are still deeply embedded in the regions of their formation.
Analysis of material flows from the very young Herbig-Haro stars, and in
particular of the subset of highly collimated Herbig-Haro jets, provide indirect
but important insights into the nature of the accretion and mass loss processes
which govern the formation of stars. The recent studies open the possibility to
partially reconstruct the mass ejection history of the newly born driving
sources and therefore their mass accretion history. This project is completing a
major interference filter imaging survey of all nearby star forming regions in
order to identify Herbig-Haro flows, analyzing the properties of the more than
700 Herbig-Haro flows known so far to derive their statistical properties,
repeating their northern survey to obtain proper motions and energetics of the
outflows, studying the launch and collimation regions of jets and their visible
sources by high resolution optical and infrared spectroscopy, obtaining adaptive
optics assisted near-infrared images and centimeter radio continuum maps of the
sources of material flows in order to study their multiplicity and to test jet
formation scenarios, and finally, an advanced magnetohydrodynamical code
simulates the cooling regions of the shocks for a better understanding of the
complex shapes and motions uncovered by the observational
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:. The study of Herbig-Haro flows is
providing a framework within which other classes of astrophysical jets may be
interpreted. This research continues to involve both graduate and undergraduate
students. Through the 2 meter Faulkes telescope at Haleakala (the world's
largest telescope exclusively dedicated to teaching high school students), the
investigators also offer small research programs related to these material flows
and their energy sources. Long term efforts to disseminate these results to the
public continue through talks, astronomy shows, and presentations at
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;