* 0407859
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Predicting the Combined Effects of Plant Resistance and Natural Enemies on Plant Fitness
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* William Morris, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2007
* USD 7,875.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants often produce chemical defenses that reduce
herbivore feeding, but those chemicals may also have a negative effect on
predators which, by attacking herbivores, also reduce herbivore damage to
plants. This research asks whether the negative effect of plant defense on
predators is sufficient to cause more chemically defended plants to grow less
well or to produce fewer seeds; in addition, the PIs will detect whether the
degree of interference between chemical defense and predators differs for
different types of plants, herbivores, and predators. Using beetles feeding on
soybean plants, earlier work found that a predator was more effective in
decreasing herbivore damage and increasing seed production on plants with few
resistance chemicals than on heavily defended plants. In this research, we will
explore whether the negative effect of soybean defense on predators is
influenced by the type of chemical defense (permanent vs. transient), the diet
breadth of the herbivore (a single vs. multiple plant species), and the
predator's feeding method (consuming the prey externally vs. as an internal
parasite). These experiments may help to explain why some plant species produce
defenses only after they receive herbivore damage, while other plants are always
defended. The results of these experiments should improve our understanding of
when plant chemical defense will enhance or detract from the positive benefits
plants receive when predators attack herbivores, and could also could help to
determine when releasing predators to control insect pests on soybeans and other
agricultural plants may be more or less effective.&lt;br/&gt;