* 0407875
* Dissertation Research: Linking an Invasive Ecosystem Engineer with Community and Ecosystem-Level Impacts: North American Beaver Effects on Stream Food Webs of Southern Chile
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Aaron Fisk, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,900.00

The impact of invasive, introduced species on ecosystems is a critical area of
research for ecology. Understanding the context-dependent responses of species
and ecosystems to exotics is necessary to comprehend and predict current impacts
and future alterations to vulnerable systems. The North American beaver
introduction into southern Chile is a particularly compelling case because of
the beaver's ability to engineer entire ecosystems. This introduction is having
destructive impacts, causing dramatic changes in forests and streams. Stream
food webs depend on forests for organic matter and shading. This study addresses
the beaver's influences on stream invertebrate community structure, secondary
production, trophic energy flow and food web dynamics in response to changes in
streamside forest cover using novel techniques. It is expected that the beaver's
cumulative impacts, shaping and structuring non-native communities and ecosystem
function, may not be predictable based on North American studies, due to
differences in vegetation and evolutionary history of beaver and forests in
South America. The broader impacts of this dissertation will include cooperative
research, education and conservation initiatives with local Chilean partners
that will allow important parts of the research to be accomplished and also
provide support and input to the local efforts.