* 0407690
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Polyandry in Crickets: Disentangling the Genetic Benefits
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Scott Sakaluk, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 03/31/2007
* USD 9,290.00

Abstract of Proposed Research &lt;br/&gt;Project Title: Dissertation Research:
&lt;br/&gt;Polyandry in crickets: disentangling the genetic benefits
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Scott Kitchener
Sakaluk&lt;br/&gt;Co-Principle Investigator: Tracie Marie
Ivy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although mating is often costly, females of
many species mate multiple times and with multiple partners, presumably because
females accrue benefits that outweigh the costs. Material benefits, such as
courtship food gifts, directly increase a female's reproductive success, while
genetic benefits indirectly improve a female's success through the performance
of her offspring. Recent work involving decorated crickets indicates that
females mating multiply produce significantly more surviving offspring than
those mating only once, particularly when females mate with multiple partners.
Moreover, the data suggest that the increase in offspring survival is due to
genetic rather than material benefits. The object of the proposed research is to
test two hypotheses regarding the nature of genetic benefits obtained via
promiscuous mating in decorated crickets: 1) offspring viability (or sexual
attractiveness) is enhanced through paternally-derived genes and 2) females
mating with multiple partners increase the probability that their eggs will be
fertilized by males with whom they are genetically compatible. These hypotheses
will be tested by utilizing a design used frequently in agricultural research,
the full diallel cross, which involves all possible crosses among a set of
inbred parental lines. If promiscuous mating results in offspring inheriting
genes from high-quality males, I predict that females will derive higher fitness
by mating with certain males, irrespective of the genetic background of the
female. However, if genetic compatibility is most important, I predict that
female fitness will be determined by the interaction between paternal and
maternal genes. Knowing which of these genetic mechanisms drives female mating
preferences is critical to understanding the evolution of animal mating
systems.&lt;br/&gt;