* 0407100
* Conference: 24th Annual Crown Gall Conference, to be held at Cornell University, Noveember 22-23, 2003
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,05/31/2004
* Stephen Winans, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 05/31/2004
* USD 1,000.00

Funding is requested to help offset travel expenses for undergraduate and
graduate students attending the 24th Annual Crown Gall Conference. This
conference will take place November 22-23, 2003 at Cornell University, and will
be attended by approximately 75 national and international scientists that study
Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Of these, approximately half will be students working
in US labs, who will be the sole beneficiaries of financial assistance from NSF.
Several of these students study at undergraduate colleges, and their advisors do
not have adequate funding for travel of this sort. Studies of A. tumefaciens
continue to provide an ongoing intellectual feast. This organism is one of the
best developed model pathogens available. It provided the first model for
translocation of macromolecules from pathogen to host, a phenomenon that is now
known to be quite widespread. The A. tumefaciens transfer system continues to be
the best characterized member of its family. This bacterium provided the first
model for the detection of host-released diffusible chemical signals, and this
system continues to lead the way in host detection. This organism has also
provided an excellent model for the phenomenon of cell-cell communication, a
phenomenon sometimes referred to as quorum sensing. Students of A. tumefaciens
will continue to provide leadership in fundamental aspects of host-microbe
interactions. This conference therefore focuses on an important model patho-
system. These studies also impact the scientific infrastructure in many ways.
One area has to do with the creation of transgenic plants. Although A.
tumefaciens is routinely used to introduce transgenes into many species of
plants, there is a great deal of room for improvement, particularly in
transformation of monocots, the introduction of extremely long T-DNAs, in the
regeneration of plants from transformed cells, and in the removal of antibiotic
resistance markers from transgenic crops. The fundamental studies presenting in
this conference will surely impact upon plant molecular genetics and
agriculture. A. tumefaciens also provides an excellent model for learning how to
do good science. The organism is readily culturable and readily manipulated
genetically. Therefore, this organism and its hosts provide many opportunities
for learning how to do highly controlled, reproducible, hypothesis-based
experiments. In short, students of A. tumefaciens learn how to be good
scientists, and will carry these skills with them throughout their scientific
careers.