* 0407097
* NUE:     Teaching Nanosystems Engineering to Early College Students with Active Learning Experiences
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Louisiana Tech
University supports Dr. Hisham Hegab, Mechanical Engineering Program, for his
work to teach fundamental concepts of nanosystems engineering to engineering and
science students within the College of Engineering &amp; Science at Louisiana
Tech University and to invigorate interest in science and engineering through
demonstrations to local high schools in northern Louisiana. The project
investigators will create a series of hands-on active learning modules targeted
for different educational levels (e.g, high school students, freshman
undergraduates, sophomore undergraduates) to teach fundamental concepts in
nanotechnology such as nanostructures, scanning probe methods, nanofabrication
techniques, and fundamental phenomena in nanoscale materials. These learning
modules will be incorporated into existing curricula through courses at the
freshman level and by the development of a new sophomore-level course entitled
"Fundamentals of Nanosystems Engineering". The course materials developed for
this project will also be made available through a web-based online set of
manuals and through the National Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics Education Digital Library (NSDL) so that they may be used by other
institutions across the nation. The project investigators will also perform
outreach demonstrations using some of the modules to regional secondary schools
around Louisiana Tech and at University sponsored outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was received in
response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education announcement, NSF
03-044, category NUE and was jointly funded by the Division of Design,
Manufacture and Industrial Innovation (DMII) and the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers (EEC) both in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG).