* 0407610
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Virus Roles in Wild Cucurbita pepo and the Risks of Genetically Engineered Virus Resistance
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Alison Power, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 11/30/2005
* USD 12,064.00

Although plant pathogens can significantly affect wild plants populations, the
ecology of viruses in wild plant populations is rarely studied. Two ecological
risks of genetically engineered (GE), virus-resistant crops (into which genes
for virus-resistance have been inserted) prompt a need to understand the
interactions of viruses within plants and the impact of viruses on wild plant
populations.

(1) If GE, virus-resistant crops interbreed with nearby, closely related wild
plant populations, then GE virus resistance genes could enter wild populations
of plants. If the targeted virus typically suppresses wild plant reproduction or
survival, then virus- resistance may increase wild plant fitness and potentially
increase the wild plant's invasiveness in natural and agricultural habitats.

(2) If several viruses compete with each other to successfully infect a plant
(crop or wild), then the plant's resistance to one virus could result in
increased infection by formerly less competitive viruses. This project will
examine a GE, virus-resistant squash (Cucurbita pepo) and a wild squash to
examine the affect of viral infection in wild plant populations and to assess
the associated risks of GE virus-resistance. In research to date, the PIs have
confirmed with controlled experiments that GE virus-resistance increases wild
squash fitness when virus infection is prevalent. In 2004, the PIs will
determine the prevalence of virus infection in wild squash populations to
predict the affect of GE virus-resistance on non-experimental, wild squash
fitness. Prior research has detected competition between squash viruses. In 2004
and 2005, the PIs will conduct a series of greenhouse experiments to study this
interaction more rigorously. This research will provide valuable information
about virus ecology and assess potential ecological impacts of GE virus-
resistance in crops.