* 0407380
* High Speed Scanner:  Digital Access to a Sky-Century
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Jonathan Grindlay, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 08/31/2009
* USD 544,794.00

It is now feasible to design and build a high speed scanner system that can
digitize astronomical images recorded on glass plates (8 x 10 in) to high
photometric accuracy in under 30 sec. This makes possible the digital
preservation of large volumes of archival data on plates which in turn enables
time variability studies of many classes of astronomical objects to extend back
a full century in time as never before possible. The longest duration set of
astronomical plates, and with the largest amount of coverage, are contained in
the 600,000 plates of the Harvard College Observatory. The cosmic "time machine"
made possible by digitizing and serving a century of stellar data on high speed
networks means that a number of key problems in astrophysics can be
investigated. Three examples include: Long-term changes in the pulsation periods
of Cepheid variable stars, the cosmic yardsticks of the astronomical distance
scale, can be studied where period change measurements can reveal the poorly
understood conditions of core convection in the interiors of these luminous
stars; Stellar evolution can be observed on decade to century timescales in very
young stars, which may be converting their left over material in surrounding
disks into the birth of planets; In white dwarfs, neutron stars and black holes
in binary systems, accreting matter from the binary companion, variability is
the rule rather than the exception so they may be studied by the brightness
changes, results of which point to the formation and evolution of these most
extreme stars in the Galaxy. Not only can known phenomena and problems be
addressed, but there is the very likely discovery of new and unexpected
phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This research is helping to
increase public awareness that the universe is not static. Evolution and change
are the rule, not the exception. The impact on science education can be large:
by showing on the project website segments of the ``cosmic movie" from quasar
variations to Cepheid variable pulsation changes to nearby examples of change in
newly-forming stars and planet systems, students can better understand the
excitement of current astronomy. Physical understanding of the dynamic universe
is even more enticing than the immutable sky. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;