* 0407317
* The Mira Imaging Project
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Frederic Schloerb, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2005
* USD 175,034.00

AST 0407317&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Ragland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As stars
approach the end of their life cycles, do they age gracefully as smooth round
orbs or do they vibrate so strongly that their surfaces become distorted? Do
they break out in spots across their surfaces? Do they puff out their
atmospheres with a thin halo of gas? The combined power of 3 interferometers is
being brought to bear on these basic questions about the end stage of stellar
life, in particular for the Mira variable stars. This research group is imaging
the surfaces and the innermost silicon oxide maser and dust shells of Mira
stars, at different wavelengths using the 3 interferometers. There already is
strong evidence at the three facilities, the Infrared Optical Telescope Array,
the Very Long Baseline Array, and the Infrared Spatial Interferometer array,
that a subset of Miras exhibits measurable asymmetries on their surfaces and
inner shells. This coordinated effort is directly investigating the space and
time connection between asymmetries on the stellar surfaces and in the masers
and dust shells. The work is focused on this subset of 11 Miras, mapping the
structure of these giant stars in the near infrared, radio, and mid-infrared to
learn to what extent asymmetries are correlated. They are measuring the
diameters and asymmetry of 5 particular Miras in the near infrared continuum and
absorption bands in order to learn about vertical photospheric structure, and
horizontal variations. These observations are leading to an improved physical
picture of the ejection dynamics of these long-period variable stars. The images
will be the first of their kind in terms of angular resolution, spectral
coverage and sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS. This research
is filling out this as-yet little explored part of the stellar evolution
picture, and so helping to explain how stars eventually start recycling their
mass into space. Through ongoing public outreach activities, they are spreading
this knowledge in public lectures and teacher training workshops. Scientific
partnerships flow naturally from this line of research, as many colleagues in
astrophysics are deeply interested in these issues. The larger benefit to
society will come from what we learn about old stars and what we can relay to
the public, thereby enhancing people's understanding of the universe in which we
live, and demonstrating that one of the benefits of pure scientific research can
be simply pure intellectual enjoyment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;