* 0407052
* RUI: Infrared Spectroscopy and Characterization of Comets
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Karen Magee-Sauer, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 04/30/2010
* USD 155,443.00

AST 0407052 Magee-Sauer

The prime objective of this project directed by Dr. Karen Magee-Sauer is to
measure and compare abundances of ammonia (NH3), hydrogen cyanide (HCN), and
acetylene (C2H2) in several comets. Other nitriles (HNC, HC3N) and hydrocarbons
(C4H2) will be targeted when a relatively bright comet is available. The
nitrogen chemistry of comets is not very well characterized. This is largely due
to the difficulty in measuring emission from N2. Thus, it is very important to
gain an understanding of the products of N2 processing to characterize the
nitrogen abundance in comets. Comparing the abundances of nitriles in comets
with their corresponding abundances in interstellar clouds will provide clues to
nitrogen processing during comet formation. Determining relative abundances of
interrelated symmetric hydrocarbon species (CH4, C2H2, C2H6) is important for
constraining cometary formation scenarios. Common relative hydrocarbon
abundances for a group of comets might reflect common processing histories.

The focus of this project is to utilize the expanding field of ground-based
infrared spectroscopy to determine cometary composition through quantitative
measurements of several key volatile species. The high spectral and spatial
resolution afforded by long-slit infrared spectroscopy enables the detection of
multiple emission features of each species, and yields information on their
production. When the signal-to-noise is sufficiently high, the spatial profiles
can separately identify material released from the nucleus from that produced in
the coma. This will help answer the basic question of the composition of native
ices in comets, and help constrain models of the solar system. Because comets
are intrusive visitors to the planets within our solar system, they introduce
new molecules into these environments. What role the delivery of organics and
water by comets played in the emergence and evolution of life on Earth is a key
question in the field of astrobiology. The composition of comets is also an
important link to the study of the evolution of planetary atmospheres.

Broader Impacts: The broader objectives of this project are to strengthen the
research environment and to promote the integration of research and education at
Rowan University, an undergraduate institution. To work toward these objectives,
this work will involve undergraduate students in all aspects of the research.
The goal will be to develop students trained in computational, analytical, and
communication skills required for future success in science, engineering, and
education fields. The interdisciplinary nature of astronomical research makes it
open to students from varying backgrounds. Participation in astronomical
research provides transferable computer and analytical skills to other
scientific fields. As a result, past research students are currently employed
and/or studying in engineering, chemistry, and marine biology fields. Students
from under-represented groups correspond to over 50% of past student
participation in this research. This project offers undergraduates the
opportunity to do research that they would otherwise not have the opportunity to
do. This research program has enabled students to attend national undergraduate
conferences, participate in summer research programs, and travel to major
observatories. Continuing to provide these types of external experiences, along
with learning everyday in a research-rich environment play a central role in the
development of future scientists. ***