* 0407201
* Collaborative Research: Pattern Formation and Dynamics in Electroconvection of Nematic Liquid Crystals - A Theoretical and Experimental Study of the Weak Electrolyte Model
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* James Gleeson, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2007
* USD 101,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0407201 PI: James T. Gleeson Institution: Kent State University
Title: Pattern Formation and Dynamics in Electroconvection of Nematic Liquid
Crystals - A Theoretical and Experimental Study of the Weak Electrolyte Model

ABSTRACT

The research proposed here is a collaboration between applied mathematicians at
Colorado State University and experimental condensed matter physicists at Kent
State University. This interdisciplinary team will work together closely to
study a paradigm system in nonlinear, non-equilibrium dynamics:
electroconvection of nematic liquid crystals. The analytical techniques
developed, backed up with stringent and quantitative experimental results, will
elucidate important but incompletely understood phenomena related to pattern
formation and dynamics, including bursts, intermittency, and spatio-temporal
chaos. One fruitful approach to the study of spatio-temporal dynamics is to
employ canonical equations such as the complex Ginzburg-Landau equation. In this
project systems of Ginzburg-Landau equations are rigorously related to the most
advanced model for electroconvection of nematic liquid crystals: the weak
electrolyte model. This technique allows the research team to study a rich
variety of complex behavior in nonlinear anisotropic systems in general, as well
as to provide comprehensive qualitative and quantitative insights into the
process of pattern formation in nematic electroconvection of interest for
experimentalists. In particular, the feedback between experiment and theory sets
this project apart and insures a unique approach to profoundly probing the
extremely difficult, yet important process of charge transport in liquid
crystals and its consequences.

The proposed research is an interdisciplinary effort directed towards a profound
understanding of fundamental physical mechanisms in nematic liquid crystals and
their mathematical description. Since liquid crystal display devices continue to
be dominated by these materials, the project is relevant for information
technology, as well as for material science. From a broader perspective, the
proposed research applies powerful, innovative mathematical and computational
techniques to elucidate the basic mechanisms underlying the spontaneous
formation of regular and complex patterns in systems far from equilibrium.
Spatio-temporally complex behavior has been observed in a wide variety of
important fields including ecology, finance, weather, demographics, earthquakes
etc. Developing a better understanding of this behavior, both theoretically and
experimentally, in an easily controllable model system such as nematic
electroconvection, is a necessary precursor to unfolding the way these dynamics
work in the wider world. From an educational perspective, students supported by
this grant get a hands-on introduction into multidisciplinary research and have
the opportunity to practice their scientific communication skills through formal
presentations to joint CSU/KSU research seminars. Moreover, the results of this
research will be directly integrated into undergraduate and graduate education
through courses taught at both universities and within the existing programs of
the Center for Liquid Crystal Research and Education, Kent, OH.

