* 0407270
* NUE: Integration of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology into the Undergraduate Curriculum at North Carolina Central University
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Branislav Vlahovic, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 08/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to North Carolina
Central University at Durham (NCCU) supports Professor Vlahovic to integrate the
principles and current advances of the nanoscience and nanotechnology into the
undergraduate science curriculum. A new interdisciplinary course, Introduction
to Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, will be incorporated to the first year
science curriculum for Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics and Computer Science,
Biology, and Environmental Science students. Existing undergraduate courses will
be updated, with addition of new nanoscience modules that will introduce
students to relatively broad background in the field of nanoscience and
nanoscience related applications and instrumentation. New module "Ventures into
Nanotechnology" will be developed for the NCCU summer program "Summer Ventures
in Science and Mathematics" for the talented and gifted high school students. It
will introduce high school students into the world of nanotechnology, with an
emphasis on the site visits and demonstrations of practical applications.

This NEU award would enhance the participation of minority students in
critically underrepresented areas of engineering and technology. Students will
be given an opportunity to participate in original research in the fields of
computational nanoscience, advanced thin film technology, production and
characterization of quantum dots, spectroscopy, and data acquisition. This would
result in providing qualified nanotechnology work force with highly skilled
women and underrepresented groups. The rate of successful graduation would be
increased, especially among African American students, women and other
disadvantaged students. The flexibility in career choices and job opportunities
for NCCU graduates would also be improved.

The proposal for this award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Education announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE and was funded
by the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.