* 0407785
* A Theoretical, Experimental, and Atomistic Investigation of Surface Energy Anisotropy Effects on Grain-boundary Grooving
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Pratul Ajmera, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 06/30/2008
* USD 150,000.00

Thin solid films are the basic structure in most microelectronic and
optoelectronic devices. During annealing of a polycrystalline film, grain-
boundary grooves can deepen to form holes, which tend to grow to breakup the
film. The investigators' preliminary theoretical work has shown that surface
energy anisotropy can reduce the grooving rate significantly. However, if the
exposed surface orientations do not contain a facet orientation, then the
anisotropic groove is smooth and looks exactly the same as an isotropic groove;
only the grooving rate is reduced. This proposal aims to investigate this
intriguing relationship between surface energy anisotropy and grain-boundary
grooving using three methods: continuum analysis, experiment, and atomistic
simulations. The investigators' preliminary work assumes that the
crystallographic orientations of the bicrystal are symmetric about the grain
boundary. However, most bicrystals are unlikely to be symmetric. Thus, the self-
similar continuum analysis will be extended to asymmetric bicrystals. The
investigators will also consider grain boundaries migrating at constant speed
and study the coupling between the grain-boundary groove and the grain-boundary
profile. Because grooving is self similar, the grooving rate is very large at
the beginning of groove development, and atomistic methods are ideally suited to
capture the groove formation. The investigators will perform molecular dynamics
on aluminum and silicon bicrystals. The long-time evolution of the thermal
groove will be studied by kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. Both tilt and twist
boundaries will be considered. Surface and grain boundary energy anisotropy and
their effect on faceting and growth rate will be systematically investigated. In
the experimental part, two materials will be used for which surface energy
anisotropy is established and measured. Bicrystal samples with symmetric
crystallographic orientations will be prepared from commercially available
material. The evolving groove shape at the grain boundary will then be
microscopically examined as a function of thermal annealing time-temperature
cycle to compare its shape with theoretical predictions.&lt;br/&gt;Grain-
boundary grooving is the most commonly used technique for measuring surface
diffusion coefficients. However, the retardation effect of surface energy
anisotropy has never been considered in the measurement technique. The proposed
investigation will clarify the effects of surface energy anisotropy on grooving
and improve the accuracy of the technique. Better understanding and control of
grooving will allow smaller microelectronic and optoelectronic devices to be
made. This translates into faster and smaller computer chips, which will sustain
continuous advancement of information technology. This project has also broad
impact on materials education. Presently, there is no Materials degree offering
program in the whole State of Louisiana. However, local industries need students
with materials training, and Louisiana State University (LSU) is building a
materials program to meet that demand. This proposal is a collaborative effort
between two departments at LSU and will enhance materials research activities on
campus. It will support graduate and undergraduate students and expose them to
materials research in both departments. It will also allow more materials
courses to be offered at LSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;