* 0407045
* Formation of Asteroid Satellites
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* William Bottke, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 207,497.00

AST 0407045 Durda

Collisions are a fundamental process in the origin and evolution of planetary
systems. For this reason, investigating impacts and impact outcomes is a
prerequisite for accurately modeling the formation and evolution of planetary
bodies. The inventory of satellites orbiting small Solar System bodies provides
critical constraints that can be used to understand small body collisions. Dr.
Durda will make the numerical models of asteroid satellite formation
increasingly more realistic, in order to address several fundamental issues
about binary asteroid formation that are still not fully understood and to
enhance the ability to compare modeled binary properties with the ever-
increasing variety of observed asteroid satellite systems. Using the same
numerical methods employed in ongoing studies, Dr. Durda will investigate
asteroid satellite formation via impacts onto pre-shattered targets and rubble-
pile targets (collisional evolution models suggest that most asteroids have been
substantially fractured or shattered and reassembled by impacts since their
formation). Using a new version of the N-body code that preserves strength-
controlled irregular primary shapes, the orbital evolution of ejecta around non-
spherical target body remnants will be tracked to compare and check previous
results (for computational expediency, simulations to date have treated the
resulting collision fragments as spheres, but several system primaries are
observed to have elongate and irregular shapes). In addition, more realistic
friction and particle interlocking effects in the resulting target remnants will
be explored by replacing the previously spherical N-body particles with
dumbbell-shaped constituents. Finally, the formation and survival of satellite
systems during the late stages of planet formation will be investigated to
determine the steady-state fraction of asteroid binaries capable of surviving
from the planet formation epoch to today.

Broader Impacts. This project will provide a strong synergistic link to ongoing
observational programs that are detecting minor planet satellite systems at an
ever-increasing rate. The many results of the ongoing research project have been
presented to scientific colleagues at major, international astronomical
meetings, and in journal papers and book articles in the peer-reviewed press.
The research results are shared with students as research activities and results
are incorporated into lecture and discussion material in college level astronomy
courses and in presentations in primary school classrooms where visually
exciting results are shared with eager young students. Research results are also
shared with the general public through extensive public outreach efforts that
include television documentaries, radio interviews, and popular articles in
magazines. ***



