* 0407784
* Homological algebra and topology in three and four dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Mikhail Khovanov, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2005
* USD 90,597.00

The project aims to develop and understand homological invariants of three- and
four-dimensional topological objects. Such invariants include Donaldson-Floer
and Seiberg-Witten theories, and several bigraded homology theories of links.
These theories have the Alexander and Jones polynomials as their Euler
characteristics, as well as the quantum sl(3) link invariant. We would like to
construct a bigraded homology theory of links for each complex simple Lie
algebra g, with components of links colored by irreducible representation of g.
The Euler characteristic of the theory should be the quantum invariant of
colored links associated with the quantum deformation of g, and the theory
should be functorial (extend to cobordisms of links). Our other goals include
better understanding of the relations between existing theories, and an
investigation of the categories that appear when link homology theories are
extended to tangles.

Topological objects in dimensions three and four have special properties and a
number of connections to algebra and analysis that do not generalize to other
dimensions. Three-dimensional objects, including knots, links, and three-
manifolds (the latter are global objects glued out of three-dimensional spaces),
admit combinatorial invariants, also known as quantum invariants, that come from
algebraic structures and can also be recovered from two-dimensional conformal
field theories. Quantum invariants of four-dimensional objects, for the most
part, are not known to have combinatorial descriptions, and their definition and
computation requires analytical tools. We would like to bridge this gap by
constructing new four-dimensional invariants that are combinatorial, and,
second, by finding combinatorial description of known analytical invariants of
four-manifolds, including Donaldson-Floer and Seiberg-Witten invariants.