* 0407894
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics and Character Evolution of Passiflora supersection Disemma (Passifloraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* John Freudenstein, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,924.00

Abstract DEB 0407894

Passiflora (the Passionflowers) comprises more than 520 species of vines or
small trees with highly specialized flowers that occur in tropical habitats
worldwide. Most diverse in the New World, they are represented in the Old World
by only about 22 uncommon and poorly known species from Asia and the Austral-
Pacific region. Preliminary phylogenetic study indicates that those 22 species
descended from a single common ancestor, thus forming a natural group
(supersection Disemma). This group differs from other Passionflowers in its
floral development, unusual leaf arrangements, and in the diverse array of
sugar-producing nectaries found both in the flowers and on leaves and stems,
meaning that an understanding of character patterns in this group is essential
to understanding patterns of diversity in the genus as a whole. A broad approach
will be employed to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships among the species,
using characters from morphology and anatomy of flowers and vegetative
structures and nuclear and plastid gene sequences. Nectaries will be studied by
comparing gene expression among the various forms to address the question of
whether they share an underlying genetic basis. A monograph for the section will
be completed that will present revised species circumscriptions, illustrations,
distribution maps, and keys to facilitate identification of these species,
forming an essential basis for conservation efforts for the group.

The project has impact far beyond serving as a dissertation study. The
Passionflowers are popular subjects for horticulture and therefore the results
of this work can have implications for commercial growers and hobbyists.
Extensive collaboration with researchers in Central and Southeast Asia is an
integral part of the study. Individuals from botanical gardens and universities
in Yunnan, Guangdong, and Hainan provinces of China, as well as Vietnam,
Thailand, India, and Papua New Guinea will be involved in the acquisition and
study of these species, strengthening ties between US and foreign institutions.
Collaboration provides an opportunity for all parties involved to learn about
the practical aspects of conserving habitats and the rare species found within
them. The monograph, including identification tools for Disemma, will be made
available to the public broadly via the World Wide Web. This information will
allow identification of rare species of Passionflowers in the wild, facilitating
conservation efforts at the level of local management authorities. Live material
collected in the field will be cultivated and distributed to botanical gardens
in the United States, forming the basis for ex situ conservation efforts.
Preserved field collections will be distributed to herbaria, increasing
resources for future workers. The developmental study of nectaries will provide
a model for how genetic techniques can be used to probe morphological diversity.