* 0407123
* Coping With Conceptual Uncertainty:  A Maximum Likelihood Bayesian Model Averaging Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Shlomo Neuman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2008
* USD 364,403.00

0407123&lt;br/&gt;Neuman&lt;br/&gt;Goal: Allow hydrologists to cope
quantitatively with conceptual model uncertainty via a well-founded
and&lt;br/&gt;well-researched methodology, incorporating maximum likelihood
parameter estimation in a multimodel Bayesian updating framework, which is
feasible to implement in practice.&lt;br/&gt;Objectives: (1) To firm up the
theoretical basis of a Maximum Likelihood Bayesian Model
Averaging&lt;br/&gt;(MLBMA) method recently proposed by the PI (Neuman, 2002,
2003) for the rendering of optimum hydrologic predictions by means of several
competing models and the assessment of their joint predictive uncertainty. (2)
To implement, explore and demonstrate MLBMA on hydrogeologic data, distributed
in three-dimensional space and time, collected earlier in unsaturated fractured
rock at the Apache Leap Research Site (ALRS) in central Arizona. The Problem:
Hydrologic analyses typically rely on a single conceptual-mathematical model of
geologic or watershed makeup and corresponding hydrologic processes. Yet
hydrologic environments are open and complex, rendering them prone to multiple
interpretations and mathematical descriptions. This is true regardless of the
quantity and quality of available data. Predictions and analyses of uncertainty
based on a single hydrologic concept are prone to statistical bias (by
committing a Type II error through reliance on an inadequate model) and
underestimation of uncertainty (by committing a Type I error through under
sampling of the relevant model space). The bias and uncertainty that result from
reliance on an inadequate conceptual-mathematical model are often much larger
than those introduced through an inadequate choice of model parameter values.
Yet most hydrologic uncertainty analyses ignore the former and focus exclusively
on the latter. This often leads to overconfidence in the predictive capabilities
of the model, which the available hydrologic data seldom justify. Indeed,
critiques of hydrologic analyses and scientific/regulatory/legal challenges to
them typically focus on the validity of the underlying conceptual (and by
implication mathematical) model. Existing method of dealing with the problem,
most notably the Generalized Likelihood Uncertainty Estimation (GLUE) approach
of Beven and Binley (1992; see also&lt;br/&gt;Beven and Freer, 2001) are, in the
PIfs view, useful but not necessarily optimal for the purpose. There is a need
for an innovative approach to the problem that rests on rigorous theory and is
feasible to implement in practice. Approach: Under Objective 1 we propose to
firm up the theoretical basis of MLBMA by exploring&lt;br/&gt;theoretically and
through synthetic numerical studies (a) the accuracy and computational
feasibility of MLBMA in comparison to Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) implemented
via Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation (Hoeting et al., 1999); (b) the impact
that availability or lack of prior hydrologic parameter measurements have on
this comparison; (c) the difference between computing posterior model
probabilities using Kashyap fs (1982) Bayesian information criterion KIC
(Neuman, 2002, 2003) versus the asymptotic Bayesian criterion BIC (proposed by
Raftery, 1993) or non-Bayesian information theoretic criteria such as Akaike fs
(1974) AIC (proposed by Burnham and Anderson, 2002); (d) the unresolved issue of
how to assign prior probabilities to various models; and (e) the rate at which
the sensitivity of posterior parameter estimates and model probabilities to the
choice of prior parameter and&lt;br/&gt;model probabilities diminishes with the
information content (quantity and quality) of hydrologic data. Some of these
same issues will also be addressed vis-a-vis real data under Objective 2.
Objective 2 is to implement, explore and demonstrate the predictive capabilities
of MLBMA on hydrogeologic data collected earlier at the ALRS. These include air
permeability and air-filled porosity data from pneumatic injection tests in
1-m-length intervals along six vertical and inclined boreholes at the site, and
transient pressure data from cross-hole pneumatic injection tests in these and
ten additional boreholes. The data represent largely a continuum of
interconnected fractures. Their analysis will be conducted in three stages. At
Stage 1 we propose to consider alternative geological-geostatistical models of
how the 1-m-scale log permeability ()10 log k and log porosity ()10 log data
vary in space, based solely on 1-m-scale measurements. At Stage 2, we will
examine the extent to which a subset of these models, as well as BMA and MLBMA,
are capable of predicting air flow between boreholes during cross-hole tests at
the site based&lt;br/&gt;solely on prior information about lo , 10 g k 10 log
and alternative representations of forcing terms. The prior information will
consist of measurements, statistics, geological-geostatistical models,
projections and projection covariances of these quantities across a domain
containing all boreholes, established at Stage 1. At Stage 3 we propose to
calibrate (via ML) airflow models having alternative parameter structures
against pressure data observed during one cross-hole test at the ALRS and
examine their ability, as well as that of MLBMA, to predict pressures observed
during other such (validation) tests. The cross-hole tests will be selected so
that injection takes place into a different borehole in each of
them.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Broad Impacts: A solid theory and a
practical methodology of rendering optimum&lt;br/&gt;hydrologic predictions and
an assessment of predictive uncertainty that account jointly for uncertainties
in model structure (conceptual-mathematical frameworks) and parameters. The
approach applies to a broad range of models representing natural processes in
ubiquitously open and complex earth and environmental systems. Results will
bedisseminated broadly to researchers and practitioners through various means.