* 0407829
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Stoichiometry in the Mutualism between Mycorrhizal Fungi and Cottonwood Trees
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Manuel Molles, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,030.00

Associations between mycorrhizal fungi and plants occur within approximately 90%
of all plant species and are considered a classic example of a mutualism in
which both partners benefit from the interaction. Through the association, fungi
serve as an extension of the plant root system and supply the plant with
nitrogen and phosphorus in exchange for carbohydrates from the plant. Most
plants associate with either ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungi that live outside of
plant roots or arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi that penetrate root cells, but
some plants associate with both types of fungi. Association with both AM fungi
and EM fungi is a common strategy for plants that inhabit riparian areas, for
reasons that are not understood. Strong gradients in nutrient availability occur
in riparian zones due to natural and anthropogenic transport of nutrients
through these areas. It is hypothesized that the availability of nutrients in
riparian zones affects the chemistry of cottonwood trees and the colonization of
cottonwood roots by mycorrhizal fungi. The study investigates the relationship
between nutrient content of cottonwood trees (Populus deltoides ssp.
wislizenii), the dominant species along rivers in central New Mexico, USA, and
their associated mycorrhizal fungi. The research involves experiments in
greenhouses in which cottonwoods are fertilized with nitrogen and phosphorus,
and tree growth, leaf chemistry, and mycorrhizal colonization are characterized
over a growing season. The results will contribute fundamental information on
nutrient exchange between mycorrhizal fungi and cottonwoods. The results of this
research may inform decisions regarding river management and protection and
rehabilitation of cottonwood gallery forests that are currently in decline
throughout much of their range.