* 0407204
* ITR Collaborative Research:  Combinatorial Algorithms for Biological Data Clustering
* CSE,IIS
* 09/26/2003,08/31/2008
* Ying Xu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,295,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Human Genome Project has opened the
flood-gate of biological data, which has resulted in the generation of enormous
amount of sequence, structure, expression, and interaction data at rates that
far exceed our current capability of analyzing and interpreting them. New ideas
and approaches are urgently needed to establish greatly improved capabilities
for biological data analysis. Data clustering is fundamental to mining a large
quantity of biological data. The goals of this project are (a) to develop a
highly effective and general framework for biological data clustering, which is
applicable to a large class of biological data analysis problems; (b) to
demonstrate the effectiveness of this framework as a general-purpose clustering
tool, through application to four challenging biological data analysis problems;
(c) to implement this clustering framework as a set of library functions, in a
similar fashion to LINPACK/LAPACK, with which other researchers can build their
own clustering capabilities more efficiently; (d) to provide insight on several
biological problems through clustering analysis; and (e) to train
students/postdocs how to build biological data analysis tools, using our
clustering framework as a training ground. The foundation of our framework is a
minimum spanning tree (MST) representation of a data set and its relationships
with clustering. Our preliminary studies have revealed that (i) there is a
natural connection between MSTs and the concept of clustering, which can help to
reduce a multi-dimensional data clustering problem to a tree-partitioning
problem; (ii) clustering problems with general objective functions, defined on
(minimum spanning) trees, can be solved optimally and efficiently; and (iii)
MSTs provide a natural framework for solving a more general class of clustering
problems, i.e., extracting data clusters from a noisy background. Additional
preliminary studies have also revealed that MSTs have such rich properties
related to clustering that further investigation could lead to significantly
more effective ways of clustering and analyzing biological data. Our research
will be organized and carried out in five tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o
Investigation of fundamental properties of MSTs versus clustering: We will
investigate fundamental relationships between MSTs and clustering. New insights
and discoveries about their relationships will be used to lay the foundation for
development of more effective ways of clustering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o
Investigation and development of MST-based clustering algorithms and statistical
analysis methods: We will investigate and develop a large class of MST-based
algorithms for several clustering related problems. In addition, we will
investigate and develop effective statistical analysis tools for assessing
statistical significance and robustness of clustering
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Development of improved analysis capabilities
for four selected application problems: We will apply our clustering framework
to four biological data analysis problems: (1) gene expression data analysis,
(2) regulatory binding site identification, (3) two-hybrid data analysis, and
(4) phylogenetic tree clustering analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Implementation
of our MST-based clustering framework as library functions: We will implement
our MST-based clustering-related algorithms as APIs (Application Programming
Interface), which can be used easily by other researchers in their own data
analysis software. In addition, we will implement our clustering tools as a Web
server for community service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Training and education: As
MST provides such a rich set of attractive properties relevant to clustering, we
will use our MST-based clustering framework as a training platform to teach
students/postdocs how to develop biological data analysis
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed study and development directly address
the research challenges of the ITR program in the following areas:&lt;br/&gt;o
providing new computational, simulation and data-analysis methods and tools to
model physical, biological,social, behavioral and mathematical phenomena,
and&lt;br/&gt;o improving our ability to understand, model and control the
behavior of complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;