* 0407891
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Selection and Inbreeding Depression: Effects of Inbreeding Rate and Inbreeding Environment
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Juan Bouzat, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,970.00

The main goal of this project is to evaluate the effects of inbreeding rate and
environment on the magnitude of inbreeding depression. Mating between close
relatives is often inevitable in small natural populations and within captive
breeding programs for endangered species, leading in most cases to a reduction
in vigor and fertility known as inbreeding depression. Although the potential
for inbreeding depression within small populations is well known, the magnitude
of inbreeding depression can vary considerably among populations of different
sizes and exposed to different environmental conditions. Using Drosophila
melanogaster as a model organism, laboratory populations will be inbred at
different rates (slow versus fast) and within different inbreeding environments
(benign, competitive, stressful). We hypothesize that these factors will
influence the effectiveness of natural selection during inbreeding, and thus
affect the magnitude of inbreeding depression.&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study
will have direct implications for the conservation and management of small
populations and endangered species. Inbreeding depression has often been viewed
as an important factor contributing to the extinction of species in the wild.
Understanding the factors that influence inbreeding depression will improve
risk-assessment and provide management options for species conservation. In
addition, the proposed research will be of value for the management of captive
populations, which are specifically aimed at minimizing the detrimental effects
of inbreeding. &lt;br/&gt;