* 0407517
* Principle of Engineering Graded Materials with Self-Assembling Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Alexander Roytburd, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 320,525.00

This award by the Division of Materials Research is to develop theoretical
principles and computational tools to design materials with self-assembled
microstructures controlled through fabricating graded mesoscopic architectures.
Professors Roytburd and Bruck will apply these principles to fabricate shape-
memory film materials with enhanced deformation response, increased frequency
response, and improved reliability. Using a graded architecture, the self-
assembling polydomain structure can be controlled through the constraint imposed
by a gradient in composition, grain size, texture, and/or temperature. The
combination of engineered graded mesostructures and self-organized micro- and
nano-polydomain structures presents broad opportunities to design new materials
with well-controlled structures at multiple length scales. To achieve these
research goals the following tasks will be accomplished: (1) Theory and modeling
of non-isothermal martensitic transformations in graded self-assembled
materials; (2) Processing and characterization of graded self-assembled
microstructures; (3) Characterization of internal stress distributions in graded
self-assembled films; and (4) Characterization of actuation properties of graded
self-assembled films. Accomplishing the goals of the project requires a
combination of three scientific research areas: Functionally Graded Materials,
Martensitic Phase Transformations, and Heat Transfer. The research plan unites
the expertise and capabilities of Dr. A. Roytburd, a theorist specializing in
martensitic phase transformations, and Dr. H.A. Bruck, an experimentalist
specializing in graded material fabrication and characterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual contributions from this research are in two
areas: (1) Development of a new self-consistent, experimentally verified model
for nonisothermic martensite transformation in graded self-assembled films, and
(2) Characterization of structural gradients and internal stress distributions
within graded self-assembled films. Broader impacts are expected in the
following areas: (1) development of microdevices with optimized actuation
properties; (2) development of a theory for phase transformations in graded
self-assembled materials; (3) a basis for formulating problems involving complex
thermomechanical behavior using self-consistent mathematical formulations; (4)
mimicry of the actuation behavior of biological materials using graded self-
assembled films; (5) strengthening the practical knowledge and experience of
students who will serve as future researchers in the functional materials and
MEMS communities by using state-of-the-art research and education tools; and (6)
enhanced diversity within the mechanics and materials community through the
participation of underrepresented minorities in the proposed research efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;