* 0407082
* Quantum Transport and Noise in Carbon Nanotubes and Mesoscopic Nanosystems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Daniel Prober, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed research investigates the noise and high frequency dynamics of
single-wall carbon nanotubes. The one-dimensional nature of the electron states
in nanotubes makes correlations significant, which can lead to the formation of
the novel Luttinger liquid state. Using carbon nanotubes as a laboratory for
studying the electron interactions, this research will investigate the quantum
shot noise of the Luttinger liquid state, and the electron wave dynamics at
microwave frequencies. The noise to be studied in this system is quite
distinctive, and measurements at microwave frequencies can access the basic
behavior without the complicating aspect of 1/f noise present at lower
frequencies. The goal is to understand the novel state of one-dimensional
electrons. This project involves collaboration with researchers at Cornell
University and will provide excellent training for postdoctoral researchers,
graduate and undergraduate students in fabrication and measurement facilities
available at both these leading institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In recent
years, the development of novel one-dimensional systems by material scientists
has led to electrical conductors with unusual properties. The carbon nanotube is
the prototype of these systems, exhibiting either metallic or semiconducting
behavior depending on their geometry. To fully understand the complex and new
aspects of the electrical properties of carbon nanotubes, highly sensitive
microwave measurement techniques, developed recently at Yale University, will be
used. These measurements will provide a model study of how to apply the advanced
arsenal of tools of nanoscience to nanoscale systems and devices. The project
involves collaboration with Cornell University and will train students at
postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate levels in frontier nanoscience and
technology, thus preparing them for careers in academe, industry, or government.
&lt;br/&gt;