* 0407933
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Jumping Spiders and Aposematic Prey: Testing the Ecological Consequences of a Context Shift Effect During Learned Avoidance
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Elizabeth Jakob, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 05/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Jumping spiders and aposematic prey: testing the
ecological consequences of a context shift effect during learned avoidance

PI: Dr. Elizabeth M. Jakob Co-PI: Christa D. Skow

Many animals, including insects and spiders, can learn to associate
environmental details with events that are important to their survival, such as
the location or palatability of a food item. Numerous studies have shown that
environmental background cues can be stored in memory as part of an event. This
can create a problem when an animal tries to recall an important association
across a changing environment. If background cues change between the time that
an animal learns an association and when its memory of the association is
tested, recall of the association can be compromised. Previous work by the
authors demonstrated that the jumping spider Phidippus princeps can learn to
avoid distasteful aposematic prey, but lose the association when environmental
cues shift. They propose to broaden their study by testing the following:
whether relearning the same association after a shift is faster than initial
learning, whether subtle shifts in vegetation across environments result in
impaired memory recollection as do more dramatic shifts, if background
environmental cues alone can be used to make beneficial foraging decisions, and
whether it is easier to recall an association after an environmental shift when
a food item is more unpalatable and forgetting becomes more costly. This work
will contribute to the understanding of the ecological consequences of attending
to background cues during learning, predator psychology, and adaptive strategies
of prey. The principle investigators have a strong track record of mentoring
undergraduate researchers, and will involve undergraduates in all aspects of
this research.