* 0407735
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of the Jaw Musculature of Archosaurs: The Transitions to the Modern Avian and Crocodilian Conditions and their Functional Implications
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Lawrence Witmer, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 05/31/2007
* USD 11,028.00

Jaw musculature is an inherently important system in the vertebrate head
occupying a space called the adductor chamber. Jaw muscles obviously are
critical elements of the feeding apparatus, simultaneously sculpting the skull
via the forces they impose on it. Likewise, these muscles occupy space in the
head and so constrain the sizes and shapes of adjacent systems (e.g., eyes,
ears, throat). This project analyzes evolutionary patterns of jaw musculature
among archosaurs (the group of animals including birds and crocodilians today
and dinosaurs, pterodactyls, and other extinct forms in the Mesozoic Era) to
elucidate not only the evolution of the modern condition but also the feeding
behavior and biology of dinosaurs and other extinct taxa. Fossils, however,
preserve only hard parts (bones and teeth), and thus a key element of the
project is to reconstruct the soft-tissue components of the adductor chamber of
extinct archosaurs which will then provide a basis for functional
interpretation. Hypotheses about the soft tissues in the adductor chamber will
be tested in the context of the extant phylogenetic bracket (EPB) approach,
whereby the modern relatives (birds, crocodilians, lizards) of the fossil group
(dinosaurs, fossil crocodilians) provide information on the relationship between
soft tissues and the signatures they leave on the bones. Pertinent soft tissues
(muscles, tendons, nerves, arteries) will be studied in the modern animals using
methods such as dissection, injection, and radiologic imaging to discover the
bony signatures of the soft tissues. Fossil archosaurs will then be surveyed for
these specified bony features (e.g., muscle scars, nerve foramina). CT scanning
of pivotal fossil specimens will be a critical tool in that it will not only
provide data on bony features surrounding the adductor chamber but also will
yield 3D digital datasets from which highly accurate measurements can be made
automatically and engineering tools such as finite element analysis can be
implemented. Some of the specific muscular patterns studied include (1) patterns
inside the adductor chamber that shed light on jaw muscle homology and function,
and (2) patterns outside the adductor chamber that have bearing on the spatial
and functional interactions between the jaw muscles and the nearby eye and ear.
Given the continual K-12 interest in all things dinosaurian, the attention this
project will attract will provide new opportunities to use dinosaurs as tools to
teach about science in general, with expected venues being media outlets, school
or other public appearances, and the internet.