* 0407569
* Processing Effects on Percolation, Microstructure and Sensor Characteristics in Cermet Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Relva Buchanan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2009
* USD 375,000.00

Ni-ZrO2 cermet film systems developed on Si or Al2O3 substrates by metallo-
organic deposition (MOD), exhibit high figures of merit, superior to the Ni and
Pt films used in hybrid sensors. This sensitivity reflects a complex percolative
structure in which nanoscale Ni particles and pathways are modulated by the
ceramic phase. The Ni-ZrO2 cermet provides an excellent model, therefore, for
study of the relevant material parameters (grain size, grain size ratio,
composition, doping and phase distribution), which crucially affect percolation
and sensor properties. The control of microstructural features will be exercised
through the above parameters and by rapid thermal-infrared heat treatment. The
planned property measurements include resistive responses to temperature and
applied stress, as well as mechanical tests relating to tribology and thermal
barrier layer characteristics. Microstructural and interfacial analyses will be
performed using a variety of EM techniques. The intellectual merit of this
proposal is the deeper understanding to be gained from development of analytical
relationships linking process variables to material properties, percolation and
sensor characteristics. Since percolation in thin films such as cermets is quite
new, the study is expected to have broad relevance to a wide range of
composite/particulate systems based on particle morphology and mixing,
potentially leading to a new class of sensor materials. The research will impact
significantly on the training of graduate, undergraduate and high school
students, who will benefit from hands-on exposure to the innovative processing
techniques and state-of-the-art measurement and characterization methods that
will be used in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cermet is a
composite material consisting of a metal conducting phase dispersed in a non-
reactive ceramic or glassy matrix. These materials can exhibit a wide range of
interesting and useful properties, including controllable resistance change
(percolation), environmental ruggedness and marked catalytic activity. The
nickel-zirconia cermet system, as thick films, has been utilized as fuel cell
anodes, in high temperature catalysts, and for sensing gases such as ammonia. In
thin film form, these materials exhibit significant resistance change with small
temperature changes (TCR), a useful attribute for gas flow, gas detection and
thermistor control. The films exhibit also a like resistance change to pressure
(piezoresistance), making them attractive materials for pressure switching and
strain gauge use. Furthermore, they adhere well to the silicon substrates,
providing a durable and low friction (tribology) surface. These very desirable
attributes, plus the drive for miniaturization and integration of passive
devices with silicon technology, justify public support for the proposed
research on these systems. The research will involve undergraduate and high
school students, working together with graduate students and faculty on a broad
range of materials processing and characterization issues related to these
sensor devices. The students will gain valuable hands-on experience also in
working with available sophisticated equipment. This outreach will extend also
to K-12 students and their teachers in a focused effort to inspire and train
future scientists. The research findings from this study will be broadly
disseminated to the public and scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;