* 0407155
* Modeling of Auroral Kilometric Radiation (AKR) Ordered Fine Structure via Electromagnetic and Electrostatic Ion Cyclotron (EMIC/EIC) Wave Stimulation and Particle Interaction
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* J. Douglas Menietti, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 06/30/2009
* USD 300,000.00

The upward current region of the auroral acceleration region is an extremely
dynamic region of electron and ion acceleration, wave-particle interaction,
magnetospheric-ionospheric (M-I) coupling, and wave generation. In this region
many different types of plasma waves are observed, including intense
electrostatic and electromagnetic ion cyclotron (EIC/EMIC) waves. It is also the
source region of auroral kilometric radiation (AKR), the most powerful
terrestrial radio emission. Upward electric currents in this region are
disrupted and modulated by EIC and EMIC waves, and thus provide a significant
component of the M-I coupling dynamics. Frequency- vs. -time spectrograms of AKR
reveal a narrow-banded fine structure that appears turbulent but displays
specific features of frequency drift. Understanding the source of AKR fine
structure is critical to understanding details of the wave generation mechanism,
and the overall particle/wave energy balance. A new class of AKR fine structure
referred to as ordered fine structure or striations has more recently been
identified. The new data have suggests that AKR ordered fine structure results
from stimulation by electromagnetic ion cyclotron (EMIC) and electrostatic ion
cyclotron (EIC) waves. This project will use a 3-D particle-in-cell (PIC) plasma
simulation code to study of the growth of EMIC/EIC waves in the auroral region
and the stimulation of AKR ordered fine structure. The simulations determine how
the morphology of the observed ordered fine structure depends on the frequency
and wave length of the waves stimulating the AKR. The simulations will also
contribute to developments in related fields of space and plasma science.