* 0407310
* H2 Emission in Outer Planet Atmospheres
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Laurence Trafton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 05/31/2008
* USD 75,003.00

AST 0407310&lt;br/&gt;Trafton&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the main sources
of thermospheric heating on the giant planets remains a major unsolved problem
in planetary science today. The known sources of heating cannot explain their
high temperatures. So some other process must be playing the dominant role. In
the upper thermospheres and ionospheres of the giant planets, the collision rate
becomes too low to maintain a Boltzmann population of energy levels vacated by
spontaneous and induced emission, or visited by cascade following fluorescent or
electron-impact excitation. This departure from local thermodynamic equilibrium
(LTE) means that the observed spectrum will bear the signature of the physical
and chemical processes operating in these upper atmospheres. Observations of
outer-planet IR emission spectra, particularly the H2 quadrupole
lines,&lt;br/&gt;are needed to constrain the processes and parameters of non-LTE
emission models, in order to infer the structure and energy balance of these
upper atmospheres and ionospheres. Such observations will insure that the
important chemical processes taking place in these atmospheres will be included
in the emission model, and will then allow the dominant source of
thermospheric/ionospheric heating to be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Laurence Trafton will obtain these needed observations in a comparative study of
outer planet thermospheres that involves surveying the near-and mid-infrared H2
quadrupole line emission over multiple vibrational levels. The results will be
applied to constraining the non-LTE emission model developed by Dr. Don
Shemanski at the University of Southern California (USC) and in preliminary
modeling of the structure and energy balance of these upper atmospheres. A
comparative, parametric study of processes in our own giant planets is needed in
order to extrapolate to the environments of other bodies. Comparative
planetology can provide&lt;br/&gt;insights into atmospheric processes of extra-
solar giant planets. Another broader impact of&lt;br/&gt;this program will be to
provide baseline reference data for future studies of solar cycle
and&lt;br/&gt;seasonal effects on these planets. Finally, by supporting the
development of the USC emission model, the proposed observations will help to
support the Cassini Orbiter UVIS mission, which will be taking place during the
grant period, because the UVIS team will be applying the USC emission model to
the analysis of their data.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;