* 0407948
* Dissertation Research: Addressing "The Hardest Puzzle in American Pomology" - the Systematics of Prunus Section Prunocerasus (Rosaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Randall Small, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Prunus (plant family Rosaceae) is a large diverse genus of the temperate
northern hemisphere with about 200 species and includes such economically
important species as plums /prunes, peaches, apricots, cherries, and almonds.
The North American plum group includes about 13-17 species that are so closely
related that they have not established reproductive barriers and frequently
hybridize. Because they hybridize so readily, species boundaries cannot easily
be delimited and therefore differentiation and classification of North American
plum species has long been difficult. The North American plums serve as an
interesting model for systematic studies (the study of the kinds and diversity
of organisms and the relationships among them) because they are at the interface
of phylogenetics (studies of evolutionary relationships among species) and
population genetics (studies of patterns of genetic variation among populations
of species). This study will therefore not only help to resolve the
relationships within a closely related group of species but it will also test
the limits of phylogenetic resolution in a closely related group of species.
Evolutionarily closely related groups of species that are difficult to
distinguish morphologically are amenable to analysis with genetic data. The
goals of this research are to resolve the evolutionary relationships among the
North American plums using DNA sequence data. By comparing the DNA sequences of
multiple accessions of each putative species from throughout their ranges, we
can infer how much genetic variation exists within each species and how much
genetic differentiation exists between putative species. This research will be
important to the academic community as it will serve as a baseline investigation
of a very closely related group of species.

Many species within the genus Prunus are economically important as ornamentals
or food crops (e.g., plums /prunes, peaches, apricots, cherries, and almonds).
The Eurasian plums of are those most often used in agriculture but are difficult
to grow in many parts of North America because they are not well adapted to
environmental conditions or diseases. Native North American plums, the focus of
this research, are not cultivated on a large scale, although some species are
currently under investigation as potential food crops. Most plum crop species
are of hybrid origin from a small number of native Eurasian plums. Because there
are more native North American plum species, the potential for improved
cultivars through hybridization is greater. In addition to their potential
economic importance, several species of North American plums are of conservation
concern at the state level. Further, the scrub plum (P. geniculata) is Federally
Endangered and restricted to only four counties in central Florida where habitat
loss through development is critically endangering its habitat. Thus,
understanding the classification and evolutionary history the native North
American plums is of economic importance as well as conservation and biological
interest. Lastly, this work will be of utility to the agricultural and
horticultural communities as Prunus is used extensively in horticulture and
there appears to be great potential for native North American plums to become a
valuable North American food crop.

