* 0407716
* Dissertation Research: Plant-Mediated Effects of Global Climate Change on Insect Herbivory
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Noel Holbrook, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2007
* USD 11,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2)
have steadily increased from 280 ppm to 367 ppm since the industrial revolution.
Carbon cycle models predict that concentrations will reach between 540 and 970
ppm by 2100. Nitrogen availability in natural ecosystems is also continuing to
increase, due to agricultural run-off and industrial pollution. This research
focuses on how these two environmental variables alter insect herbivory on
herbaceous plants. The PIs will investigate how elevated CO2 and increased soil
nitrogen affect insect herbivory on five Flaveria species in an open top chamber
experiment. The genus Flaveria provides a highly suitable system with which to
investigate effects of environmental change on plants and their insect
herbivores because the species in this genus possess a range of physiological
pathways for photosynthesis. Flaveria species are predicted to show a range of
physiological responses to CO2 and nitrogen availability, which can be clearly
explained based on their photosynthetic pathways. This research will determine
the relationship between the responses of a plant's leaf characteristics to
increased CO2 and nitrogen and the degree to which insect feeding is influenced
by differences in these leaf characteristics. The leaves of plants grown at
elevated CO2 levels undergo changes in their water content, in the
concentrations of chemicals that defend against insect herbivory, and nitrogen
content. Differences in plant chemistry may therefore alter the feeding
preferences of insect species, leading to changes in the diversity and
composition of natural plant habitats and communities.