* 0407369
* NUE: Engineering Properties and Micro/Nano Technologies for Biological Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Eniko Enikov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to the University of
Arizona supports Dr. Eniko T. Enikov, Department of Aerospace and Mechanical
Engineering, and Dr. Joel Cuello, Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering for
their work to develop a set of undergraduate laboratory experiments that are
focused on the nano-scale surface science of biosensors. BioMEMS and biosensors
have generated significant interest because of their potential use in a wide
spectrum of applications ranging from biotechnology and medical diagnostics to
environmental monitoring and biological warfare. The key component of most
biosensors is an artificial surface capable of recognizing a specific analyte
molecule. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will expand the newly developed
interdisciplinary undergraduate course "Engineering Properties and Micro/Nano
Technologies for Biological Systems" through the development of five experiments
in support of a lecture-based course on the nanoengineering of biologically
active surfaces. Specifically, the experiments will focus on fabrication of
micro-cantilever probes, self-assembly of organic monolayers (SAMs), micro-
contact printing of SAMs, measurements of elastic properties of bio-films via
nano-indentation, and measurement of the surface stress of self-assembled
monolayers with micro-cantilever sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
laboratory development is part of a multi-departmental master plan for the
creation of a college-wide undergraduate curriculum on micro- and nano-
technologies addressing the needs not only of undergraduate engineering students
but also of students from other sciences, such as biosciences, optics, and
physics. It is being designed with the mission of inspiring a broad spectrum of
students to pursue scientific careers in the area of nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was received in response to
the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education announcement, NSF 03-044,
category NUE and was jointly funded by the Division of Civil and Mechanical
Systems (CMS) and the Division of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems (BES)
in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Directorate for Biological
Sciences (BIO).&lt;br/&gt;