* 0407344
* NUE: Teaching Modules on Transport Properties of Polymer Nanocomposites with Layered Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Amar Mohanty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Michigan State
University supports a team of four faculty led by Dr. K. Jayaraman, Department
of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, to develop a new undergraduate
laboratory experiment on transport properties of polymer nanocomposites with
layered materials and a related web-based interactive teaching/learning module
on the subject designed for sophomores. The new experiment will be added to an
existing laboratory course titled Composite Materials Processing offered every
year to juniors and seniors from chemical engineering, mechanical engineering
and materials science. Undergraduate students in the course will investigate the
mean particle aspect ratio, the polymer crystallinity, the diffusivity of gases
and the electrical impedance in chosen nanocomposite specimens prepared with
nanoscopically thin, silicate layers and expanded graphite in several polymers.
Selected undergraduate students will be recruited as summer interns to work with
the faculty on this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The web-based module will
have three components - a virtual experiment on the permeability of layered
silicate nanocomposites, a basic description of how electrically conductive
nanolayers achieve conduction in a polymer nanocomposite; and a description of
packaging applications including green nanocomposites based on sustainable
polymers. The interactive web-based module will be combined with lectures in an
undergraduate course on Plastics Packaging taken by 120 students. A total of up
to 200 undergraduate students per year will be impacted by this development at
Michigan State University alone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this
award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Education announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE and was funded by the Division
of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;