* 0407790
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Costs and Constraints of Wing Melanism in a Butterfly
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Marlene Zuk, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 04/30/2006
* USD 10,000.00

Dissertation Research:&lt;br/&gt;Costs and Constraints of Wing Melanism in a
Butterfly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Marlene Zuk and Andrew M.
Stoehr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine the
consequences of seasonal wing pattern variation (plasticity) for immune defense
and mating behaviors in the butterfly Pieris rapae. First, this research will
determine if P. rapae wing patterns and immune defense trade off due to their
common reliance on melanin pigment. This will be accomplished through
experimental manipulations that induce differential variation in wing melanin
and immune defense melanin. Second, this research will determine if wing
patterns function in communication in the context of mating and if seasonal
differences in wing pattern are important in this context. This will be
accomplished through experimental manipulations of wing patterns and behavioral
experiments on mating behavior. These experiments will address how the seasonal
changes in wing pattern and the mechanistic link between wing patterns and
immune defense through melanin interact to shape the evolution of these traits.
Intellectual merit: This research will contribute to our understanding of immune
defense; the potential information content of mating signals in an ecological
and behavioral context; the interaction between phenotypic and developmental
plasticity; and the significance of melanism. Broader impacts: The research will
enable undergraduates normally interested only in medicine to use science as a
problem-solving tool and to see the broad value of organismal
biology.&lt;br/&gt;