* 0407895
* Dissertation Research: Exploring Metapopulation Dynamics and Life History Evolution in a Single Versus Multiple Host Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Ottar Bjornstad, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 11/30/2006
* USD 4,632.00

As human activities continue to fragment natural habitats, the need grows to be
able to quantify the impacts of isolation and subdivision on individual mobility
and on dynamics of natural populations. We propose to use the forked fungus
beetle, Bolitotherus cornutus, which completes its entire lifecycle on a few
species of shelf fungi, as a study system for addressing questions related to
the effects of habitat loss and fragmentation on natural populations. Because of
the inherent patchiness of its habitat in wooded regions of the eastern United
States, forked fungus beetles and their fungal hosts are an ideal system for
studying how host quality, host presence, and spatial arrangement of hosts in a
wooded landscape effect the dynamics of populations as well as the persistence
of the species. We propose to study the movement of individual beetles via
capture mark recapture techniques to better understand how dispersal in patchy
landscapes impacts population dynamics. We also propose to study how local and
regional population dynamics of the beetle change when only one of its hosts is
present versus when multiple hosts are present. We will use empirical
techniques, including the CMR study and behavioral studies of host choice,
combined with spatially explicit population models to better understand how
habitat heterogeneity (presence of multiple hosts) and geometry (their
arrangement of patches in the landscape) impact population persistence.