* 0407689
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of Larval Competition on Vector Competence of Container Mosquitoes Aedes Albopictus and Aedes Aegypti
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* L.Philip Lounibos, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,546.00

Effects of larval competition on vector competence of container mosquitoes Aedes
albopictus and Aedes aegypti

Project Summary: . Competition due to limited food and high larval density
occurs commonly among mosquitoes that occupy container habitats and influences
their survivorship, growth, development, and adult size. Little is known,
however, as to how competitive interactions among larvae influence the
susceptibility of adult females to infection and transmission (i.e., vector
competence) of mosquito-borne pathogens. This proposal tests whether variation
in mosquito performance known to arise from larval competition is associated
with variation in vector competence for dengue virus. A series of experiments
varying larval density will test for effects of competition on vector competence
of natural populations and laboratory colonies of Aedes aegypti and Aedes
albopictus, the two most important transmitters of dengue virus in nature. Adult
mosquitoes derived from competition experiments will be given a dengue-
infectious blood meal, and vector competence will be measured with standard
virological procedures. Progress to date using Sindbis, a model virus, showed
that uncrowded larval conditions consistently resulted in superior mosquito
performance compared to crowded conditions but, counterintuitively, resulted in
decreased infection with Sindbis. The proposed experiments with dengue, an
unrelated virus, will indicate the generality of results and whether mosquitoes
from the laboratory and natural populations differ in responses. This research
is novel for exploring how ecological factors in an early life stage may
influence vector competence in adult, blood-feeding insects.