* 0407246
* NUE: Introduction to Nanoelectronics
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Chu Wie, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to State University
of New York at Buffalo (UB) supports Dr. Vladimir Mitin, Electrical Engineering
Department, to develop an innovative course entitled, "NUE: Introduction to
Nanoelectronics." The course will be developed in collaboration with Dr. C.R.
Wie from UB and Dr. M. Stroscio from the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC)
and it will be targeted at undergraduate students on their early stage of
education. The successful implementation of major goals and objectives will
result in second-year undergraduate students gaining knowledge and understanding
of nanoelectronics as an important interdisciplinary subject. Through the
examples, exercises, and educational Java applets the course will cover quantum
mechanics including the quantum-mechanical origin of the electrical and optical
properties of materials and nanostructures, chemically-directed assembly of
nanostructures, biomolecules, traditional and nontraditional methods of
nanolithography, interactions between electronic and optical properties, as well
as the forefront topics such as organic heterostructures, nanotubes, and quantum
computing. For the high-school students, an introductory lecture on nanosensors
and their role in the exploration of the Universe will be developed and placed
on the Web sites of UIC and UB and will be delivered in local high schools.

The proposal for this award was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
and Engineering Education (NSEE) announcement, NSF 03-044, category NUE and was
jointly funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of Materials Research (DMR)
in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).