* 0407722
* Dissertation Research: Connectivity and Intra-Population Structure of Western South Atlantic Green Sea Turtle (Chelonia mydas) Foraging Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Robert DeSalle, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 5,200.00

Robert DeSalle DEB- 0407722 DDIG Abstract Connectivity and Intra-Population
Structure of Western South Atlantic green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas) foraging
populations

Genetic methods will be employed to test hypotheses about the dynamics of major
Western South Atlantic green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas) foraging groups. In
this approach major objectives are to: 1) Determine genetic relationships
between the study populations and other regional green turtle breeding and
feeding aggregations; and 2) Obtain an unprecedented picture of the mating
dynamics and population structure of these turtles.

The scientific significance of the study derives from otherwise unobtainable
insight into how these turtles move in time and space, relationships of genetic
composition of the turtles and key biological factors, and conservation
priorities. This information enhances basic knowledge of population structure of
these turtles in a key but inadequately researched area, with applications to
other species worldwide. In the course of the project, education and training
are promoted, and underrepresented groups from geographically disparate regions
are included. In addition, a sustained partnership between scientists in Brazil
and the United States is expanded, and results are communicated in various
languages to diverse audiences. The broader impacts of the research thus include
benefits from the diversity of participating programs, frequent presentations
and workshops, improved research content and infrastructure, and broad
dissemination of results.

