* 0407838
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing the General Importance of Frequency-Dependent Selection in Plant Breeding Systems.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,511.00

It has been long recognized that the success of a mating type depends on its
frequency in the population. Although a few empirical examples of frequency-
dependent selection exist, its general importance in the evolutionary dynamics
of plant mating has yet to be documented. The proposed study will use Solanum
carolinense, a species that carries both male and hermaphroditic flowers within
individuals, as a model system to answer: i) What is the pattern of selection
acting through both female and male components of fitness on the relative
production of male flowers? ii) Is selection acting on this trait frequency-
dependent, as predicted by theory? iii) If so, does this frequencydependent
selection explain the maintenance of intermediate proportions of male flowers in
natural populations? These questions will be addressed through a combination of
field and greenhouse experiments, and genetic fingerprinting of individual
plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal is to test
a fundamental prediction in sexual theory, i.e. that selection on male-biased
allocation is frequency-dependent, thus contributing information needed for a
more thorough understanding of plant mating systems. The broader impact of this
project will enhance the academic community by encouraging the participation of
diverse groups, particularly undergraduate and Latino students with an interest
in science. &lt;br/&gt;