* 0407543
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Does Host Genetic Variation Influence Susceptibility to a Novel Pathogen?
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Andre Dhondt, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

To what extent genetic diversity increases resistance to disease is an important
question that has rarely been examined in natural populations of animals. A
debilitating bacterial pathogen recently colonized populations of house finches,
Carpodacus mexicanus, that had reduced genetic variation, providing a rare
opportunity to investigate how genetic diversity impacts disease resistance. The
study by Dr. Andre Dhondt and Dana Hawley integrates field data, captive bird
experiments, and molecular techniques to examine whether genetic diversity
within or among house finch individuals predicts resistance to this novel
pathogen. Furthermore, this study tests the potential physiological mechanisms
underlying the relationship between genetic diversity and disease resistance.

Results from this study are relevant both for understanding pathogen dynamics in
social organisms and for conserving small, isolated animal populations that
often harbor low levels of genetic diversity. As worldwide agricultural traffic
and habitat destruction intensify, pathogen colonization of vulnerable hosts
will become increasingly common, with potentially devastating consequences.
Broader impacts of this study also include extensive research participation by
undergraduates and the dissemination of results to members of Cornell's
Laboratory of Ornithology and the public at large.