* 0407915
* Rheological and Thermodynamic Properties of Subduction Zone Magmas and Lavas - An Integrated Experimental and Observational Study
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Alan Whittington, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 219,968.00

This project will investigate the rheological and thermodynamic properties of
hydrous dacitic to rhyodacitic lavas from Santiaguito volcano in Guatemala,
which form block flows. These have the potential to remain mobile for months to
years, and to extend great distances. They are significant hazards, and block
and ash flows resulting from flow-front collapse have occurred both at
Santiaguito and Unzen (Japan) in recent times. Results of this project will
include measurements of the actual temperatures and water contents of silicic
block-lavas at Santiaguito, and their viscosity and heat capacity as a function
of chemical composition, temperature, and water content. These silicic
compositions are particularly interesting because andesitic magmas do not form
block lava flows, and we will determine whether there is a "critical melt
structure" at which this rheological change occurs. The results will be applied
directly to refine existing models for the emplacement of slow-moving block lava
flows, and will also be used to develop a predictive model of the viscosity of
hydrous (rhyo-)dacitic liquids based on configurational entropy theory,
providing important data required for improving current physical and thermal
models of magmatic and volcanic processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be
carried out in close collaboration with volcano observers in Guatemala
(INSIVUMEH), and the aim is to provide them with an improved understanding of
rheology and heat budgets related to block flow emplacement, contributing to
improved hazard monitoring and prediction capabilities. Other broader impacts of
this project include training graduate students in viscometry and calorimetry
techniques, and establishing the first laboratory in the USA that will apply
low-temperature viscosity measurement techniques to hydrous silicate liquids.
&lt;br/&gt;