* 0407384
* NUE:  Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education and Emphasis at Utah State University
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* YangQuan Chen, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Carmen I. Huber
* 04/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Utah State
University is to support Professors Haeyeon Yang, Jon Takemoto, Tapas Kar,
Leijun Li and Yangquan Chen, who as a team will develop an interdisciplinary
effort in physics, Biology, Chemistry, and Electrical and Mechanical
Engineering, and will create a series of courses describing concepts and
techniques related to nanotechnology. In the first phase, a course will be
developed for first-year undergraduate students entitled "Nanotechnology", which
will be a general education, University Study, course. The course will stress on
qualitative, conceptual approaches and will consist of five modules from
biology, chemistry, electrical/mechanical engineering, and physics. These
modules will be based on each participating PIs' relative research fields and
interests. Later, these modules will be evolved to the following four separate
courses for sophomores: (1) Physics of Nanotechnology; (2) Chemistry aspects of
Nanomaterials; (3) Nanomechatronics; and (4) Synthesis and Fabrication of
Nanomaterials. Students taking these four along with "Nanotechnology" course
will be eligible to apply for "Emphasis in Nanotechnology" in addition to their
respective BS degrees. A supplementary laboratory course, which will stress
hands-on experience on actual nano-fabrications and characterizations, will also
be developed. Examples of fabrication are "self-assembly" using molecular beam
epitaxy and the bottom-up approach using scanning probe microscope (SPM).
Examples for the characterization will be based on SPM for the fabricated
nanostructures.