* 0407412
* NUE: In Situ Real-Time Atomic Scale Nanomaterials Synthesis, Characterization and Modeling for Undergraduate Education
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Jeff Drucker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2008
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Arizona State
University supports Dr. Ray W. Carpenter, Center for Solid State Science, along
with colleagues Prof. Marilyn Carlson (applied mathematics and Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) teaching methods), Prof. Jeff
Drucker (Physics), Prof. Stephan Goodnick (Electrical Engineering), Prof.
Vincent Pizziconi (Bioengineering), Dr. Andrew Chizmeshya (Physics), Dr. Michael
McKelvy (Chemistry), Prof. B. L. Ramakrishna (Chemistry and Plant Biology), and
Dr. Renu Sharma (Chemistry)to teach undergraduates, at three levels, the
abstract concepts and properties dependence on length scales of nanoscience and
engineering by leveraging existing cutting edge nanoscience and engineering
research projects to produce teaching modules for undergraduate classes and
opportunities for senior thesis projects. The levels of students who will be
targeted in this program are: first year honors students, second year students
who have completed calculus, and advanced undergraduates participating in senior
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was received in
response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education announcement, NSF
03-44, category NUE and was jointly funded by the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), the
Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
(DMS) both in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).