* 0407487
* Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Digital Scientific Information Resources in China: Opportunities and Challenges
* GEO,GEO
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Paul Uhlir, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 06/30/2006
* USD 90,000.00

The U.S. National Committee (USNC) for the Committee on Data for Science and
Technology (CODATA) (of the International Council for Science (ICSU)) will
convene a workshop on "Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Digital
Scientific Information Resources in China: Opportunities and Challenges". This
workshop is being organized in cooperation with the Chinese National Committee
for CODATA (of the Chinese Academy of Sciences) and with the CODATA Task Group
on Preservation and Archiving of Scientific and Technical Data in Developing
Countries. The workshop will be held in Beijing in June 2004. The proposed
workshop is intended to identify the data and information resources issues that
require the highest priority attention in order to develop long-term
preservation and open access management. The workshop is intended to (a) explore
various options for open digital archiving that might be adopted or adapted for
use within the Chinese context on a realistic and sustainable basis and (b)
provide an interdisciplinary analysis and methodology to improving those
activities in China. Four areas have been identified for possible initial
consideration: scientific, technological and medical (STM) journals; earth and
environmental science data; biomedical science data; and laboratory physical
sciences data. The workshop is expected to bring together scientific and digital
archiving experts, national science policy and funding officials, and
representatives of public and private donor and development organizations who
will be able to integrate the results of this project into their future
planning. As a result, access to STM data and information resources in China
might be improved and future scientific cooperation between Chinese and U.S.
researchers might be facilitated by such improved access. The issues identified
and discussed during the course of the workshop may also have broader
application for other developing countries and, to this end, the results will be
considered by the USNC/CODATA and the international CODATA Task Group in
considering the organization of similar activities in other developing regions
and countries.