* 0407214
* Infrared Spectroscopic Search for Minority Species On The Surfaces Of Icy Outer Solar System Objects
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* William Grundy, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2008
* USD 79,524.00

AST 0407214 Grundy

A systematic 1 to 5 micron infrared spectral survey of icy, airless, outer solar
system satellites of Saturn and Uranus will be conducted by Dr. William Grundy,
to take advantage of dramatic improvements in the state of the art of
astronomical infrared spectrometers. Many of these satellites have yet to be
well-observed with sensitive modern instruments so tremendous gains can be made
relative to previous observations, and the potential for discovering new
minority species on their surfaces is high, as exemplified by Dr. Grundy's
recent discovery of CO2 ice on Ariel.

Interest in minority species on icy satellites has expanded rapidly, fueled by
recent discoveries of many new species (mostly on Jovian satellites, so far) and
a growing understanding of the connections between minority species and chemical
and physical evolution driven by processes such as radiolysis, photolysis, and
volatile transport. Infrared spectroscopy is the best tool for detecting new
compounds and for learning about their phase states, temperatures, etc. New
discoveries made through this project offer rich opportunities for attracting
broader scientific and public interest (see below). In addition to providing a
much more detailed view of chemistry of icy satellites surfaces, the new data
will enable us to investigate the spatial distributions and physical/thermal
states of newly discovered minority species, shedding considerable light on
their origins and eventual fates. This type of work can only be done at
moderately high spectral resolution. The instruments to be used offer five to
ten times higher spectral resolution than the Cassini spacecraft VIMS
instrument, so the data produced by this project will be complementary to
Cassini's much higher spatial resolution.

The excellent potential for discovering new species offered by this project
translates into significant impact beyond of the study of icy satellites and the
processes acting on their surfaces. These discoveries can also provide valuable
information about the evolution of astrobiologically important chemicals and the
distribution of potentially exploitable resources in the outer solar system.
Some of these materials may have contributed to the surface/atmospheric
environments of early Earth and Mars, via meteorite delivery, and may even have
played a key role in the origin of life. The discoveries awaiting this project
will also be of considerable interest to the public. Since they are easily
understood and communicated by the media, the likelihood of newly discovered
compounds being widely reported is high. The broad attention that can be
attracted by such discoveries helps maintain citizen interest in publicly-funded
science. Dr. Grundy is also involved in educational efforts which leverage the
excitement of ongoing scientific research such as this. These activities include
working with Navajo and Hopi middle school science teachers and their classes.
Both Navajo and Hopi communities are underrepresented in science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology. Undergraduate summer students are involved in the
research through NSF's Research Experiences for Undergraduates program. ***

