* 0407352
* Study of Asteroidal Satellites Using Adaptive Optics
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Peter Tamblyn, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Thomas S. Statler
* 09/30/2010
* USD 311,438.00

AST 0407352 Merline

Dr. William Merline and his team will continue and extend their survey for
satellites of asteroids, using adaptive optics (AO) on large ground-based
telescopes. Their existing project began in 1998, jointly supported by both NSF
and NASA. They will continue that arrangement here, but with increased support
for analysis, interpretation, and dissemination of results. This new phase of
the program will double the number of objects observed so far (to a total of
about 1500). The focus will shift to those smaller (and so fainter) asteroids
that have eluded observation to date. Continual advances in techniques and
technology since the program began mean that these faint objects can now be
accessed. Within about the next year, laser-guided AO will become available,
giving access to fainter objects. The team recently acquired simultaneous near-
IR spectra of an asteroid/satellite pair and they will expand such studies,
which will yield taxonomic type and compositional differences (based on near-IR
band parameters) and which will help probe the origin of binary systems.
Application of the new technique of interferometric nulling should substantially
improve the brightness limits for close-in satellites. Deeper searches for
satellites near Ceres and Vesta will support the upcoming DAWN spacecraft
mission to those asteroids. The team's development of new tools enables
prediction of dozens of appulse events per night for many faint asteroids, so
that even without laser AO it is possible to observe many small asteroids. The
proposed program will focus on main-belt and Trojan targets, but also include
near Earth object (NEO) and trans-Neptunian Object (TNO) targets when possible
during observing runs planned at Keck, Gemini, VLT, Palomar, and IRTF
observatories. INTELLECTUAL MERIT. Discovery and study of asteroid satellites
provides vital information that addresses the specific collisional environment
of a particular asteroid and probes the composition and structure of asteroids.
Asteroid satellites are critical in two ways: 1) they permit determination of
the mass of the primary asteroid, hence its density; density is a prime
parameter for any object, whether a wrapped Christmas gift or an asteroid and
(except for the largest asteroids and those visited by spacecraft) it cannot be
obtained in any other way; and 2) they provide a real-life laboratory for the
study of collisions. Collisions have played the dominant role shaping asteroids
over the eons and, indeed, most bodies in the solar system. One need only look
at the surface of the moon to realize the effects collisions have had on solar
system history. BROADER IMPACT. Asteroids are among the most popular and
relevant astronomical targets for lay people in general (mainly because their
fragments, meteorites, arrive on Earth as blazing bolides and because there is a
tiny but real threat of a devastating impact by a large asteroid). That some
asteroids are double or have satellites is one of the most fascinating new facts
about solar system bodies in recent years. Thus study of asteroids provides a
natural gateway for many into astronomy and the wider world of science. This
research program includes an integral component of education and public
outreach, to be conducted by scientists who already have a national reputation
for excellence and effectiveness in communicating science to the broader
society. ***



