* 0407104
* E=mc2
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Paula Apsell, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,200,000.00

WGBH's Science Unit is requesting funds to produce for NOVA a two-hour
television special based on David Bodanis' book "E=mc2: A Biography of the
World's Most Famous Equation." Combining dramatic and documentary techniques,
the program uses Einstein's iconic equation to explore the physics behind the
equation and the nature of the scientific process. A media initiative, an
interactive Web site, and an outreach campaign broaden the program's impact
beyond the television broadcast. "E=mc2" is intended for prime-time broadcast on
PBS in the fall of 2005, to coincide with the centennial of Einstein's "Miracle
Year," and should reach an initial audience of seven million viewers. Outreach
kits will be made available for free to 16,000 public libraries and 1,000 after-
school programs. Notification of educational resources will be sent to all
14,000 high school physics teachers around the country. A formative evaluation
of the program and a summative evaluation of the program and outreach materials
will ensure that "E=mc2" achieves its ultimate purpose: to enhance public
understanding of science and promote scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key Project
Personnel:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Director of the WGBH Science Unit and Senior
Executive Producer of NOVA: Paula S.
Apsell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Writer/Director: Kevin
Macdonald&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Producer: John
Smithson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formative Evaluation: Multimedia
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summative Evaluation: Goodman Research
Group&lt;br/&gt;