* 0407858
*  DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Behavioral Responses of Male African Elephants (Loxodonta Africana) to Musth Urine
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Susan Alberts, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 04/30/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Behavioral responses of male African elephants (Loxodonta africana) to musth
urine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Susan C. Alberts and Julie Hollister-
Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Male elephants generally exhibit the dominance
relationships seen in males of most mammalian societies; a larger individual is
dominant to a smaller individual. However, musth episodes (periods of elevated
testosterone and high aggression) temporarily raise a male's dominance position
above any non-musth male regardless of size or age. Typified by increased
association with females, increased sexual activity, temporal gland secretions
and nearly continual urine dribbling, musth has been described as similar to rut
in ungulates. Unlike rut, however, musth occurs throughout the year and is
asynchronous in a population, so that only a few bulls are in musth
concurrently. The mechanisms underlying its onset and duration are not well
understood, but age, size and physical condition all affect the likelihood that
an individual will experience musth. A single musth period may last from just a
few days to over five months, generally increasing as a male ages. Maintaining
the condition is energetically costly, thus a male physically declines as it
continues.&lt;br/&gt;This study explores the potential for chemical signaling
between male African elephants via urine dribbling during musth. By examining
the temporal patterns of signaling during musth, this study investigates how
population level asynchrony of musth may in part be explained by individual
economics of maintaining this physiologically expensive condition and of
avoiding direct competition with other males in musth. As such, these results
may shed additional light on current theories of sexual selection, signaling
theory, and male competition strategies. This study also lays the groundwork for
future exploration of possible suppression or stimulation of musth in males via
urinary signals of musth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;