* 0407478
* The Design and Synthesis of Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Materials as Base Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Alexander Katz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 06/30/2008
* USD 240,679.00

Biological catalysts routinely achieve high degrees of enantioselectivity and
activity, which is made possible via the nanoscale organization of organic
functional groups within the active site. Achieving the same in synthetic
heterogeneous catalysts has remained elusive. Accordingly, the intellectual
merit of this proposal is to rationally design and synthesize functional
catalytic sites in hybrid organic-inorganic materials via the control of
relevant connectivity and spacial organization of organic functional groups on
the nanoscale. The resulting heterogeneous catalysts rely on multifunctional
mechanisms for facilitating specific adsorption and reactant activation for
catalysis. The research will exploit recent successful efforts in achieving
significant rate enhancements in base catalysis by the synthesis of catalysts in
which an acid group acts cooperatively with base for reactant adsorption and
activation. A systematic investigation will explore the effects of local acid-
base separation and immobilized base strength, as well as the use of aqueous
solvent environments for catalysis. Finally, a comprehensive approach for the
incorporation of enantioselective reaction capability into these materials is
proposed. The research activities broadly impact the training of future
scientists in catalyst synthesis and characterization, with emphasis on
catalysis using hybrid organic-inorganic materials. The training of graduate and
undergraduate students will have special attention placed on the recruitment of
female and minority students. Outreach activities include a K-12 component, in
the form of research presentations to middle-school students on the topic of
future directions and challenges in chemical engineering.