* 0407727
* US-Japan Seminar: Network and Center-Based Research for Earthquake Engineering and Smart Structures Technologies
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Mahendra Singh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 06/30/2006
* USD 46,000.00

0407727&lt;br/&gt;Singh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on network
and center-based research for earthquake engineering and smart structures
technologies to be held in Osaka, Japan from July 6-9, 2004. The co-organizers
are Professor Mahendra Singh at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute in Blacksburg
and Professor Eizaburo Tachibana at Osaka University in Japan. Significant
advances have been made in the disciplinary area of earthquake engineering and
also in the area of sensors and sensor-based systems. The main thrust of new
research is to develop infrastructure systems that are smart and predictable,
can adapt to changes, can protect itself from environmental and societal
threats, can self diagnose and heal, and is proactive. In achieving these
objectives sensing systems play a central role. Many new consortia of research
centers have been created to facilitate collaborative research and exchange
activities among the premier research centers worldwide working in the area of
earthquake engineering and smart technologies. In addition, a new Internet-based
network system called NEES (Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation)
consisting of networked hardware testing facilities and enabling tele-operating
systems with software, has been recently established to create a "shared-use and
geographically-distributed experimental laboratory" to facilitate and promote
innovative research activities in earthquake engineering in the U.S. The meeting
will bring together scientists, engineers, computer scientists, materials and
device experts from diverse fields and disciplines working on these new frontier
research areas. The goals of the meeting are to: 1) provide a much needed new
track to accelerate center-to-center based research activities on new frontiers
of sensor-based smart structure technologies; 2) expand and energize the
interface which overlaps discipline-based research in earthquake engineering and
research in sensor-based smart structures; 3) cultivate, promote and nurture
collaborative and exchange research activities between US and Japan -- two
leading countries in earthquake engineering and advanced technology and 4)
expose US students and young scientists to social, technical, and cultural
values in Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have complementary
scientific expertise in the field. This enables them to evaluate and attract the
best science and engineering researchers to participate. These new developments
will revolutionize how civil and mechanical structural systems are built and
maintained in the future and will impact the areas of structural dynamics,
earthquake engineering, sensor systems, signal processing system identification,
fiber optics, wireless technology, and smart systems. The seminar organizers
have made a special effort to involve postdocs and graduate students as both
participants and observers. The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts
in the field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will
set the stage for future collaborative projects. Following the seminar the
organizers plan to establish a workshop web page. Conference proceedings will be
published on this web site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;