* 0407879
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genome Evolution of a Polyploid Complex in Sorghum (Poaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Stephen Kresovich, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 08/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

NSF DDIG Non-technical Abstract

One of the most challenging problems in systematics today is understanding the
relationships between closely related species, especially those that have been
subject to processes such as hybridization and polyploidy, the doubling of an
organism's genome. This research investigates the effects of these processes on
the relationships among species of Sorghum sect. Sorghum (Poaceae). Sorghum
sect. Sorghum includes cultivated sorghum [Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench] and
johnsongrass [Sorghum halepense (L.) Pers.], one of the world's most noxious
weeds. S. halepense is a polyploid, thought to be derived from S. bicolor. S.
bicolor and S. halepense are not genetically isolated and may hybridize,
creating complex patterns of relationship. DNA sequence data for multiple
sections of the plants' nuclear and chloroplast genomes from individuals of this
species complex will be used to reconstruct evolutionary relationships. These
relationships can be examined for the presence of patterns, which may be
correlated with geography, plant appearance, invasiveness, or other factors.

In light of the economic importance of this species complex in Sorghum, a better
understanding of their relationships is essential. Cultivated sorghum is the
fifth most important cereal crop in the world and a staple grain in the semi-
arid tropics. It has a small genome size relative to that of maize, making it an
ideal model organism for comparative genomics studies in the grasses. S.
halepense is one of the ten most noxious weeds worldwide. Invasive species rank
second behind only habitat destruction as the largest threat to biodiversity
worldwide and cost billions of dollars each year in reductions in crop yields.
This research also will contribute to a greater understanding of the process of
polyploidy and its impact on plant evolution. The process of polyploidy has been
linked to extensive genomic changes. Current estimates suggest that at least
50-70% of angiosperms have undergone genome duplication at some point in their
evolutionary past, making polyploidy a significant factor in plant evolution.
Polyploidy has also shaped the genomes of many other organisms, such as
vertebrates, including humans, and plays a role in some cancers. Polyploidy and
hybridization both have the potential to increase genetic variability within a
species, and possibly invasive ability. A greater understanding of these
processes and their effects on the evolution of these economically important
species may be beneficial to a variety of fields, including plant breeding and
weed control efforts.

