* 0407070
* Gravitationally Driven Instabilities in the Early &amp; Late Stages of Stellar Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Joel Tohline, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 05/31/2008
* USD 332,074.00

Rotating stars are susceptible to a variety of global, gravitationally driven
instabilities, especially during the earliest (e.g., protostellar) and latest
(e.g., compact object) phases of their evolution when they are most likely to be
rotating rapidly. These include, for example, a wide spectrum of nonradial
pulsations. An even larger number of instabilities may be encountered by stars
in binary systems through their mutual gravitational interaction, in particular,
tidal and mass transferring instabilities. Any one of these instabilities may
result in substantial alterations in the star's global structure and change the
star's evolution. In the case of compact objects, such as neutron stars, they
may give rise to measurable levels of gravitational radiation. Also, we're not
likely to understand the origin of binary stars until we are able to
realistically model the variety of gravitationally driven instabilities in
rapidly rotating protostars and protostellar gas clouds. The Principle
Investigator of this project is extending his detailed investigations of
gravitationally driven instabilities in rotating stars, using fully three-
dimensional, nonlinear hydrodynamical techniques to determine under what
conditions certain key instabilities arise, and what the astrophysically
important implications are of the nonlinear development of these instabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The types of high-performance
computational tools that must be developed in order to further our understanding
of gravitational instabilities in astrophysical systems are also used to make
significant research advancements in atmospheric sciences, coastal studies,
certain areas of the health sciences, and numerous subfields of engineering.
This Louisiana State University researcher and his students regularly exchange
ideas and computational techniques with applied mathematicians, computer
scientists, and numerous colleagues who employ computational fluid dynamics
tools in their research to model hurricane storm surges, fluid flow in the human
eye, cooling flows in advanced gas turbine systems, coastal erosion, and
reacting flows in petrochemical stirring tanks. Most of these areas of research
directly influence Louisiana's environmental and economic well-being. The
Principle Investigator will continue to be involved in K-12 and general public
outreach projects, especially those associated with the local Highland Road Park
Observatory and one secondary school in Baton Rouge where substantial efforts
are being made to strengthen the early training of young women in science and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;