* 0407335
* NUE: Introduction to Nano-Engineering:  A Web-based Approach to Expand Nanotechnology Horizons
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Changmo Sung, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to the University of
Massachusetts -Lowell supports Drs. Carol Barry,of the Department of Plastics
Engineering, Alkim Akyurlu of the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, and Jacqueline Moloney and Steven Tello of the College of
Continuing Studies and Corporate Education for their work to develop interactive
lectures and virtual experiments with the same level of effectiveness as
traditional laboratory-based courses. The online course will be part of the
University's offerings for the "general education" core. Such laboratory courses
are critical to the expansion of the knowledge base in nanotechnology,
particularly nano-engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength and diversity
of three engineering faculty with research interests in nanotechnology and two
administrators having extensive experience in online education is combined to
create the course materials, assess the effectiveness of a virtual laboratory
compared to a similar hands-on engineering laboratory, develop techniques for
group projects in an online course, which will facilitate a shared-learning
experience, and evaluate the effectiveness of group project techniques as an
educational tool. While the online course will be part of the undergraduate
curriculum, course modules will be used in undergraduate classroom education,
extended to K-12 classrooms, offered in the University's industrial seminar
program, and made available to other interested parties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal for this award was received in response to
the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education announcement, NSF 03-044,
category NUE and was jointly funded by the Division of Design, Manufacture and
Industrial Engineering (DMII) and the Division of Engineering Education and
Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG). &lt;br/&gt;