* 0407857
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny, Specificity, and Biogeography of Endophytic Xylariaceae in Liverworts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Arthur Shaw, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 05/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Fungal endophytes are fungi that grow inside living plants, causing no apparent
harm to the host. Although endophytes have been revealed in a wide variety of
plants, the ecology of most endophytic relationships remains unexplored. Fungi
in the family Xylariaceae are regularly identified as endophytes in a broad
diversity of host plants throughout the world, yet almost nothing is known about
whether they are host specific, or how particular species of endophytes are
distributed geographically. This project will focus on the ecology and genetic
relationships of fungi living endophytically in liverworts. It is difficult to
identify endophytic fungi based on morphology, so molecular methods will be used
to identify the fungi from their DNA sequences. Preliminary research has shown
that Xylariaceae are dominant endophytes in liverworts, as in many other plants.
Liverworts comprise one of the earliest groups of plants to colonize land, some
400 million years ago, and it has been suggested that fungi helped to facilitate
this important step in the evolution of terrestrial organisms. Endophytes will
be cultured from plants collected in North America, the Caribbean region, South
America, Europe, and New Zealand. DNA sequences from endophytes will be
identified by their similarity to known fungi; comparisons will be made against
data contained in GenBank (National Center for Biotechnology Information), and
databases available at Duke University. Geographic, ecological, and genetic
information will be integrated in order to make inferences about host
specificity, geographic structure, and relationships within and among endophytic
and non-endophytic Xylariaceae and other fungi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Completion
of this project will contribute to training a doctoral student and increase our
knowledge of global fungal biodiversity, perhaps revealing previously
undescribed species. This research will also provide a foundation for future
work aimed at understanding the ecology and evolution of this potentially
important plant-fungus interaction. The cultures obtained as a result of this
research will be submitted to the American Type Tissue Collection , where they
can be accessed for future experimental and comparative studies by other
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;