* 0407186
* Atmospheric Dynamics Modeling of Venus with Realistic Topography and Structure and Comparative Modeling of Titan
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Timothy Dowling, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 12/31/2007
* USD 171,200.00

AST 0407186 Dowling

The proximity of Venus to Earth makes it a major target for planetary
exploration, both because it is easy to reach and because of the need to
understand why Earth and its closest neighbor are so different. Several missions
to Venus have returned remote sensing and in situ observations, and the vista
from Earth of both Venus and Titan has dramatically improved with precise near-
infrared filters and adaptive optics. History has ordered itself such that most
of the modern tools used to simulate atmospheric dynamics have been developed
after the bulk of Venus spacecraft missions have been completed. The result is
that all the data are fresh and the planet is an open book. Titan, about to
become an open book itself, is dynamically closest to Venus because it is also a
slow rotator, hence, it is traditional to pair the two for comparative studies.
Furthermore, indications are that Titan's atmosphere exhibits a superrotation
that is similar to that of Venus. There is heightened interest in Venus and
Titan for several reasons, two being a recent credible claim for simulating the
full Venus superrotation starting at rest in a low-resolution atmospheric model,
and the advent of the Cassini Orbiter/ Huygens-Probe mission to Titan. Attempts
to model equatorial superrotation have focused on simplified models that
logically reduce and isolate the number of candidate physical processes being
tested. Some numerical simulations lend support to the Gierasch mechanism
wherein momentum is transported vertically as part of the Hadley-cell
circulation, and to the equator by waves from instability, but there is also
support for other eddy sources such as thermal tides and topographically excited
gravity waves. Part of the problem is to distinguish which effects contribute
most to a given altitude region. A leading detail missing from many Venus spinup
models to date is topography. Venus has tall mountains, and these should
generate internal-wave phenomena and modify the planetary boundary layer and the
influence of the surface on the atmosphere.

In this project, Dr. Timothy Dowling brings to Venus/Titan research a new tool,
a high-resolution general circulation model, EPIC, which uses a hybrid
isentropic/terrain-following vertical coordinate. In the first year, Dr. Dowling
will begin by reproducing the superrotation results of Yamamoto and Takahashi
for Venus, with additional sensitivity tests regarding the Newtonian cooling
profile and the horizontal resolution, which will yield a valuable confirmation
of the results. Also in Year 1, the researchers will systematically test the
effects of topography on the general circulation. This work will continue into
the second year. In Year 2, they will add sulfuric-acid clouds to the Venus
model, taking advantage of the EPIC model's existing cloud-microphysics
capabilities, and compare the model's cloud patterns with ultraviolet (UV)
observations of Venus. It is anticipated that Titan will be the primary focus in
the third year, as new data from the Huygens Probe and Cassini Orbiter become
available.

Because Venus and Titan have small Coriolis accelerations progress in
understanding their atmospheric dynamics translates into advances in
understanding equatorial or tropical meteorology on any planet. As in the past,
the EPIC model will be made freely available as open source code, providing a
new tool for Venus/Titan studies to the planetary astronomy community. On the
demographic front, this project promotes an effort to expand atmospheric
dynamics research in Kentucky. ***

