* 0407877
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Gametophyte Ecology: Consequences for the Distribution and Abundance of Tropical Ferns
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Michelle Mack, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,970.00

Ferns are unique among plants because they have two distinct, free-living stages
in their life cycle. The sporophyte stage is the familiar frond-bearing plant,
which asexually produces spores that germinate to form the gametophyte stage.
The gametophyte, by contrast, is tiny and rarely visible, but it is key because
it reproduces sexually to form the sporophyte and complete the life cycle of the
fern. A fern sporophyte may disperse millions of spores into its environment,
yet few gametophytes ever survive to complete the life cycle. Despite the
importance of the gametophyte stage to the distribution and abundance of ferns,
we know little about the factors that control its survival and reproduction. The
goal of this research is to understand controls over survival and reproduction
of fern gametophytes in the wet forests of Costa Rica, where ferns are an
important component of the ecosystem. A series of observational studies and
experiments will be used to determine how different species' gametophytes vary
in their response to drought, light, and nutrient availability, and how these
responses affect reproduction and the formation of sporophytes. This study will
have application to the management and conservation of fern populations. The
broader impacts of this research include support of a doctoral dissertation,
development of a large collection of specimens that will be archived in the
herbarium of the La Selva Biological Station, and the development of new
techniques for measuring photosynthesis and nutrient uptake.