* 0407830
* Visual Learning in Science and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2006
* Michael McGrath, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Diana L. Burley
* 03/31/2006
* USD 30,514.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We define visual learning for science
and engineering as the use of images and animations to enable and enhance
learning at all levels. These visual learning methods are: opening up new ways
of problem solving; providing new ways to think about science and engineering;
and enhancing the education and practice of science and engineering
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visual learning is important in engineering and science
because problems are increasingly complex, and visual thinking gives us the
ability to understand relationships and behavior in complex situations. Students
must learn to think visually and communicate their ideas visually to peers and
the general public. However, most science teachers and students know little
about visual communication capabilities and techniques, and they can cause
misunderstanding through the misuse of shapes, colors, and animation. This is
compounded by cultural differences in how students from different parts of the
world react to shapes, colors, and other visual representations. Since
collaborations are important for gaining further insights into scientific
phenomena, learning to understand how other cultures interpret images and
communicate visually is often vitally important. McGrath and Brown co-chaired
the first interdisciplinary workshop on Visual Learning in Science and
Engineering in 2002. Conclusions were that visual thinking is crucial to the
future of learning in science and engineering, that a visual language can
communicate most effectively in some situations, and that all science and
engineering students should have exposure to creating visualizations. This
project addresses these conclusions and elaborates on more specific goals and
implementation. Further globalization of this work is also essential to obtain
the Asian experience. This project refines the ideas from the 2002 workshop and
merges them with new views. The resultant white paper is expected to influence
future curricula in science and engineering. Both investigators have vast
experience in organizing workshops and writing technical reports that are high
quality and professional, yet easily read and understood. &lt;br/&gt;