* 0407952
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Fitness Cost of Nest Defense: A Trade-Off With Offspring Care?
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Stephen Nowicki, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 04/30/2006
* USD 10,000.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: &lt;br/&gt;FITNESS COST OF NEST DEFENSE IN A PASSERINE
BIRD: &lt;br/&gt;A TRADE-OFF WITH OFFSPRING CARE?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Stephen Nowicki &amp; Renee A. Duckworth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many organisms,
the ability of young to grow and survive depends on the care they receive from
their parents. Despite the importance of parental care for offspring survival,
adults often vary widely in the quantity and quality of care they provide. One
of the reasons why this variation is observed may be because individuals face a
trade-off in the use of their time and resources for parental care and for other
activities. A fitness cost to the expression of nest defense behavior was
recently documented in western bluebirds (Sialia mexicana). Bluebirds benefit
from defending their nest cavities from competitors because suitable breeding
cavities are a limited resource. However, male western bluebirds that defend
their nests more aggressively produce fewer offspring on average each year. The
proposed research examines three alternative hypotheses that could account for
this observed relationship between nest defense behavior and reproductive
success. Specifically, it tests whether there is a time/energy trade-off between
offspring care and defense, whether aggressive males are inherently poorer
parents, or whether a correlation between elevation and nest defense best
explains the relationship between nest defense and reproductive success.
Identifying the mechanisms that produce variation in parents' ability to raise
young successfully is essential for our understanding of the evolution of
parental investment strategies.&lt;br/&gt;