* 0407298
* NUE:    Incorporating Nanotechnology Into the 1st and 2nd Year Chemistry Laboratory Curricula at CMU
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Minghui Chai, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education (NUE) award to Professor Minghui
Chai at Central Michigan University is made by the Division of Chemistry to
support the development and incorporation of new laboratory modules that
emphasize current concepts and principles of nanoscience and nanotechnology for
the first- and second-year chemistry curricula for students at Central Michigan
University (CMU). In addition, an outreach activity offers local teachers at the
secondary education level a series of workshops in nanoscience and
nanotechnology with talks, demos and hands-on activities. The project's
objectives are: 1) to integrate current visualization and characterization tools
(e.g. AFM, NMR, etc.) into the existing chemistry laboratory curricula; 2) to
interest students early in their academic careers in nanotechnology and to take
subsequent advanced courses in materials science and instrumentation; 3) to
prepare early science students with versatile problem solving skills thus
shortening the time to enable an undergraduate student to become an effective
researcher in their senior research projects; 4) to educate a more productive
workforce that is literate in nanotechnology; and 5) to disseminate
nanotechnology by training secondary educators in the Mt. Pleasant school
district. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also encourages women, including
undergraduate students and secondary education teachers, to participate in the
nanotechnology educational program. The associated outreach activities (science
demonstrations to younger population and the workshop for secondary school
teachers) will also have a direct impact by disseminating nanotechnology to a
wider range of citizens. &lt;br/&gt;