* 0407753
* From Unstable Precursors to Metastable Nitrides:  Azidothermal Synthesis of Binaries and Beyond
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Edward Gillan, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 355,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports Professor Edward Gillan at the University of Iowa to explore large
scale, facile, and reproducible synthetic methodologies towards metal nitride
and pnictide systems. The chemistry of metal azide to nitride (azidothermal)
conversion reactions will be investigated. Because of the energetic nature of
the azide ligand, moderate decomposition temperatures allowing access to
metastable materials are expected. Through careful adjustments in the non-
aqueous solvent, this method is expected to produce discrete nanostructured
products that have interesting optical and magnetic properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles and nanocrystallites of bulk inorganic
solids exhibit size dependent properties, such as lower melting points, higher
energy gaps, and non-thermodynamic structures that are distinct from bulk
materials. This research aims to access stable nitride structures with
controlled structural, optical, and magnetic properties through viable and
reproducible low-temperature chemical syntheses. Specifically, the chemistry of
metal azides will be developed for the low-temperature synthesis of nitrides.
Graduate students, undergraduate students and postdoctoral associates will
receive training in synthetic materials methodology and in determining the
physical properties of microscale and nanoscale nitride materials.