* 0407975
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Patterns of Intraspecific Genetic Variation In Cordyline Fruticosa and the Basis for Male Sterility with Implications for Archaeoethnobotony in Polynesia
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Brent Mishler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2006
* USD 10,761.00

The islands of the Pacific Ocean are some of the last areas on Earth to have
been colonized by humans. In Polynesia, major archaeological questions remain as
to the timing and order of colonizing voyages to the islands. This study uses
the Polynesian-introduced plant Cordyline fruticosa (L.) Chev., better known as
the Hawaiian "ti" plant, as a proxy for the study of events in Polynesian
prehistory. Populations of ti plants from the entire Polynesian region will be
screened for patterns of genetic variation. This information will be used to
help reconstruct likely colonization scenarios of the Polynesian peoples.
Morphological and reproductive differences in ti plants across Polynesia will be
characterized to explore the possibility that sterile ti plants were selectively
favorable because of the use of their rhizomes for food.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research cuts across disciplines by applying
botanical and genetic methods to an integrated study of biological and cultural
history. These data, when compared with other genetic and linguistic studies,
will help to build a more precise picture of patterns of human colonization in
the region. Results will be of interest to indigenous peoples of Polynesia,
botanists, archaeologists, and horticulturists who grow this plant as an
ornamental.&lt;br/&gt;