* 0407713
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Sexual Conflict and Extrapair Paternity in the Plural Cooperatively Breeding Superb Starling, Lamprotornis Superbus
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Stephen Emlen, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Jerry O. Wolff
* 04/30/2005
* USD 9,989.00

SEXUAL CONFLICT AND EXTRAPAIR PATERNITY IN THE PLURAL COOPERATIVELY BREEDING
SUPERB STARLING, LAMPROTORNIS SUPERBUS

Dustin R. Rubenstein

Cooperative breeding occurs when more than two individuals contribute to the
care of a single nest. Typically, this involves one or more non-breeding helpers
who aid the parents raise the offspring in the nest. However, much recent
genetic work examining parentage in nests of cooperative breeders has found that
these helpers are often the genetic parents of some of the offspring. That is,
male helpers may sneak extra-pair fertilizations with the breeding female. This
project tests two hypotheses about sexual conflict (i.e., conflict over extra-
pair fertilizations) in cooperative breeders. Females may seek extra-pair
fertilizations to gain (1) direct reproductive benefits (e.g., helping in return
for reproduction) or (2) indirect genetic benefits (e.g., genetic quality,
diversity, or compatibility in their mates). We will use species-specific
microsatellite markers to study sexual conflict, paternity, and relatedness in
the plural cooperatively breeding superb starling, Lamprotornis superbus, in
Kenya. This will be one of the few studies to examine the social dynamics of
plural cooperative breeding (i.e., multiple breeding pairs per group) using
microsatellites, and it will offer insights into how reproductive and sexual
conflict are mediated in cooperative breeders. This project will educate and
train Kenyan students in skills necessary to pursue careers in ecotourism and
research.