* 0407956
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Seedling Dynamics and Forest Diversity in Amazonian Ecuador
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Wayne Sousa, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2007
* USD 15,000.00

The rainforest of Yasuni National Park, Ecuador, is among the most diverse on
earth. Various mechanisms have been hypothesized to explain the local
coexistence of such a large number of canopy tree species. Many of these
proposed mechanisms invoke particular patterns of seedling recruitment, growth,
and mortality that reduce the likelihood that dying canopy trees will be
replaced by only one or a few dominant species. This dissertation research
evaluates these hypotheses using a two-pronged approach. First, natural rates of
recruitment, growth, and mortality of seedlings are being quantified in
permanent census plots distributed throughout the study forest. These plots,
established in 2002, are monitored annually. Second, based on these censuses,
focal sets of common and rare species will be selected for use in field
experiments. The spatial distributions and densities of seeds and seedlings of
these species will be manipulated to directly test the hypotheses that diversity
is maintained by 1) the restriction of different species' seedlings to
particular soil types or microhabitats, 2) spatially limited dispersal of seeds;
particularly by competitively dominant species, or 3) frequency-dependent or
density-dependent mortality that prevents a dominant competitor from excluding
relatively rare species. These experiments will determine whether species of
differing abundances (i.e., relatively rare vs. relatively common) exhibit
responses to experimental manipulation consistent each proposed mechanism of
diversification. The study forest is more species-rich than sites of previous
studies of rainforest diversity. Thus, the research will test the generality of
conclusions drawn from other tropical forests. An added benefit of the project
is that it involves active collaboration between Ecuadorian and North American
scientists.