* 0408538
* Inverse Kinematics and Interoperability Standards for Visualization of Construction Activities at the Operations Level of Detail
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Vineet Kamat, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 07/31/2007
* USD 179,799.00

This project will investigate the requirements that will enable the 3D animation
of a construction operation to be automatically generated from the kinematic
properties of the resources (e.g. equipment, craftsmen) that perform that
operation, and the geometry of the infrastructure. This will be achieved by
designing an analysis technique that considers an articulated resource to be a
system of linkages that can be analyzed as an open kinematic chain. This will
allow the implement of such a resource (e.g. excavator's bucket, mason's arm,
etc.) to be considered as the kinematic chain's end-effector that can be
manipulated and controlled using goal-oriented techniques based on inverse
kinematics. The goals of the end-effectors themselves, i.e. positions where a
resource's implement should be at key instances during an operation will be
automatically extracted from interoperable 3D product models of
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A simple, software-authorable, object-oriented
language to define articulated resources will be designed and implemented. A
discrete-event simulation model (or any other external software process) will be
able to instantiate resources defined in this language inside 3D virtual worlds,
and instruct them to perform operations using a high-level, construction work-
like terminology. This will enable the automated 3D animation of construction
operations of any length and complexity. The resulting capability will
significantly improve the verification, validation, and communication of
discrete-event simulation models, and make them more credible and thus used in
operations planning and decision-making. Performance of actual field operations
will be improved by allowing proper communication of the planned work prior to
its execution. In addition to communicating what may happen in the future (by
visualizing simulated operations), it will be possible to automatically re-
create in virtual worlds what happened in the past, and what is currently
happening (from real-time data). Such benefits will also accrue in other fields
such as manufacturing, aviation, mining, and ship-building where the need to
visualize operations is as acute as in construction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
enabled technology will allow educators to effectively teach operations
planning, analysis, and design to students in construction and other domains.
The tools resulting from the research will be used to enhance the construction
courses being currently taught at the University of Michigan, and will be made
publicly available to educators at other institutions. This work will also
significantly impact the infrastructure for research by providing an effective
technology for investigators to study operations, safety, and educational issues
in construction and other fields. In summary, the societal benefits of the
project are: 1) the reductions in construction life-cycle costs that will be
possible through proper planning and design of construction operations; 2) the
career development of the personnel participating in the project; and 3) the
effective education and training of future construction engineers.&lt;br/&gt;