* 0408752
* Evaluating the Detrital Record of Continental Collision in the Songpan-Ganzi Complex, Central China, the World's Largest Pre-Cenozoic Turbidite System
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Stephan Graham, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2007
* USD 284,329.00

The Songpan-Ganzi region, an area the size of Kansas on the NE corner of the
Tibet Plateau, is underlain by a vast expanse of Triassic-age deep-marine
sedimentary sediments (turbidites). The Songpan-Ganzi Complex (SGC) is the
world's largest ancient turbidite system, comparable in volume to the largest
modern sedimentary accumulation, the Bengal submarine fan, yet the sources of
these sediment are very poorly known. Continental blocks and volcanic arc
systems fringing the SGC ocean basin could have provided considerable sediment
to the SGC. Alternatively, a likely source for the sediments is the nearby
suture belt between the North China and South China continental blocks, which
collided during the Triassic. With collision-driven uplift, this suture belt
rapidly eroded to great depths in the monsoonal climate of Triassic-Jurassic
east Asia, removing a volume of crust comparable to the sediment volume in the
SGC. By analogy, the occurrence of the SGC turbidite sequence structurally
wedged into a coeval suture between two continental blocks is reminiscent of the
temporal and geometric elements of the modern Himalayan collision system,
including the ultimate repositories for Himalayan detritus, the Bengal and Indus
submarine fans. However, whereas the Himalayan system will continue to evolve
far into the future, the long extinct North China/South China/Songpan-Ganzi
system contains a full record of continental collision. This study is
identifying the sources of sediment for the SGC through a program of analytical
studies of new samples and extensive pre-existent collections (600 kg, 400
samples) housed at Stanford University, complemented by field investigation of
sediment transport directions. The study includes conventional sandstone
petrographic analyses, as well as sophisticated analytical approaches such as
use of the Stanford-USGS Sensitive High Resolution Ion Microprobe (in co-
operation with J.L. Wooden, USGS) and Stanford's Raman spectroscopy facility to
identify minerals (e.g., zircon with microdiamond or coesite inclusions)
indicative of ultrahigh-pressure deep-crustal sources, currently the focus of
major research efforts in the North China/South China suture zone. If suture-
derived sediment can be identified in these sediments, then it may be possible
to track the record of erosion of the North China/South China suture belt in
much the same way that modern Bengal and Indus fan sediments archive a record of
erosion of the Himalayan collision system. Thus, comparison of data from the SGC
with the Himalayan system will yield better understanding of the long-term
evolution of collisional systems and their sedimentary records.