* 0408828
* Community of Practice for Environmentally Benign Design and Manufacturing
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Richard Neal, Integrated Manufacturing Technology Initiative, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 07/31/2007
* USD 105,000.00

This award will create a set of dissemination tools for the Environmentally
Benign Design and Manufacturing research and education community, within the US
and accessible and linked to the global activities in Sustainable Product
Development. The objective is to promote a sharing environment, maintained and
actively linking industry, academia, and national lab participants in this
growing area. Five tasks are planned to accomplished this, including setting up
a web-based discussion service for all EBDM researchers and educators,
moderating open forums on topics selected by an organizing committee of those
who have recently held international conferences and workshops, and a library of
best practices, focusing on solutions for industrial implementation or
educational modules.

The broader impacts of these activities include the potential for blending
global perspectives in conjunction with regional activities, balancing materials
use research with industrial product life cycle management, and creating an
avenue for emerging software tools and management principles to be readily
tested against a broad set of applications. The PI has successfully demonstrated
the ability of his group to facilitate, manage, and disseminate research in new
fields through previous NSF funding. This activity will assist researchers in
carrying out their advancements, providing them with a supportive environment
within which to web-publish, discuss, and collaborate. The creation and
management of such a network is beyond the scope of typical research grants.