* 0408574
* Vapor Lubrication of Magnetic Data Storage Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Esteban Broitman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2006
* USD 156,000.00

A research program is proposed that addresses a number of critical tribological
issues that arise in the lubrication of magnetic data storage media. As the
areal density of data stored on hard disk surfaces increases, the gap between
the read-write head and the disk surface must decrease. The gap is currently
&lt;20 nm and predictions are that in order to store data at densities of 1
Tbit/in^2 the gap will have to be reduced to &lt; 5 nm. A thin film (1 - 2 nm)
of liquid lubricant on the disk surface is critical for protection of the disk
surface during intermittent high speed head-disk contacts. As the gap between
the head and the disk decreases, the demands on the performance of this
lubricant film increase and the tolerances on its characteristics grow tighter
and tighter. The proposed research program explores some of the fundamental
scientific issues that must be understood in order to develop a new vapor phase
method for applying lubricant to the disk surface under highly controlled vacuum
conditions. The proposed research program is an industry-university
collaboration that will develop the physico-chemical understanding of the
properties of lubricant films deposited on the freshly sputtered amorphous
carbon overcoats that cover the media surface. This research is made possible by
a newly built apparatus that emulates the vapor deposition process while also
allowing study of the surface properties and the surface chemistry of lubricant
films vapor deposited onto amorphous carbon (a-C) overcoats. Oxidation of
freshly sputtered a-C overcoats will be studied in order to determine the
kinetics of oxidation and to identify some of the species produced on the a-C
surface during exposure to O2 and H2O. The adsorption of fluorinated ethers and
alcohols with fresh and oxidized a-C films will be studied in order to
understand the bonding of perfluoropolyalkylether (PFPE) lubricants with fresh
and oxidized a-C surfaces. Finally, the surface chemistry and surface properties
of PFPE lubricants themselves will be studied on the surfaces of fresh and
oxidized a-C surfaces. Understanding the differences between PFPE lubricants on
the freshly deposited a-C films and air-exposed a-C films is needed in order to
help the development of the vapor lubrication process and its transition into
practice. The impact of the proposed project extends quite broadly beyond the
development of a fundamental understanding of the science underlying the
emerging technology of vapor lubrication. The proposed research will have a
direct impact on the technology itself and the PI's connections with the data
storage industry will enable the results of the work to be directly disseminated
to the scientists and engineers within the data storage industry who will
transfer this technology into the commercial sector. The rapid development of
this technology will help the U.S. data storage industry to maintain its
leadership position in an extremely competitive sector. The PI, the co-PIs and
students meet quarterly with the members of the Information Storage Industries
Consortium (INSIC) and with the members of Carnegie Mellon's Data Storage
Systems Center (DSSC). These meetings serve as venues for dissemination of
research results and for feedback from industry while also providing an
excellent opportunity for educating, training, and exposing students to
developments in data storage.