* 0408577
* Modeling Interdependent Infastructures and Optimizing Investments
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Mark Turnquist, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 225,816.00

Our nation's security as well as the quality of life of its citizenry depends on
the continuous reliable operation of a collection of complicated interdependent
infrastructures including transportation, electric power, oil, gas,
telecommunications and emergency services. A disruption in one infrastructure
can quickly and significantly impact another, causing ripples across the nation.
Our infrastructures are increasingly reliant on new information technologies and
the Internet to operate, often being connected to one another via electronic,
informational links. While these technologies allow for enormous gains in
efficiency, they also create new vulnerabilities. The same technology that
allows us to transmit information around the globe at the click of a mouse can
be used to disrupt our vital systems including the flow of electric power or
water, and the dispatch of emergency services. Many of our infrastructures are
privately-owned by companies that face strong pressure for short-term financial
results. This pressure may lead to under-investment for the future. The
confluence of increasing interdependency among infrastructures and increasing
economic pressures implies a significant need to understand how these systems
are interdependent so that systems of infrastructures, or "mega
infrastructures," are less vulnerable to disruption while maintaining their
financial viability. &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of
computationally tractable mathematical models to asse the performance of
interdependent infrastructure and to optimize investment. A key aspect of the
mathematical approach we are taking is the creation of a unifying mathematical
framework to represent these mega infrastructures and a collection of algorithms
that can be used to estimate performance and optimize investment. This unifying
mathematical framework needs to be of sufficient detail to provide an
understanding of the impact of the physical facilities and cyber technologies on
performance, but remain computationally tractable for realistic application. It
must also play explicit attention to the underlying uncertainty in these
systems. A primary focus of this effort is the applicability of Markov and semi-
Markov models for this purpose. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;