* 0408943
* Methods and Models for Stochastic Energy Market Equilibria
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Steven Gabriel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2009
* USD 273,501.00

The project will develop energy market equilibrium models with probabilistic
components and analyze conditions that ensure existence and uniqueness of
solutions. Two modes will be considered, the first one in which a specific
sector such as natural gas will be examined and the second one corresponding to
the overall energy market where sectors (e.g., the coal market) will be modeled
from a high-level perspective. In the sector-specific approach, individual
market players (e.g., natural gas producers, electric power generators) will be
depicted as solving profit maximization problems subject to operational
constraints as well as uncertain demand or other stochastic elements. These
market participants will either be modeled as Nash-Cournot players and thereby
have the potential to assert market power, or perfectly competitive players that
take market prices as given. The simultaneous solution of each of these
optimization problems along with market clearing conditions will lead to a
nonlinear complementarity or variational inequality problem whose solution will
be sought. In the second mode considered, the overall energy sector will be
modeled allowing for certain key elements (e.g., pipeline capacity) to be
uncertain due to man-made or natural occurrences. Existence and uniqueness
issues for the related market equilibria also based on a nonlinear
complementarity/variational inequality approach will be examined. The project
will also develop and analyze efficient algorithms to solve these stochastic
market equilibrium problems making use of decomposition, matrix factorizations,
or recourse approaches. As such, the project will join the two important
disciplines of stochastic optimization and equilibrium modeling. Lastly, the
project will analyze key energy policy scenarios using these
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Modern society depends heavily on many types of
infrastructure to operate efficiently. This infrastructure is in many forms such
as the electric power grid, transportation networks, water treatment facilities,
etc. However, many of these infrastructure elements face risks that threaten to
seriously degrade the societal benefits. For example, recent energy market
deregulation and restructuring have in some cases contributed to large
volatility in energy prices which have adversely affected society. The
instability in certain aspects of the energy sector is troublesome since energy
is vital to many parts of the economy. Thus, risk management in energy can
benefit many areas. To combat these energy infrastructure problems, one can
develop mathematical models to predict how the energy sector will function under
a wide range of scenarios and then plan accordingly by building redundant
systems, using financial instruments or other measures. This project will both
develop and analyze energy market equilibrium models as well as build and
analyze efficient algorithms to solve such problems. These models will directly
take into account uncertain demand or other probabilistic elements to more
accurately reflect the market players' actions when faced with uncertainty.
These models will then be used to analyze certain key energy policy scenarios in
consultation with U.S. energy officials as well as those of other countries as
appropriate. &lt;br/&gt;