* 0408977
* Laboratory Experiments on Rock Friction Focused on Understanding Earthquake Mechanics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Terry Tullis, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2008
* USD 498,939.00

The behavior of rocks during frictional sliding experiments in the laboratory is
reasonably well described by, and forms the basis for, the so-called rate and
state-variable friction laws. In spite of the fact that these laws reproduce a
rich variety of earthquake-related phenomena when employed in models of
earthquakes, the physical mechanisms that occur at the microscopic contacts
between rock surfaces during frictional sliding, which cause the observed rate
and state effects, remain poorly understood. This lack of knowledge precludes
making reliable extrapolation of existing laboratory friction data to the Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of a physical basis for the rate and state
friction laws stems in part from the difficulty of isolating and studying the
behavior of micron-sized contacts between rock surfaces in the laboratory. In
this study a Nanoindenter is used to effectively isolate the deformation
behavior of a single asperity contact using a precisely controlled contact load
and geometry. A constant load is applied to an indenter tip in contact with a
polished geologic specimen. The indenter is then held for a specified time under
constant load (in static indentation tests) or translated across the specimen
under constant load (in sliding indentation tests). The ability to conduct both
static and sliding tests allows indentation tests to be designed which are
analogous to the two most commonly used rock friction tests, the velocity-
stepping test and slide-hold-slide test. The area of the indenter/specimen
contact is determined continuously throughout the indentation tests, allowing
the degree to which changes in contact area effect changes in friction to be
quantified. Mechanical tests are followed by extensive microstructural analyses
of indented specimens using scanning and transmission electron microscopy. The
mechanical tests and microstructural analyses provide fundamental data required
to identify the microphysical mechanisms described by the rate and state
friction laws and thus form a basis for understanding the origin of
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;