* 0408064
* Dissertation Research: Shinisauria (Squamata, Reptilia) and Anguimorph Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Paul Sereno, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 05/31/2006
* USD 5,889.00

Guangxi Province of southern China is the last bastion of an extraordinary
group of animals known as crocodile lizards. Today, there is only one living
member of this group, yet it stretches back to the time of the dinosaurs.
Preliminary anatomical study indicates that members of this group have remained
virtually unchanged for at least 50 million years (Ma). Anatomy of the crocodile
lizard has been very poorly known because this endangered species is extremely
rare in zoological and museum collections. Previous studies of the skeleton were
fraught with errors because of the poor quality of available specimens. This,
coupled with the complete absence of fossils younger than the Cretaceous (65
Ma), has made it very difficult to place this group on the family tree of
lizards. Fortunately, 15 complete specimens from the University of Florida and
the Field Museum of Natural History (FMNH) in Chicago, Illinois will make the
skeletal anatomy of this strange creature accessible to science. The current
project will describe skeletal anatomy and anatomical changes between hatchling
and adults and correct current misconceptions regarding the anatomy of crocodile
lizards. Changes in anatomybetween newborn and adults also will be described in
related lizards. Additionally, FMNH recently acquired a fossil from Wyoming
representing the first known fossil crocodile lizard younger than the
Cretaceous. Preliminary work indicates that the new fossil is all but identical
to the living form. This is significant because of the age of the fossil (about
50 Ma) and the distance separating the two species (living crocodile lizards
come only from East Asia, whereas the fossil is from the western United States).
This project will describe and name the new fossil form and develop a new
systematic analysis to place it on the family tree of lizards. These data will
then be used to address the great anatomical similarity between the fossil and
the living form, which is properly regarded as a "living fossil." Understanding
the placement of any animal group on the tree of life is central to studying
evolutionary processes (such as long-term persistence of anatomical forms, as
evidenced by crocodile lizards) and to developing hypotheses about the origin
and history of biological diversity. Additionally, the new family tree will be
used to compare the occurrences of crocodile lizards to other groups with
similar distributions. For example, several groups of fossil and living fishes
exhibit remarkably similar distributions, which means that the study of
crocodile lizards may become broadly significant to interpreting the history of
the western North American and Asian landmasses. &lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts of
this study include: 1) training of a doctoral student in vertebrate anatomy and
systematics; 2) the first detailed anatomical study of the crocodile lizard, a
globally endangered species that has been very poorly studied up to now and that
has excellent potential to attract broad public interest in science and global
change because of its rarity and interesting fossil record; 3) description and
naming of a remarkable new and important fossil species; 4) dissemination of
research findings via scientific publications, lectures and websites; 5)
inclusion of 3-dimensional images of crocodile lizards on the Digital Morphology
Website at the University of Texas (http://www.digimorph.org/index.phtml; note
that this site attracts a great deal of interest from non-scientists because of
its arresting 3-D images of animal skeletons based on cat-scanning technology);
6) training of inner-city high school students in Chicago through BioOutreach
and Project Exploration, two programs designed to excite student interest in
science and augment their regular classroom experiences. &lt;br/&gt;