* 0408994
* Exploring Flood Mitigation Policy: A System Dynamics Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Thomas Birkland, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 05/31/2008
* USD 199,334.00

This project applies system dynamics tools to understand key features of flood
hazard mitigation policy and behavior. Floods are among the costliest natural
hazards in the United States, account for the largest category of federal
disaster declarations, and the flood hazard is broadly distributed across the
United States. System dynamics is an approach to policy analysis and design that
applies to problems arising in complex social, managerial, economic, or
ecological systems. This approach allows us to identify key features of the
policy process that may not be detected by more traditional research techniques.
This is because inherent in the system dynamics approach is the accumulation of
knowledge from experts in the problem being studied, followed by model building
and testing, and then followed by validation of the model by the experts. The
model is then refined and tested again, in an iterative process that yields a
model that evolves to more accurately represent the system being studied. This
research will attract hazards researchers to the system dynamics approach, and
will attract the interest of system dynamics researchers to studying natural
hazards policy. The combination of what is known about mitigation policy with
the power of the analytic tool will yield new insights into how policy is made
and how it is improved. This research will be valuable to policy makers who
support more effective flood mitigation. Our research method will bring together
researchers and decision makers. The results of this research will be applicable
to other hazards, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, or technological hazards,
such as aviation safety. Once these models are developed, we will be able to
isolate the intended and, equally importantly, the unintended consequences of
current and proposed mitigation and prevention policies. This project is
therefore the beginning of a long-term research program involving the use of
systems tools to more clearly understand the impediments to and the
opportunities for improved hazard mitigation policies.