* 0408083
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Role of Multiple Infections in the Evolution of Virulence
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Stephen Stearns, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2006
* USD 15,345.00

This research builds on field and laboratory work investigating the prevalence
of multiple trypanosome infections in the Serengeti by experimentally addressing
a central question of disease evolution. Theory predicts that competition among
different parasites in one host animal will lead to increased severity
(virulence) of each parasite, but empirical support for this prediction is
scarce. To test the prediction, mice will be infected with different strains of
Trypanosoma brucei, protozoan parasites of great economic and medical
importance. Three parasite strains, visually distinguishable by different
fluorescent markers introduced into their genomes, will be repeatedly passed
through mice alone or in combinations. Parasites will then be isolated from
mixed infections and their effect on mice will be measured to determine whether
they have evolved to higher virulence than the same parasites in single
infections, as theory would predict.&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of the
proposed experiment is to provide for a critical test of the effect of multiple
infections on parasite virulence. The resulting empirical data will help put
virulence evolution theory on a better foundation. The proposed research will
have broader impact by improving our understanding of parasite and disease
dynamics. As an international collaboration it will also transfer knowledge
among institutions in the United States, Europe, and Africa.&lt;br/&gt;