* 0408807
* Constitutive Modeling for Mechanical Response of Ionomer-Based Nano-Phase Composite Laminates
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Kenneth Reifsnider, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/2006
* USD 40,000.00

CMS 0408807 Constitutive Modeling for Mechanical Response of Nano-Phase
Composite Laminates &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ken Reifsnider and Xinyu Huang
&lt;br/&gt;Global Fuel Cell Center, ME Department, UCONN &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A major concentration of the national
initiative to develop fuel cell power systems is focused on Proton Exchange
Membrane (PEM) cells, which use polymer-based composite laminates and membranes.
Durability has been identified by several current national studies as the most
important barrier to progress in this important enterprise, so the question of
mechanical behavior is an essential issue. The present program will address
three high risk aspects of this barrier. It will make the first attempt to
construct constitutive concepts for the fully nonlinear and anisotropic
mechanical response of &lt;br/&gt;ionomeric membranes, attempt to identify a
failure criterion for such membranes, and identify the strain-rate dependence of
that failure criterion using classical stress-rupture concepts. The broader
impact of this program will be to remove a critical barrier to the design of
durable fuel cells to enable a sustainable society by introducing the findings
of the program into courses taught by the Connecticut Global Fuel Cell Center.
&lt;br/&gt;