* 0408130
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Oxygen Isotope Signatures and the Identification of Chert in the Southern Plains
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* David Meltzer, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2006
* USD 11,820.00

Under the supervision of Dr. David J. Meltzer, Joanna Roberson will investigate
the application of oxygen isotope analysis as a method for identifying the
source of the chert - a cryptocrystalline sedimentary rock - used by late Ice
Age peoples on the Southern Plains of western North America. Chert has
properties that make it an excellent material for producing stone tools, but
because outcrops of this stone are geologically uncommon and scattered in the
Southern Plains, these hunters and gatherers often had to track great distances
across the landscape to obtain the stone. Thus, knowing where stone was quarried
becomes a means of revealing just how far groups had to move to obtain this
resource vital to their tool-making, and therefore opens an important window
into understanding human adaptations to what was a very different landscape than
is present today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, identifying the source of the
stone in use is complicated, not least because of problems that stem from the
nature of chert itself. Complex formation processes can create great diversity
among cherts, including visible, microscopic, and chemical variations. In
addition, some cherts have extensive geographic distributions, while others have
look-alikes that occur elsewhere, and still others may not be documented or even
visible today. This research will test the feasibility of identifying chert
through isotopic analyses of elemental oxygen, a technique common in geology,
but not regularly used on chert in archaeology. While other methods are hindered
by the variations in chert, oxygen isotope analysis may, in fact, benefit.
Oxygen isotopic ratios (18O/16O) vary according to the environmental origin of
the material in which the oxygen occurs, such that the isotopic make-up of chert
reflects the original sources of the sediments, the local conditions of chert
deposition, and any post-depositional influences. Thus, isotopic ratios are
expected to exhibit measurable variation between chert sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this method can improve stone sourcing by
eliminating ambiguity in identification methods, by discriminating between
visually similar materials, and by recognizing variability between spatially
separated outcrops of a single material type. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
this study will focus on chert sources and artifacts from the Southern Plains,
if the method proves viable it will be of great use to archaeologists working in
any geographic region and chronological period, and is thus poised to make
important contributions beyond this area. Moreover, by bringing together
archaeologists and geologists, it will have a broader impact by fostering inter-
disciplinary relationships and encouraging others to seek solutions to research
problems from diverse and unconventional sources. Such collaborations will make
great contributions to numerous disciplines, as techniques and information are
shared between research fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;