* 0408945
* Rheology of Liquefied Sands
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Pedro de Alba, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2008
* USD 168,629.00

When an earth dam is subjected to earthquake loading, it is possible that
certain zones within the embankment will liquefy, and their strength will be
reduced to a low, residual, value until the excess pore water pressures causing
liquefaction can dissipate. Embankments that are especially vulnerable in this
regard are old hydraulic fills, and tailings embankments required by mining
operations. Decisions regarding the safety of these embankments often hinge on
assessing their post-earthquake stability assuming that certain zones within the
dam have liquefied and their strength has been reduced to a small residual
value. Current geotechnical engineering practice is to use residual strength
values obtained from back-analysis of embankment failures. Unfortunately, there
is a large scatter in these values. Recent experiments suggest that residual
strength may depend on the velocity of motion of the sliding mass, i.e.
liquefied sands behave as Bingham plastics, exhibiting a small threshold
strength which increases with sliding velocity, and thus the residual strength
at any moment during sliding depends on the particular geometry of the sliding
mass. This may explain in part why there is so much scatter in back-analysis
values. The proposed testing program will attempt to quantify, under controlled
conditions, the extent to which the residual strength of liquefied granular
materials is rate-dependent and the liquefied soil behaves as Bingham plastic. A
ring shear device of new design is proposed for these tests. The materials to be
tested represent a range of granular soils susceptible to liquefaction and flow.
The test results will provide basic insight into the influence of such variables
as gradation, fines content and plasticity of fines on rate-dependent residual
strength values, applicable to the analysis of loose contractive materials in
embankments and natural slopes subjected to earthquake loading. If, as expected,
there is a significant variation of residual strength with strain rate in
granular soils, there will be an important impact on analyses of earth
embankments under earthquake loading, and on runout analyses of debris flows and
tailings. In embankment dam stability analyses, the minimum threshold residual
strength at very low strain rates would have to be employed; runout analyses
would consider a range of strength values depending on the geometry and
potential velocities of the sliding mass. These same factors will have to be
considered in back-calculating residual strengths from field case histories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of the proposed ring shear device will make
available to the profession a new tool for studying the impact of other
variables (e.g. partial drainage during sliding) on post-liquefaction behavior
of natural sands under controlled conditions, as well as permitting the study of
other materials such as tailings produced by different ore processing
techniques. From the point of view of teaching and training, the design of the
load control system for the ring shear device will be an excellent capstone
design project for senior undergraduates in mechanical engineering, and will
provide a beneficial interaction between the mechanical engineering students and
at least one civil engineering graduate student; it is also hoped that one or
more civil engineering undergraduates may be involved in the project through the
university's very active undergraduate research opportunity program
(UROP).&lt;br/&gt;