* 0408803
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2004
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Anita Fernandez, Fernandez               Anita          G
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2007
* USD 170,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2004.
The goal of the fellowship is to increase the participation of minority
scientists at the postdoctoral level and to prepare them for positions of
scientific leadership in academia and industry. To attain this goal, the
fellowship provides opportunities for postdoctoral training and research of the
highest quality to recent doctoral recipients. It is expected that Fellows
supported through these fellowships will play important roles in training of the
future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and training plan is
entitled "Functional genomic approach to DNA replication in embryogenesis using
Caenorhabditis elegans." To identify genes essential for basic cellular
processes, RNA interference (RNAi) is being used in C. elegans to identify and
study embryonic lethal genes. Genes that function in the same process often
cluster together on the basis of shared phenotypes, facilitating functional
prediction for novel genes found in that cluster. Early embryonic phenotypes are
being recorded using time-lapse imaging and genes that show similar phenotypes
will be placed into putative functional groups. To test the idea that phenotype-
based clustering can accurately predict gene function, new genes hypothesized to
act in DNA replication will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training goals
are to obtain a systems-level view of this fundamental cellular process using
tools of functional genomics. This will lay the foundation for establishing an
independent research program at a teaching and research institution.&lt;br/&gt;