* 0408882
* U.S.- Czech Research on Environmental Policy Learning and Capacity Development
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2003,04/30/2006
* JoAnn Carmin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 44,483.00

The goal of this U.S.-Czech research project between JoAnn Carmin of Virginia
Polytechnic and Sate University and partners from the University of Economics,
Prague, is to educate junior researchers and to strengthen the theoretical
foundation for assessments of environmental policy learning and capacity
development in situations related to natural disasters, such as flooding. As a
European Union accession country, the Czech Republic faces the challenge of
setting resilient policies and practices that comply with EU directives. The
principal investigator and her partners, Jirina Jilkova and Zdenek Kopecky,
maintain that learning and adaptation are central to sound policy. In this
context, the team of U.S. and Czech social scientists and graduate students
plans to examine current Czech capacity for informed environmental policy by
answering questions related to their experience with: 1) disaster processes that
focused on enhancement of regulatory mechanisms, technical capabilities and
resource availability and 2) a mix of public, private, and civil society actors
and institutions that contributed to governmental capacity to implement and
sustain environmental policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a means for understanding
environmental learning and capacity development, the researchers will examine
elements of one focusing event, the Czech floods of 2002. The significance of
the floods will allow the researchers to draw timely conclusions that will be
applicable to both theory and practice. Specific attention will be paid to
institutional and organizational change in the four dimensions of capacity
addressed by this study: policy, scientific and technical, economic, and
nongovernmental. Results are expected to lead to a refined rubric for
identifying procedural underpinnings that can support and sustain the
implementation and enforcement of policy and
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the collaborative research should
generate policy relevant information that can be used by Czechs decision-makers
or others in countries and communities that must cope with the consequences of
natural disasters. Furthermore, by integrating students with all phases of the
research process and providing them with mentoring, they will gain valuable
international experience in assessing responsiveness to environmental focusing
events. This project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.