* 0408895
* The impact of physical heterogeneity and connectivity on LNAPL entrapment and dissolution
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Stephen Silliman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2008
* USD 144,026.00

0408895 Silliman

This work examines the transport behavior of LNAPLs in the region bounding the
water table. Defined as the Partially Saturated Fringe, or PSF (Berkowitz et
al., 2003), the region bounding the water table includes the classic Capillary
Fringe (CF) and the region below the water table in which multiple phases (air,
water, and/or LNAPL) are present. This work builds on prior work within our
laboratory on Air Entry Barriers (e.g., Silliman et al., 2002; Dunn and
Silliman, 2003; Dunn et al., 2003) as well as the substantial literature on
LNAPL behavior (e.g., Nambi and Powers, 2000; Illangasekare et al., 1995a,b;
Schroth et al., 1998; Walser et al., 1999; Van Dijke and Van Der Zee, 1997). Of
particular interest for the present study is the interaction of the structure of
heterogeneity and the distribution / dissolution of LNAPLs under conditions of a
fluctuating water table. The work is based on a combination of two-dimensional
laboratory and numerical experiments on the distribution of pure- and dissolved-
phase LNAPL in a two-zone porous medium (coarse sand and fine sand). Within the
laboratory, visual and TDR techniques will be used to monitor LNAPL saturation.
Mass of dissolved-phase LNAPL constituents will be monitored at the outflow from
the porous media. Numerical experiments will be performed on simulated random
and scaled porous media and T2VOC, an extension of TOUGH2 [Transport Of
Unsaturated Groundwater and Heat, version II], developed at Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory. These experiments will be based on generating a series of
realizations of random distributions of the coarse and fine sands (based on both
stationary random permeability distributions and structured permeability
distributions), followed by simulation of a fluctuating water table with
significant LNAPL phase above the original water table. The laboratory
experiments will be utilized to verify LNAPL behavior as predicted by the
numerical model, as well as to provide visualization of LNAPL behavior. The
numerical model will be utilized to address the central hypotheses: The degree
of connectivity (defined within the proposal) of coarse sand lenses within a
fine sand matrix will influence the amount of LNAPL entrapped within the PSF.
Specifically, as the connectivity of the coarse regions increases (with the same
relative volume of coarse and fine sands), the volume of entrapped LNAPL will
decrease. An increase in the degree of connectivity of coarse sand lenses within
a fine sand matrix will result in a reduced overall rate of dissolution of LNAPL
entrapped within the PSF. In terms of intellectual merit, this work advances the
understanding of controls of LNAPL distribution and dissolution in the PSF. From
a theoretical standpoint, this provides greater insight into the impact of
physical structure on transport characteristics near the water table. From an
applied standpoint, extension of this work holds promise for innovative means of
remediation of LNAPL contaminated systems. In terms of broader impact, this work
will provide training for one Ph.D. and one Masters student, as well as
contributing to undergraduate and graduate courses in groundwater hydrology and
remediation. In addition, this work will aid in further development of research
collaborations with colleagues in western Africa (Benin).