* 0408890
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Gustavo Azenha, Azenha                  Gustavo        S
* Fellowship
* Fahmida N. Chowdhury
* 10/31/2008
* USD 160,000.00

This Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences Minority Post-Doctoral Research
and Training Fellowship is a comparative examination of the cultural and
economic impacts and implications of recent innovations in computer technologies
on youths and young adults in Salvador (Bahia, Brazil) and New York City. Using
a combination of ethnographic, historical, and discursive approaches to examine
differences between Brazilian and American perceptions and uses of digital
sampling and computer networking technologies in music making practices, the
researcher will explore how differences in culture and access to computers
inform the ways technologies are viewed and appropriated, and how technologies
and music participate in the rearticulation of cultural boundaries. A better
understanding of the complexities of cross-cultural differences in access to and
use of computer technologies is essential for the development of more
appropriate discussions, initiatives, and policies aimed at minimizing the role
of technologies as agents of social exclusion. Music technologies provide a
particularly apt vehicle for developing a more nuanced understanding of the
cultural impacts and implications of globalizing technologies. Music is both
formative and indicative of cultural and political identity among youths and
young adults, the groups most engaged with computer and computer-networking
technologies. Music also plays a primary role in shaping perceptions of other
cultures, serving as a means to both reproduce and transcend cultural boundaries
and prejudices. With recent innovations in computer and computer networking
technologies, music has become one of the most salient, mobile, and widely
circulated forms of cultural exchange, thus, reinforcing its role as a prime
mediator of cross-cultural perceptions. Recent innovations in computer and
computer-networking technologies have profoundly altered the way music is
produced in several ways: (1) It is possible to cheaply produce professional-
quality music with home computers; (2) Computer-based digital sampling
technologies have blurred the conventional lines between musical production and
consumption, allowing composers to appropriate and re-contextualize any existing
sound source (both foreign and domestic); (3) Internet technologies have allowed
for the development of transnational computer music technology fora through
which geographically-dispersed communities exchange technical knowledge and
circulate music and software for music production. Together, the relative ease
and lower costs of music production, the increased accessibility of and use of
preexisting sounds in music production, and the increased role of transnational
communication and exchange in mediating the use of technology have fostered the
emergence of subcultures oriented around novel musical forms that synthesize
disparate cultural elements. Included among these, are culturally hybrid musics
that employ digital sampling technologies to synthesize North American and
European urban dance music with traditional Brazilian musical elements. This
study argues that musicians in Salvador and New York City view themselves as
participating in a cosmopolitan technoculture forged around computer music
technologies and culturally hybrid musics. Despite this shared participation in
social processes, different cultural, linguistic, political, economic, and
technological contexts yield disparate ways in which people symbolically and
practically engage in this community and in the technologies and music around
which it is oriented. Although Brazilian sampling practices can often bear
similar meanings to those of North American artists, the uses of computer music
technologies have distinct meanings that address, react to, and seek to
transform local contexts. These contexts not only inform the meanings of samples
and sampling, but the particular ways in which technological tools are used to
manipulate sounds. This study argues that the different ways in which
technologies and music are appropriated and re-contextualized, are indicative
and formative of perceived cultural differences and changing relations between
Brazilian and American youth. Extensive interviews will be conducted with
computer music technology users to understand the different ways in which
computer technologies are socialized and their role in mediating interviewees'
relationships to music and other cultures.

