* 0408300
* Harvey Mudd College Mathematics Conference Series
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Lesley Ward, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 09/30/2007
* USD 26,481.00

This award will support a series of annual mathematics conferences begun in 1999
and held at Harvey Mudd College in Claremont, California. These conferences,
unusual because the topics vary from year to year, are designed to expose
faculty and advanced undergraduate students to cutting-edge mathematics, and to
enhance the Harvey Mudd College research environment by fostering interactions
between its students and faculty and the participants of the conference. This
award will provide support for four speakers, a contributed poster session, and
a community-wide pre-conference talk. It will also significantly broaden the
geographic participation in the conferences by providing travel support for
graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s, with &lt;br/&gt;preference given to
members of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By bringing topflight
researchers to Harvey Mudd College each fall, the conferences expose
participants to a wide range of mathematics. Past topics have included analysis,
applied mathematics, differential geometry, applied algebra and combinatorics,
and mathematical biology. The planned topics for the conferences covered by this
award are: geometry, algebra, and phylogenetic trees (2004); scientific
computing (2005); and enumerative combinatorics (2006). The conferences give
rise to activities and projects in mathematics &lt;br/&gt;courses taught at
Harvey Mudd College. They also serve as a convenient gathering place for
mathematicians and mathematics students in Southern California, fostering
interaction and collaboration in several mathematical communities. With
community-wide pre-conference talks that emphasize the impact and beauty of
mathematics, these conferences will annually influence over 250 people,
encouraging mathematical research while also strengthening public awareness of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;