* 0408996
* Real-time Fine-grained Adaptivity on Multiprocessors: Acoustic Tracking as a Test Case
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* James Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 07/31/2007
* USD 358,300.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: 0408996&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
Anderson, James H.&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of NC Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
TITLE: Real-time Fine-grained Adaptivity on Multiproces-sors: Acoustic Tracking
as a Test Case&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two trends are evident
in recent work on real-time systems. First, multiprocessor de-signs are becoming
quite common. Second, many applications now exist that require fine-grained
adaptivity, i.e., the ability to react to events within short time scales by ad-
justing task parameters. Examples of such applications include systems that
track people and machines, many computer-vision systems, and signal-processing
applications such as synthetic aperture imaging. The goal of this project is to
develop techniques for imple-menting such systems on tightly-coupled
multiprocessors. The central thesis of this pro-ject is that this goal can best
be met by using multiprocessor fair scheduling algorithms. Such algorithms are
designed to mimic the allocations of an ideal fluid scheduler, which can react
instantaneously to workload changes, while still ensuring real-time
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key objectives of this project include the
development of (i) multiprocessor scheduling algorithms that facilitate
adaptation, (ii) kernel services for synchronization and I/O to be used in
conjunction with these algorithms, and (iii) mechanisms for determining how and
when to adapt. The resulting platform is to be evaluated by implementing a
spread-spectrum acoustic full-body tracking system for virtual environments. The
proposed tracking system is a good surrogate for the wide range of highly-
adaptive computation-ally-intensive real-time applications that exist. Results
of this research will be dissemi-nated through publications. Any software of
general utility that is produced will be made publically available on the web.
This study will lead to a better understanding of the re-source-allocation
issues unique to real-time applications with fine-grained adaptivity re-
quirements implemented on multiprocessors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D.
Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;June 25,
2004&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;