* 0408041
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Phylogeny of Caesalpinioid Legumes from the Guyana Shield
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Patrick Herendeen, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 04/30/2006
* USD 11,975.00

The legume family (650 genera/~18,000 species) is the third largest family of
flowering plants and the second most economically important family. The
subfamily Caesalpinioideae has received relatively little attention and recent
morphological and molecular evidence suggests this subfamily may not be a
natural group. Part of the reason for the uncertain status and relationships of
the members of the Caesalpinioideae is that many of the genera and their species
are poorly known and rarely collected. The study of plant taxonomy and phylogeny
is inherently dependent on field work, many times in remote areas, which is the
case for caesalpinioid legumes in general, and in this study in particular. The
research outlined in this proposal will provide monographic revisions and
species-level phylogenetic hypotheses for a group of poorly known caesalpinioid
legume genera that are endemic to the Guiana Shield area of South America
(Venezuela, Suriname, French Guiana, and Guyana). Funding from the NSF DDIG
program will allow Ms. Redden to travel to museums in Venezuela and Europe to
examine herbarium material that is needed for this study, and to conduct field
work in southern Venezuela to collect plant specimens, dried leaf samples, and
pickled flowers for study. A total of five weeks will be spent in the Sierra de
la Neblina area of Venezuela. While in Venezuela, Ms. Redden will also visit
five herbaria to gather information on plant characteristics and distribution
for the monographic and phylogenetic aspects of this study. The primary
objectives Ms. Reddens dissertation are to provide a systematic revision of five
key genera of the group (Dicymbe, Paloue, Paloveopsis, Heterostemon and
Elizabetha) and to study morphological evolution, especially floral morphology,
in this group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working directly with Venezuelan scientists,
students, and local communities is an essential part of this study. These
activities will enhance collaboration with Venezuelan botanists, including
students, and will contribute to broader studies of relationships within
Caesalpinioideae. While conducting research in the Venezuelan herbaria Ms.
Redden will examine and photograph specimens, verify identifications, and
identify unknown material wherever possible. In addition to locating important
specimens for her research, Ms. Reddens herbarium work in Venezuela will help to
improve their collections. We have been working with Dr. Basil Sterigos with the
Universidad Nacional Experimental de los Llanos Occidentales Ezequil
Zamora(UNELLEZ) in planning the field work. Dr. Stergios and his student will
accompany Ms. Redden on the field expedition. This expedition will not only
contribute vital information to the dissertation project, it will also document
biological diversity in Venezuela. Voucher specimens will be made for the
Smithsonian Institution (US), Herbario Universitario BioCentro-UNELLEZ (PORT),
and Herbario Nacional de Venezuela (VEN). In addition to the plant collections,
all other information will also be shared with UNELLEZ. Photographs, GPS
coordinates, field notebooks, and other data also will be copied and left with
UNELLEZ.&lt;br/&gt;