* 0408661
* Collaborative Research: Implications of Active Tectonics in Morocco for the Kinematics and Dynamics of Africa-Eurasia Plate Interactions in the Western Mediterranean
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Francisco Gomez, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2008
* USD 144,636.00

This project is using Global Positioning System (GPS) repeat observations, and
Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) to monitor active deformation
in Morocco associated with ongoing "collision" of the African plate with Iberia
(Eurasia). Additionally, neotectonic and paleoseismic studies are helping better
determine the relation between ongoing deformation, earthquake generation, and
the development of geologic structures. Toward these ends, the investigators are
upgrading three continuous GPS (CGPS) stations (Rabat, Tetouan, Ifrane) and
establishing a new CGPS station near Agadir. These stations provide highly
precise estimates of Africa (Nubia) plate motion as well as strong constraints
on intraplate deformation, including anticipated shortening across the Atlas
Mountains in central Morocco. In addition, the Moroccan CGPS network provides a
framework for integrating survey-mode GPS observations that provide dense
coverage to isolate individual, active structures. The relationship between
interseismic deformation (as recorded by GPS and InSAR) and the earthquake cycle
are being investigate with paleoseismic techniques. A major focus of our work is
the Rif Mountains in northwestern Morocco that exhibit rapid SW motions relative
to the African plate as a whole. GPS and InSAR measurements are better defining
the special and temporal character of these anomalous motions. Using the
improved deformation results, quantitative models to test extrusion models
(crust being squeezed out of the collision zone) as well as models of crustal
deformation associated with dynamic processes in the mantle (active subduction,
lithospheric delamination) are being developed.