* 0408668
* SGER: Holocene Variability of the South Pacific Westerly Wind Field
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Robert Dunbar, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2005
* USD 59,581.00

This award, under the auspices of the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
(SGER) program, will support the collection of a series of ~3.0 meter-long lake
sediment cores from Lago Fagnano for a "proof-of-concept" analysis to determine
which chemical tracers, if any, may be most useful for future paleoclimate
studies. Situated within the Andean Cordillera of Tierra del Fuego, Lago Fagnano
trends East to West across the boundary between Argentina and Chile and is the
southernmost large (~120 km long) ice-free body of fresh water on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lago Fagnano lies in the path of the modern global
southern hemisphere westerly wind system and is affected by tropical,
subtropical, and polar ocean-atmosphere interactions. The Southern Hemisphere
Westerly winds are thought to have played an important role in the regulation of
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration, the timing and style of deglaciation,
and the character of the hydrologic water balance over much of southern South
America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific specifics are sparse regarding such
past environmental variability, however, so this is a somewhat risky expedition.
Lago Fagnano is a deep lake (&gt;270 meters) in a high rainfall region of high
topographic relief so the researchers expect that they have a good chance of
recovering high sedimentation rate cores from the lake. This will help provide
good age control that is critical to a well-calibrated paleoclimate record from
the lake cores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher and his colleagues will
collect basic information about lake bathymetry, sediment distribution, and the
basin-scale hydrologic regime in order to constrain some of the scientific risks
and uncertainty associated with the region. The researcher will join Swiss and
American colleagues in conducting a preliminary geophysical study of Lago
Fagnano, utilizing high-resolution seismic reflection profiling that will be
combined with a limited sediment piston coring campaign using available
geophysical control for identification of suitable sediment accumulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the researchers are able to retrieve a high-resolution
record of environmental change extending into the past, this will help move the
paleoclimate research community forward from the standpoint of new data from a
data sparse region of potential climatic importance.