* 0408243
* Collaborative Research:    Improving USAR Preparedness Using Simulation Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2008
* Benigno Aguirre, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 11/30/2008
* USD 245,051.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IMPROVING USAR PREPAREDNESS USING SIMULATION
TECHNOLOGY&lt;br/&gt;Sherif El-Tawil and Benigno
Aguirre&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: When a building collapses due
to a catastrophic event, stable voids are inevitably formed in the rubble pile.
These voids occur as a result of falling structural and nonstructural elements
that interact together in a favorable manner to create spaces in which victims
may find shelter. Since as many as one third of all building collapse victims
that are rescued are found in such spaces, the primary objective of this
research is to use state-of-the-art finite element simulations to investigate
how, and under what conditions, they are formed. Other secondary objectives are
to: 1) create effective training tools based on validated finite element models
coupled with virtual reality visualization tools that can be used for training
USAR personnel, and 2) develop knowledge that could form the basis of public
education and awareness programs to help untrained, impromptu rescuers as well
as urban search and rescue taskforces operate more effectively and safely at a
collapsed building site. The research will be conducted as a collaborative
effort between the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the
University of Michigan (UM) and the Disaster Research Center (DRC) at the
University of Delaware. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The products of
the proposed research will be of value to building code associations,
architects, engineers, and other professionals involved in building
construction. The results will help them make choices of infrastructure design,
space-function interrelationships, the creation of building search and rescue
policies, staff training, and other matters to maximize survivability during and
in the aftermath of building collapse. Moreover, the results will also be of
great benefit in guiding and improving the operations of emergent groups of
volunteers and SAR taskforces at the federal, state, and local levels at sites
of building collapse. As importantly, the project will assist the NSF in its
ongoing programmatic efforts to show the practical implications of sound science
as well as the important payoffs of interdisciplinary cooperation in sociology
and engineering. Project results will also constitute an extended example of
induced social change guided by engineering science of importance to the
sociology of disasters. &lt;br/&gt;