* 0408389
* An Unconstrained Sliding Friction Model and an Application to the Folsom Dam
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Richard Goodman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2008
* USD 301,281.00

We are undertaking a fundamental curiosity driven project that has immediate
implications for public safety. The intellectual merit rests in development of
an analytical technique to model laterally unconstrained shear displacement of a
gravity loaded block. The public safety issue concerns safety of the Corps of
Engineer's Folsom Dam. Completed in 1955, the structure is located just east of
Folsom, California, and holds back over one million acre-feet of water. Between
Folsom Dam and downtown Sacramento, the American River flows through one of the
most densely populated regions in California. Recent calculations made with
original surface topographic data have produced some unacceptably low factors of
safety for seismic scenarios involving independent sliding of the monoliths, in
which case there might be little or no lateral constraint on a given block.
Co-P.I. Richard Goodman is a member of the Folsom Dam Outlets Modification
Project external review panel, giving us unique access to existing topographic
data on surface profiles beneath the Folsom monoliths. This enables us to
approximately duplicate actual surface profiles in test samples, as well as to
use the topographic data to analytically estimate the stability of the dam.
There is currently no general analytical model for laterally unconstrained
sliding, even if full topographic information is available for the entirety of
both sliding surfaces (as in the case of Folsom Dam). We are developing a
mathematical sliding model that takes into account the unconstrained boundary
conditions, offering a prediction of the 3-D failure (dilation) route. We are
utilizing the properties of functionals and examining relatively simple tests on
rough surfaces to develop an analytic energy-based equation describing
unconstrained sliding. Minimizing virtual work and setting constraints which
reflect the interaction of the surfaces between which contact points are sliding
allows the calculation of the lowest energy path of each sliding point along the
surface. This methodology is being extended over the candidate set of likely
contact points to describe the net motion of a rough block sliding over a rough
surface, which is not a trivial problem because the contacting set of asperities
changes with displacement. The equation will be empirically refined and extended
to the semi-constrained case. Experimental verification of the proposed model is
being carried out using a simple but entirely new device, which allows virtually
unconstrained lateral motions in the principle directions. This device is being
incorporated into the specialized acoustic emission (AE) shear testing facility
built for a previous NSF grant. The upper loading platen for the normal load has
embedded within 24 Glaser/NIST-type high-fidelity AE sensors which yields full
quantitative time-domain waveforms from local movements on the sliding surfaces.
The overdetermination of the present problem allows for extremely accurate
source location in 3-D space and inversion for the detailed source kinematics
expressed as a moment tensor. Besides the life safety issues, broader impacts
include the furthering of our understanding of frictional behavior of
unconstrained blocks. This will provide a tool for many other researchers in a
variety of fields. Basic knowledge of the interaction and behaviors of
interacting asperities will grow out of the inversion of AE data for source
kinematics, which has important implications for fault rupture modeling and
energy release estimates. This work is a direct outgrowth of the P.I.'s previous
work. The P.I. works closely with Berkeley's Center for Underrepresented
Engineering Students (CUES), in addition to the SUPERB and CAMP programs. We are
presently using the Berkeley Edge to assist in finding qualified graduate
students for the proposed project. The Berkeley Edge, partially funded by the
National Science Foundation, is a recruitment, retention, and advancement
program for traditionally underrepresented minority graduate students in
science, mathematics, and engineering. In addition, the P.I. directly involves
undergraduate students in all aspects of his research program (4 currently), and
supervises students with backgrounds in electrical engineering, physics, and
IEOR. This interdisciplinearity forces all the students to grow technically and
to respect other disciplines and ways of approaching problems.