* 0408715
* GOALI: Materials Integration of III-V Compounds for Electronic Device Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Mark Goorsky, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2007
* USD 293,441.00

This is a GOALI project with collaboration between UCLA and Northrop Grumman
Space Technology (NGST, formerly TRW). The project addresses materials science
research issues relevant to III-V semiconductor wafer bonded template substrates
having high bulk resistivity and appropriate surface lattice constants for large
lattice parameter materials, and with compatible thermal expansion coefficients.
Research areas include: (i) bonding and polishing of the templates to a GaAs,
InP, or silicon substrate, (ii) ion splitting (hydrogen-based) of InP and InAs
substrates and InAlAs graded buffer layers, (iii) strain modeling and
measurement of the composite structure to, for example, determine the influence
of thermal expansion differences on the stability of the structures, (iv)
epitaxial growth of strained layers and of device structures on wafer bonded
substrates, and (v) electronic and structural characterization. Carrier
transport, photoluminescence, infrared and x-ray imaging will be implemented, as
well as transmission electron microscopy, and atomic force microscopy.
Applications involve structures with an intermediate dielectric bonding layer.
An objective is to develop III-V based wafer bond templates for subsequent
epitaxial growth of device structures using non-compliant layers. Issues of
layer exfoliation, polishing, thermal-mismatch induced strain, and stability
during annealing and epitaxial growth will be studied, as will the electronic
properties of wafer-bonded structures. An important component of the proposed
research is quantification of defects formed in wafer-bonded structures under
different processing conditions. The template layers to be used are InP, InAs,
and InAlAs layers wafer-bonded to GaAs (or InP or silicon) substrates with
silicon nitride bonding layers. The test vehicle to address the relationship
between structural properties and electronic performance is a high electron
mobility transistor (HEMT) structure fabricated using high indium mole fraction
InGaAs channels grown on the template layers. %%% The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of electronic materials with high
technological relevance. An important feature of the project is the strong
emphasis on education, with emphasis on integration of research and education.
Broader impacts of the project include industrial collaboration, and
collaboration with the UCLA Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity.
Undergraduate and high school students will be involved in the project. Wafer
bonding lessons will be developed for a Grassroots Science Program that targets
5th and 6th grade students with hands-on science demonstrations. Results from
the research will also be highlighted in both undergraduate and graduate
courses. The industrial GOALI collaborations will also broaden the educational
experience of graduate students involved in the project, provide access to
technologically advanced processing tools not widely available to university
researchers, and increase technological exchanges through seminars and
presentations. The multidisciplinary and collaborative nature of the project
provides education and training in the areas of materials processing,
characterization, and prototype device fabrication/operation. ***