* 0408094
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Theories of Adaptive Radiations: A Test Using the Family Percidae (Teleostei: Perciformes)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Richard Mayden, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 11,905.00

Dr. Richard L. Mayden and Mr. Nicholas J. Lang of Saint Louis University will
study the evolution and ecology of the family Percidae; a Holarctic group of
freshwater fishes. The family is comprised of 10 genera and over 200 species
distributed across North America and Eurasia. The North American endemic tribe
Etheostomatini (4 genera and nearly 200 species) represents the vast majority of
species-level diversity within the family. This group of fishes exhibits many
characteristics of the classic adaptive radiations (African rift lake cichlids,
Galapagos finches) including high diversity, strong sexual dimorphism, and a
range of ecological specializations. Recent theoretical advances have allowed
for the objective identification and characterization of adaptive radiations. In
order to implement these tests within the percids, the awardees will construct a
hypothesis of evolutionary relationships within the family using nuclear and
mitochondrial DNA sequences, as well as morphological and behavioral characters.
These relationships will be used to identify and test hypotheses about the
processes through which adaptive radiations form.

This project will train a doctoral student. In addition, adaptive radiations
are, quite literally, the foundation for modern ideas about evolutionary
biology. Recently devised methods have allowed biologists to focus on those
groups of organisms that display a wide range of adaptations regardless of how
many species are included. This has focused research on groups that have evolved
into new niches instead of those that have many species within a retained
ancestral niche. Darters (the common name for Etheostomatine fishes) are a
diverse group that inhabits many niches in all possible types of freshwater
bodies in North America. There are several lineages of darters, each of which
inhabits a characteristic microhabitat. While representatives of divergent
lineages often segregate by microhabitat within a local fauna, it is rare for
closely related species to inhabit the same stream. The hypothesis that
diversification into new niches drove early darter evolution, while vicariance
and/or local sexual selection are the factors underlying high levels of species
diversity, will be tested using a comprehensive phylogenetic tree. This tree
will be useful to many future scientists interested in both evolutionary and
ecological processes within this interesting group.