* 0408118
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Spatial Ecology of Fire in an East African Savanna: Effects of Burn Size and Patchiness on the Foraging Ecology of Herbivores of Varying Body Size
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Emilio Laca, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2006
* USD 13,191.00

In many places, including the savannas of Kenya, patterns of burning have
drastically changed in the last half-century due to changes in demographics,
land ownership, and beliefs about fire. While fire has been recognized as a
particularly important structuring force in many of these grassland systems,
ecologists have rarely addressed how the spatial scale of a burn affects system
response. Data from our previous studies in East Africa suggest that differences
in the spatial attributes of a burn can markedly affect the response of grazing
mammals of differing body sizes. Our research has begun to test how the spatial
attributes of grassland fires (burn size and patchiness) affect: (a) which
grazing species utilize the post-burn re-growth, and (b) in turn, how such
herbivory modifies nitrogen dynamics, acacia tree regeneration, and grass
productivity in the post-burn environment. The project is a partnership with
three ranches in Laikipia, Kenya where plots of 81, 9 and 1 hectares have been
burned in order to measure how animals of varying body-size, from elephants to
rodents, make use of the grass re-growth. Additionally, the project works toward
engaging the local community within the research program. Through an
international cooperative arrangement with the University of Nairobi, a Kenyan
MS student is providing additional measures of grass productivity and soil
changes in the post-burn environment. Prescribed fire training, fire ecology
instruction, and fire suppression equipment are provided to local landowners and
stakeholders. This award is co-funded by the Division of Environmental Biology
and The Office of International Science and Engineering.