* 0408988
* Valuing Flexibility in Infrastructure Projects:      Development & Assessment of Real Option Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Michael Garvin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 01/31/2007
* USD 153,711.00

Real option models have emerged over roughly the last two decades to address the
limitations of traditional valuation methods such as net present value analysis.
Various approaches to modeling real options have surfaced as the related but
independent fields of finance and decision theory have wrestled with the
challenges of model development. The differences between the various approaches
revolve principally around the assumptions made and the mechanics involved. The
assumptions made dictate how closely a model mimics reality while the mechanics
involved influence how accessible a model is to practitioners. The
infrastructure community is just beginning to explore the potential
contributions that real option valuation can make to improve infrastructure
development decisions. Thus, this endeavor takes account of the prospects of
these techniques. Through case studies of both international & domestic Build-
Operate-Transfer (BOT) arrangements, this research: (a) identifies and
characterizes the managerial options found in authentic energy and
transportation projects, (b) values the most common real options identified
using the classic, marketed asset disclaimer, revised classic and hybrid
modeling approaches, (c) assesses the robustness and simplicity of each model
developed as well as evaluates the validity of underlying assumptions, and (d)
develops guidelines for real option valuation and BOT contracting based upon the
assessment results. The merits of this research reside in its contributions to
the changing infrastructure development paradigm. The exclusive use of segmented
project delivery and tax-supported financing strategies for the development or
renewal of infrastructure systems is coming to an end in the United States and
worldwide simply because traditional funding mechanisms cannot keep pace with
the demands to develop new and to modernize existing infrastructure facilities.
Increasingly, public infrastructure owners are soliciting BOT arrangements to
deliver needed infrastructure. Such arrangements potentially preserve a public
owner's capital capacity for allocation to projects that cannot support
themselves by essentially "pulling" projects from the private sector. Tolled
highways are but one type of project where BOT's potential for integrated
delivery and asset-based financing exists. However, the solicitation of private
capital for public purpose demands a rather thorough assessment of a project's
economic characteristics, but traditional methods of project evaluation can
often fail to consider important dimensions of a project. Frequently, BOT
projects possess managerial options, which are not directly valued by either the
government or the private consortium because conventional valuation methods fail
to capture flexibility's value. Without a careful appraisal of the opportunities
and risks inherent in such arrangements, development may not occur at all if the
project itself is undervalued because managerial flexibility is ignored or the
concession agreement struck between the government and the private developer may
include disproportionate subsidies since financial guarantees are given for
free. Real option models can provide the means to ensure that neither of these
circumstances occurs. Thus, the real option valuation and BOT contracting
principles developed by this work will enhance the ability of public owners and
private developers to account for the managerial flexibility that is often
embedded in BOT projects. Hence, an expanded and unbiased market will result
since some projects will not be mistakenly eliminated as BOT candidates or
erroneously subsidized through public sector contributions or guarantees. In
addition, when applied to evaluate candidate infrastructure projects, real
option techniques can supply strategic insights for architecture, engineering &
construction (AEC) organizations that are not possible when using traditional
methods. Both outcomes are important impacts as the nation confronts the
daunting challenge of expanding, modernizing and restoring its infrastructure
base and as US-based AEC firms compete globally.