* 0408565
* Modeling and Control of Nonlinear Intrinsic Shells
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Catherine Lebiedzik, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2007
* USD 93,257.00

The objective for this project is to investigate issues of modeling, stability,
and control for a new partial differential equation shell model, based on
intrinsic geometry, which includes nonlinear effects and thermal effects. In
contrast to traditional coordinate-based models, the intrinsic geometric
(coordinate-free) model facilitates analysis for stabilization and optimal
control of the system by exploiting the special geometry of the shell. This
project will explore (i) modeling of a nonlinear and thermoelastic shell based
on intrinsic geometry, the equations of which appear analogous to those of the
full von Karman system of linear elasticity; (ii) analysis of the resultant
wellposedness issues of the uncontrolled (free) model, which is specifically of
interest in the context of nonlinear models; (iii) control of the model -- both
controllability and stabilizibility issues are of paramount importance; and (iv)
numerical analysis as a means to verify the modeling. These goals will be
accomplished through the adaptation of mathematical techniques that have been
developed for the corresponding `flat' case. These are highly nontrivial
adaptations because of the fact that variable coefficients are involved. The
adaptations are made possible through the use of the intrinsic geometry to
implicitly take advantage of the special form of those coefficients and the
known relationships among the geometric objects that appear in the
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling and control of shell structures is
important in many fields, including design of automobiles, aircraft, and
submarines, manufacturing of industrial equipment, and medical research. A
thorough understanding of the nature and behavior of the partial differential
equations governing shell structures is essential for development of effective
control strategies and efficient numerical simulation of shell properties and
behavior. This research project aims to advance understanding of these
equations, with the long-range goal of improving technology for analyzing
industrial problems that require control of shell structures.&lt;br/&gt;