* 0408674
* Workshop:  Student Research in Computational Linguistics
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Justine Cassell, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary P. Harper
* 01/31/2005
* USD 22,400.00

This award is for funding to subsidize travel, conference, and housing expenses
of students selected to participate in the ACL Student Research Workshop to be
held during the joint ACL on July 21st to 26th, 2004 in Barcelona, Spain. The
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization in the field of natural language processing and language
engineering. The Association's annual conference, which rotates among the
Americas, Pacific-rim countries, and Europe/Africa, is the major international
meeting in the field. Computational linguistics is a multidisciplinary field of
increasing importance to science, commerce, and society. This workshop
contributes to the professional development of young scientists who will lead
this growing field in the coming decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
format allows students to present their research and receive feedback from a
panel of established researchers in the field. It provides students with
invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on their work at a critical time in
their professional development through feedback from the panel and other student
participants. Also, student participants will be able to see each other's
presentations and feedback, which could lead to a general raising of standards
and expectations, strengthening future student research. The ACL Student
Workshop is an inexpensive yet highly effective means of encouraging young and
upcoming computational linguists. The intimate format encourages the student
participants to begin building a rapport with established researchers. The
workshop should contribute to the maintenance and development of a skilled and
diverse natural language processing workforce, helping to produce a pool of
researchers with the scientific and engineering knowledge required for future
applications of natural language processing. It should help to foster
international scientific exchange, providing merit-based opportunities for
future leaders of the field to attend a conference that might otherwise be less
geographically diverse than is desirable for the field. In addition, by building
a supportive environment for these students, it is more likely that down the
road, they will lend a supporting hand to other students who follow. &lt;br/&gt;