* 0408499
* A Clearinghouse on Natural Hazards Research and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Kathleen Tierney, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,554,157.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Natural Hazards Research and
Applications Information Center at the University of Colorado at Boulder
(NHRAIC/Center), founded in 1976, works to strengthen communication between
researchers who study hazards and disasters and users of research, including
policymakers and practitioners. NHRAIC, which is affiliated with the CU-Boulder
Institute of Behavioral Science, accomplishes its work through four major
activities: information dissemination, an annual workshop, library and
information services, and the sponsorship and conduct of research. The Center's
goal is to facilitate knowledge transfer and improve hazard mitigation and
emergency management programs and practices. Key Center objectives include (1)
the collection and sharing of research and experience related to disaster
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery; (2) the development of
networks and partnerships that foster capacity building and best practices for
disaster loss reduction; and (3) the conduct of original research on extreme
events. In addition to funding from NSF, the Center receives support from a
consortium of agencies, including FEMA, NOAA and the National Weather Service,
NASA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, CDC, the U.S. Forest Service, and
related private sector organizations. More than a quarter century of
facilitating communication and knowledge transfer among loss-reduction
stakeholders has placed the NHRAIC center stage in the national and global
hazards communities. Through its varied activities, the NHRAIC advocates for
sustainable hazard reduction, interdisciplinary partnerships, and an all-hazards
approach to the management of extreme events. Through its Quick Response
program, the NHRAIC makes funds available for field work and the collection of
perishable disaster-related data. The Center's extensive publication series
includes Beyond September 11: An Account of Post-Disaster Research (2003), a
compilation of quick-response research conducted after the 9-11 terrorist
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's newsletter, the Natural Hazards
Observer, is published six times a year and is available in hard copy and
electronic form. The NHRAIC web site, http://www.colorado.edu/hazards, is among
the most widely used information portals in the field of extreme events. With
the American Society of Civil Engineers, the Center co-sponsors the
interdisciplinary journal, the Natural Hazards. Other important Center products
include Disasters by Design, by former NHRAIC director Dennis Mileti, as well as
other books and publications produced as part of the Center-directed "Second
Assessment of Research on Natural Hazards." The second assessment, which
produced a five-volume set of books published by the Joseph Henry Press,
summarizes the state of knowledge in fields such as hazard insurance, land use
planning for hazard mitigation, disaster preparedness and response, and the
spatial dimensions of hazard vulnerability. The Center is also active on issues
such as curriculum development for interdisciplinary hazards education. With
funding from NSF and the Public Entity Risk Institute, the NHRAIC also offers
dissertation enrichment fellowships for students engaged in research on extreme
events.&lt;br/&gt;