* 0408419
* Inverse Problems in Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Peter Perry, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2008
* USD 153,316.00

&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0408419&lt;br/&gt;Title: Inverse problems in geometry and partial
differential equations&lt;br/&gt;PI: Peter A. Perry, University of
Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project involves inverse spectral and scattering theory in three
areas&lt;br/&gt;of mathematical investigation: (1) the spectral theory of two-
step&lt;br/&gt;nilpotent groups and compact nilmanifolds, (2) the inverse
resonance problem for&lt;br/&gt;exterior domains and scattering manifolds, and
(3) inverse scattering for&lt;br/&gt;singular potentials with applications to
nonlinear dispersive equations.&lt;br/&gt;Two-step nilpotent lie groups play an
important role in pure mathematics as &lt;br/&gt;models of sub-Riemannian
geometry and as a rich source of examples of&lt;br/&gt;manifolds with identical
Laplace spectra but distinct geometries; a&lt;br/&gt;detailed investigation of
the trace formula for these manifolds will be&lt;br/&gt;carried out using
analysis on nilpotent Lie groups. Resonances are&lt;br/&gt;discrete scattering
data for non-compact manifolds analogous to the&lt;br/&gt;eigenvalues of the
Laplacian on a compact manifold; the inverse resonance&lt;br/&gt;problem will be
investigated in the contexts of conformal and&lt;br/&gt;asymptotically flat
geometries, and invariants such as the determinant will&lt;br/&gt;be studied.
Nonlinear dispersive equations with singular initial data may&lt;br/&gt;be
viewed, via the inverse scattering method, as linearized flows for
the&lt;br/&gt;scattering data of a very singular potential. We hope to extend
the inverse&lt;br/&gt;scattering picture for the KdV and mKdV equations to such
singular data and&lt;br/&gt;obtain greater insight into these dynamical systems
--by constructing the&lt;br/&gt;flow on Hilbert spaces of initial data which are
singular but very natural&lt;br/&gt;from a dynamical point of view.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inverse spectral theory is the mathematical discipline
that&lt;br/&gt;underlies important applications of mathematics to medical
imaging,&lt;br/&gt;geophysical prospection, non-destructive testing, and many
other areas.&lt;br/&gt;In these applications, properties of a
physical&lt;br/&gt;system (a human body, the earth, or an industrial material)
are &lt;br/&gt;deduced from its response to externally imposed stimuli
(electromagnetic&lt;br/&gt;radiation, seismic waves, or ultrasound). The
properties deduced may &lt;br/&gt;loosely be described as the "geometry" of the
system and its response &lt;br/&gt;to external stimuli the "spectral data" (or
"normal&lt;br/&gt;modes"). A deep result of the study of completely integrable
systems is &lt;br/&gt;that certain physical phenomena, such as the propagation
of waves in&lt;br/&gt;shallow water, can be solved using an associated inverse
spectral problem.&lt;br/&gt;Thus advances in inverse spectral theory lead to a
better understanding of&lt;br/&gt;how such nonlinear waves propagate. The impact
of this project will be &lt;br/&gt;twofold: first, it will elucidate, by
studying carefully chosen geometric &lt;br/&gt;contexts, the relation between
speectrum and geometry. Secondly, it will &lt;br/&gt;deepen our understanding of
nonlinear dispersive waves by extending tools &lt;br/&gt;of inverse scattering
theory to study nonlinear wave propagation with &lt;br/&gt;very singular waves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;