* 0408014
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny and the Evolution of Colony Organization in the Siphonophora, Cnidaria
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Gunter Wagner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,985.00

Non-technical abstract for NSF Proposal DEB-0408014&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Gunter Wagner and Mr. Casey Dunn of Yale University will study the systematics
and diversity of siphonophores, a type of colonial jellyfish. Siphonophores live
in the open ocean and are the longest animals in the world, sometimes exceeding
50 meters in length. They are also among the most complex of all colonial
organisms. Rather than consisting only of specialized cells organized into
tissues and organs, as humans do, they have entire animals, each specialized for
a task such as feeding or reproduction, that are precisely organized into a
colonial "super organism". The organization of siphonophores is the same from
colony to colony of the same species but different between species. This grant
will make it possible to describe this colony-level organization in a diversity
of siphonophores for the first time, and to study the relationship of
siphonophores to each other. This information will then be used to test
hypotheses about the evolution of colony form in siphonophores. The results will
bear directly on several important questions that have long been of general
biological interest: when does evolution favor specialization in the units that
make up an organism? How does complexity arise at different levels of biological
organization? When is precise body organization favored by evolution? Even
though it has long been recognized that siphonophores are particularly well
suited to the investigation of these fundamental questions, it has been
difficult to learn much about them because they are extremely fragile and the
nets that have been historically used to collect oceanic organisms severely
damage them. Recent advances in oceanographic technology have dramatically
improved the situation, though. Ongoing collaborations with biological
oceanographers will make it possible to collect siphonophores for this work by
SCUBA diving from ocean-going research vessels and through the use of
sophisticated samplers mounted on submarines. The specimens obtained using these
new methods are often in pristine condition and are ideally suited to the work
this grant will support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant has important broader
implications. It will train a young scientist in siphonophore systematics and
the methods used to study oceanic organisms. Siphonophores play a central role
in the ecology of the open ocean and the results of this work will provide a
strong foundation for the investigation of other aspects of siphonophore
biology, including their interaction with their
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;