* 0408218
* Planning Grant for Lincoln University under the NSF HBCU-UP STEM Program
* EHR,HRD
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Marjorie Campbell, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Camille A. McKayle
* 04/30/2006
* USD 50,000.00

This planning grant proposal under the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Undergraduate Program will enable Lincoln University to conduct an
assessment of science, mathematics, engineering and technology education, in
order to develop an institutional action plan to enhance and improve the quality
of STEM education programs. Activities include curriculum improvement, student
education enrichment and faculty professional development. The goal of the
planning grant is to ensure greater participation of minorities in STEM program
areas with the end result of more students enrolling in, successfully graduating
from, and eventually working in the STEM areas. The objectives of this planning
grant are to establish advisory committees; to gather information from other NSF
HBCU-UP institutions; to develop and conduct assessments of the STEM curriculum,
program areas, students, and faculty; to seek outside evaluators; and to develop
an implementation plan and proposal for submission to NSF.

These objectives will be accomplished through the commitment of faculty
resources and time; through the participation of interested stakeholders;
through visits to institutions that have already made improvements to the STEM
program areas; through use of outside consultants for assessment, technical
assistance and training; and through data collection and analysis.

The intellectual merit of this project is that it will encompass both
quantitative and qualitative approaches to understanding the problems associated
with the STEM program areas, why these problems exist, and how plans might be
developed to address these problems. Through visits to other universities, this
planning grant will also contribute to the understanding of factors that lead to
success in STEM program areas, curriculum, student preparation, recruitment and
retention. Once data is collected and analyzed, it can be used by other
institutions, and the results may be appropriate for publication or for
presentation at professional conferences.

The broader impacts of this planning grant are improvements to diversity,
infrastructure, dissemination to enhance scientific understanding and society.
Diversity - The assessment will include understanding the perspectives of
underrepresented minorities in the STEM areas and the challenges they face, as
well as understanding the perspectives of faculty and their competencies and
abilities to mentor and advise these students. Infrastructure - The assessment
will include understanding student perspectives of campus housing, facilities,
classrooms, and equipment; and will include visits to other institutions where
living and learning have been improved upon in the STEM program areas. These
assessment activities will contribute to developing implementation plans to
enhance the infrastructure of Lincoln University for its students. Dissemination
to Enhance Scientific Understanding - The planning grant process will include
building and strengthening relationships between and among stakeholders
interested in the success of STEM programs at Lincoln University. Many of the
stakeholders will have the resources to assist in the enhancement of
dissemination of information and research to the public and to their
constituencies. Benefits to Society - Establishing relationships with high
school teachers who prepare students in the STEM areas and who could influence
students to consider majoring in STEM areas could be beneficial to the
recruitment process. These efforts may enhance the overall recruitment and
retention process and contribute to a better understanding by the public of the
STEM program areas.