* 0408580
* Collaborative Research: Timing and Geodynamic Significance of Mesozoic Basement Tectonism and Basin Evolution in the Southwestern North American Cordillera
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Carl Jacobson, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2008
* USD 91,953.00

Retroarc foreland basins record the timing and magnitude of uplift and erosion
within the interiors of mountain belts, and the nature of the sediments filling
such basins can be used to investigate the nature of deformation at continental
margins. This project is evaluating the timing of foreland deformation and
deposition in retroarc foreland basins in the southwestern North American
Cordillera to constrain the timing of magmatism in the continental margin
magmatic arc and shortening in the foreland. High precision dates from plutons
in the Cordilleran arc suggest high volume batholith emplacement was a
relatively short-lived phenomenon superimposed on a much less voluminous
background magmatic flux. Precise geochronologic control on evolution of the
foreland fold and thrust belt is necessary to better establish the nature of
orogen-wide stress field over long time scales, and thus clarify whether
foreland shortening is a cause or consequence of arc
magmatism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, of the McCoy basin of
southeastern California/southwestern Arizona and in equivalent basins in Sonora
Mexico are being studied. The age and source area of these sediments is being
determined by dating detrital zircons using a combination of ion microprobe and
inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer techniques. Previous application of
ion microprobe dating to the lowermost and uppermost parts of the McCoy
Mountains Formation has demonstrated that most of the formation is Cretaceous in
age, in contrast to previous studies, which have suggested that much or most of
the unit was deposited during the Jurassic. Furthermore, dating of granitic
rocks that intrude the McCoy Mountains Formation in southeastern California has
shown that the most of the formation is older than about 75 million years.
However, studies in southwestern Arizona by previous workers have implied that a
significant fraction of the unit must be younger than 78 million years. Unless
rates of sedimentation in Arizona were anomalously high, this requires either
that the age estimates in Arizona are incorrect or that the McCoy Mountains
formation must young significantly to the east, which would also imply that
deformation migrated eastward with time. These two alternatives are being
discriminated using the zircon dating techniques used in this
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deposition of the McCoy Mountains Formation is
believed to be largely the result of deformation in the Maria fold and thrust
belt. Thus, brackets on the timing of the Maria deformation will be provided by
the dating of McCoy sediments. In addition, various isotopic techniques are
being utilized to directly date structures within the Maria belt. These include
potassium-argon dating of minerals that grew in the McCoy Mountains formation
during metamorphism of the Maria belt and uranium-lead determination of the
igneous age of granitic rocks that intruded synchronously with
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data from this study suggest that
lag time for foreland basin detrital zircon deposition is very short; thus this
retroarc foreland basin sequence can yield a record of whether lithospheric
thickening by foreland shortening may have contributed to high volume batholith
magmatism, or whether shortening served as a space-making mechanism or
gravitational response to batholith emplacement and lithospheric thickening in
the arc.&lt;br/&gt;