* 0408010
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Population-level Genetic Differentiation During the Early Stages of a Radiation in Two Reptilian Families.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Christopher Austin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2007
* USD 12,290.00

Investigators will study processes responsible for the origin and maintenance of
biodiversity on oceanic islands. To uncover the evolutionary processes
generating biodiversity within and among island populations, the investigators
will use modern DNA techniques to determine population history of
representatives of two lizard families with broad Pacific distributions. Genetic
data and current methods of genetic data analysis will be used in conjunction
with geological data to infer the ways in which populations become isolated and
genetically distinct, a crucial first step in speciation. The project will focus
on the Vanuatu archipelago a recently emergent island chain located in an area
of high species richness in the southwest Pacific
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is innovative in its focus on the early
stages (&lt; 2 million years) of evolution within an archipelago. Despite the
incredible biodiversity of island groups such as Hawaii and the Galapagos
islands, biologists do not have a good understanding of the processes essential
to the initial development of biodiversity after island emergence. Results will
be published in peer-reviewed journals and additional data will be made freely
available via the Museum's online databases. As part of this project, a female
graduate student will be trained in reptile taxonomy, molecular DNA techniques,
and phylogenetic methods. Additionally, a female Vanuatu biodiversity officer
will receive training in the taxonomic and biodiversity survey methods crucial
to the conservation of the poorly studied, yet highly threatened, reptile fauna
of the Vanuatu archipelago.&lt;br/&gt;