* 0408011
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Coevolutionary Diversification in Septobasidium, a Fungal Symbiont of Scale Insects
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Rytas Vilgalys, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 08/31/2006
* USD 11,965.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the biology
of Septobasidium, a fungal parasite&lt;br/&gt;on scale insects. Scale insects
are common agricultural and horticultural&lt;br/&gt;pests, and Septobasidium is
a fungus that sterilizes the insects that it&lt;br/&gt;infects. However,
colonies of Septobasidium require both infected and&lt;br/&gt;uninfected insects
to survive. Because Septobasidium lives in this complex&lt;br/&gt;association
with its host scale insects its diversification is expected to&lt;br/&gt;be
tightly linked to diversity and diversification in host scale
insects.&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to elucidate any correlative patterns
of&lt;br/&gt;diversification in the hosts and parasites and to determine the
processes&lt;br/&gt;that lead to the formation of those patterns. The proposed
research has&lt;br/&gt;two main parts. The first part uses DNA sequence data
from both fungi and&lt;br/&gt;host insects to examine large-scale patterns of
host association and&lt;br/&gt;cospeciation that structure diversity within the
symbiosis. Phylogenetic&lt;br/&gt;methods are used to infer the history of hosts
and parasites, and these&lt;br/&gt;reconstructed histories are compared to
determine how host evolution is&lt;br/&gt;related to parasite evolution. The
second part implements methods to&lt;br/&gt;analyze DNA sequence data from
multiple populations of Septobasidium&lt;br/&gt;species from across the
southeastern United States in order to identify&lt;br/&gt;processes that
generate the large-scale patterns. Population processes&lt;br/&gt;such as
migration and dispersal are estimated from DNA sequence
variation&lt;br/&gt;separately and simultaneously for both hosts and parasites.
Comparing&lt;br/&gt;these processes from several different fungal species with
different host&lt;br/&gt;insects and ecologies but from overlapping geographic
ranges will&lt;br/&gt;determine how strongly the host and parasite population
processes&lt;br/&gt;influence each other. Combining the two major parts provides
insight into&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary diversification in this symbiosis and
represents the first&lt;br/&gt;study to apply critical genetic approaches to
understand the ecology and&lt;br/&gt;evolution of this classic fungus/ insect
relationship.&lt;br/&gt;This study benefits the public in several specific ways.
This study&lt;br/&gt;improves cross discipline communication through
collaboration of a&lt;br/&gt;mycology student and an expert entomologist. The
study also provides&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for undergraduate students to gain
research experience.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the research furthers understanding of
fungal/ scale insect&lt;br/&gt;parasitism that may lead to biological control of
plant pests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;