* 0408593
* Innovative CFRP Prestressed Concrete Box-Beam Bridge System
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Nabil Grace, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* lawrence bank
* 04/30/2009
* USD 318,660.00

Prestressed concrete box-beams are one of the most commonly used structural
components for the construction of small and medium span highway bridges in the
United States. However, the problems experienced by this type of bridge in
various states are serious. These problems include: (1) deterioration of
concrete resulting from corrosion of steel reinforcements, (2) longitudinal
cracks in the deck slabs between the box beams, and (3) leakage problems due to
the deck slab longitudinal cracks. These combined problems mandate significant
and continuously increasing maintenance costs to repair and restore the load
carrying capacity of this type of bridge.

To solve the above-listed problems, an innovative design and construction
approach of a new and long lasting box-beam bridge system using carbon fiber
reinforced polymer (CFRP) needs to be developed, evaluated, and implemented. In
addition, the developed approach must allow for the timely reconstruction of
box-beam bridges to alleviate the disruption to traffic. This development and
evaluation will require extensive collaboration among: CFRP tendon/stirrup
fabricators, precaster/contractors, academia, and end users. This study will be
conducted at Lawrence Technological University with collaboration from
Diversified Composites, Inc, Prestressed System, Inc. (PSI), and Michigan DOT.
In the first phase, four full-scale box-beams, two beams with and two beams
without PT tendons will be tested under service, fatigue, and ultimate loading.
The second phase will address the behavior of two bridge models during various
stages of construction and in service. The proposed RUI collaboration will be
extended to teaching and seminar activities for our undergraduate students. The
FRP producer, precaster, and MDOT engineers will be guest lecturers at LTU. The
university undergraduate research team and the industrial partners will provide
seminars at the annual meetings of the Associated General Contractors of America
(AGC) and at meetings of the Great Lakes DOTs Consortium. Collaboration between
university and CFRP-manufacturer/MDOT/CFRP-precaster will result in the
development of an innovative corrosion/maintenance-free CFRP prestressed
concrete box-beam bridge system.