* 0408247
* Transport, Magnetism and Superconductivity in Strongly Correlated and Frustrated Lattices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Sriram Shastry, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2008
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports theoretical research and education in the area of strongly
correlated electron materials. The PI will carry out theoretical research to
study transport, magnetic and superconducting behavior in highly frustrated
lattices. This work is motivated by very recent discoveries of magnetism and
unusual superconductivity below ~5 K, and of anomalous transport behavior in the
sodium cobalt oxide system Na_xCoO2. These metallic systems display a
thermopower as large as some of the best semiconductors; the thermopower is also
strongly magnetic field dependent. The Hall effect is most unusual in that there
is no saturation with temperature. Extreme type II superconductivity occurs on
hydration. Unusual magnetic long-ranged order occurs in the phase diagram.
Experimental findings such as these challenge the tenets of the basic theory of
metals, suggesting an important role for strong many-body correlations in these
systems. The PI will use a combination of analytical and numerical techniques
applied to appropriate models to study the transport properties and the
occurrence, as well as the nature, of the magnetic and superconducting states.
The research will focus on the especially strong many-body renormalizations
revealed by recent experiments. Broader impacts: Studying the cobaltates may
ultimately improve our understanding of other strongly correlated electron
systems, such as the high temperature superconductors, which have proven to be
very intellectually challenging. The cobaltates are potentially very important
from a technological point of view in their own right - their large thermopower
combined with low resistance enables them to achieve the best-known figure of
merit at high temperature. They are also related to the lighter alkali atom
cobaltate LixCoO2 that is central to lightweight lithium battery technology.
Materials such as Liy-xNaxCoO2, that arise as natural possibilities in this
study, may catalyze a novel fusion of thermoelectric and battery technologies
leading to new technologies. This award also supports graduate level education
in advanced theoretical condensed matter physics. %%% This award supports
theoretical research and education on strongly correlated electron materials
with a focus on understanding the anomalous properties and ordered states
revealed in recent experiments on cobaltite compounds, Na_xCoO_2. These
experiments show that the cobaltites are unlike ordinary metals. They also show
unusual magnetic and superconducting states. It is believed that the inability
of the interactions between electron spins to be satisfied because of the
geometry of the underlying crystal structure (geometric frustration) combined
with strong interactions among electrons, leads to the anomalous properties
exhibited by these materials. Some properties of these strongly correlated
electron materials, like their combined large thermopower and low resistance,
suggest potential technological applications and the potential for new
technologies, as suggested above. The study of these materials, like other
strongly correlated-electron materials, leads to the discovery of new
fundamental condensed matter physics. This award also supports graduate level
education in advanced theoretical condensed matter physics. ***