* 0408066
* Dissertation Research: Does Hydraulic Redistribution Increase Microbial Activity in the Rhizosphere?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Zoe Cardon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James W. Raich
* 06/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Dissertation Research: Does Hydraulic Redistribution Increase Microbial Activity
in the Rhizosphere?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Z.G. Cardon and P.M.
Herron&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The root systems of single plants can span a depth
of soil exhibiting strong gradients of water availability. Often, in arid
regions, dry soils are found at the surface and moister soils at depth. This
gradient of water availability provides a driving force for the passive
redistribution of water through the root systems from the deeper soils to the
shallow, nutrient rich soils, usually at night. Such "hydraulic redistribution"
is now recognized in almost 60 species worldwide, and has been shown to increase
rates of transpiration, increase growth in neighboring plants, and alter the
hydrology of entire regions. A number of hypotheses have emerged focusing on the
potential importance of hydraulic redistribution of water into the shallow,
nutrient-rich soil layers for maintenance of soil microbial activity, and thus
potentially enhanced nutrient availability, around plant roots. This project
explores whether hydraulic redistribution, and resulting patterns of water
availability, affect rhizosphere microbial biomass, growth rates, and activity.
We will test whether nutrient cycling around plant roots, and nutrient
availability to plants, are enhanced by hydraulic redistribution in the
greenhouse and in the field. The focal plant species is sagebrush (Artemisia
tridentata), a deep-rooted shrub that is often a community dominant in semi-
arid, western landscapes in the U.S. In field work, we will explore the
relationship between the presence of hydraulic redistribution and the
reproductive fitness of Artemisia; in the greenhouse, we will use soil bacteria
that are genetically engineered to report soil water potentials to provide the
first glimpse of soil water potentials at micro- and millimeter scales around
roots. In both the greenhouse and the field, standard soil assays and soil
psychrometers will be used to track microbial activity and bulk soil moisture.
Results from this study will suggest mechanisms by which deep-rooted Artemisia
tridentata can affect nutrient dynamics and water contents in shallow soils of
semi-arid systems.&lt;br/&gt;