* 0408564
* Numerical Modeling of Reaction-Enhanced Fluid Flow and Isotopic Exchange in Contact Aureoles
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Mian Liu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 162,465.00

Along with metamorphism, fluid flow is the most important process that occurs in
contact aureoles of igneous intrusions. Fluid flow drives metamorphic reactions
and induces advective heat and mass transport. There is a very large body of
field, chemical, mineralogic, and fluid inclusion data that demonstrate that
magmatic-hydrothermal systems are very complex, spatially variable, and
compositionally evolve through time as thermal conditions change. However, the
temporal evolution of these processes during a contact metamorphic event is
often difficult to decipher from petrology and geochemistry. Numerical computer
techniques provide means to examine two and three-dimensional aspects of contact
aureole evolution with time. The goal of this research is to numerically examine
how transient permeability changes that are inherent to rocks in which
metamorphic reactions produce volatiles, influence fluid fluxes, compositions of
evolving fluids, and chemical exchange between rocks and fluids in magma-driven
hydrothermal system. The results will serve as a guide for interpreting
mineralogic, trace element and stable isotope signatures of fluid flow in fossil
magmatic-hydrothermal systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context, this
study will enhance our understanding of the long-term behavior of deep, magma-
driven hydrothermal systems, including volcanic and geothermal systems, and ore-
generating processes. These hydrothermal systems have played a key role in mass
redistribution in the Earth's crust and its chemical evolution and are
responsible for concentrating metals that can be explored economically. This
project will train a graduate student that will be proficient in computational
modeling of complex processes. In terms of outreach to the community, an
undergraduate student will be hired to help in production of a guide to the
software that could be later distributed to interested parties.&lt;br/&gt;