* 0408543
* The Tristan-Gough Plume Source and Constraints on the Composition of Recycled Sediment
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Cornelia Class, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2009
* USD 368,336.00

Oceanic island basalts associated with mantle plumes are a primary source of
information on the precursor materials of mantle heterogeneities. Mantle plume
sources are commonly thought to represent recycled oceanic lithosphere. Sediment
is an integral part of the oceanic crust recycling, though rigorous constraints
on the presence of recycled sediment in mantle plume sources are still limited.
The Tristan-Gough plume track is among the volumetrically most significant plume
tracks on the ocean floor. New high precision trace element data on Gough lavas
reveal negative anomalies in the concentration of the rare earth element cerium
(Ce), whose magnitude correlates with higher 87Sr/86Sr and lower 176Hf/177Hf
isotope ratios. The presence of a negative Ce-anomaly offers a robust and
exciting new tracer for recycled sediment in the mantle. This study will
characterize in detail the geochemical signature of the recycled sediment
component in the Tristan-Gough plume source. By comparing the composition of the
recycled sediment component with ocean floor sediments, the trace element
fractionations during subduction will be constrained with implications for the
composition of sediments recycled into the deep mantle in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;The results of this
study will be published in international journals and be of interest and benefit
to a large cross-section of scientists studying mantle dynamics. The proposal
involves an international collaboration with Prof. le Roex at the University of
Cape Town, South Africa (UCT). A Master of Science (MSc) student from UCT will
be visiting LDEO and will be exposed and trained in analytical methods currently
not available at UCT. Funding of the proposal will help to support the
analytical facilities at LDEO and contribute to the career development of a
woman geoscientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;