* 0408150
* Advanced Probabilistic Analysis of Stability Problems in Geotechnical Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Denwood Griffiths, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* John Daniel
* 08/31/2009
* USD 232,411.00

The rapid growth in interest in probabilistic methods applied to geotechnical
engineering is relatively recent. Papers by eminent academic/practitioners such
as Whitman (2000) and Duncan (2001), have raised the profile of probabilistic
concepts, by explaining the methods in familiar terminology. A recent UEF
conference held in Graz, Austria in 2002 on "Probabilistics in Geotechnics:
Gechnical and Economic Risk Estimation" has brought these concepts to a wider
audience, including the insurance industry. The first textbook dedicated to
reliability and statistics in geotechnical engineering has recently been
published by Baecher and Christian
(2003).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research brings
together random Field theory and elasto-plastic finite elements in the "Random
Finite Element Methods" (RFEM). This approach has been developed by the PI and
co-workers for a range of geotechnical applications involving highly variable
soils. The methodology proposed in this research represents one of the very few
techniques available for meaningful quantitative analysis of geotechnical
boundary value problems. The impact of soil variability on design will be
investigated. Different methods of generation of spatially correlated random
fields will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Good statistical characterization
of soil properties is crucial for practical application of the modelling tools
that will be developed in this research. Digitized site-investigation data,
particularly from CPT will be gathered enabling relevant parameters such as the
mean, variance and correlation properties to be extracted. In addition to using
these site-specific properties in the random field models, it will be possible
to develop more robust guidelines for engineers indicating typical ranges of
soil variability for use in design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
research seeks to promote the use of advanced proba-&lt;br/&gt;bilistic tools in
geotechnical design by applying them to the classical geotechnical stability
problems of bearing capacity and slope stability. These particular application
are chosen because of their practical importance and the serious consequences of
failure. It is expected that this research will lead to improved understanding
and quantification of risk and reliability in geotechnical design. In addition
to graduate training, the proposal will also provide research experience for
undergraduates under the REU program. The project has potential to attract
minorities and women, groups that are traditionally under-represented in
engineering. The Colorado School of Mines has higher percentages of minority and
women students in engineering as compared with local and national averages. This
is in part due to the success and activity of the Minority Engineering and Women
in Science, Engineering and Mathematics Programs that will help in recruitment
for this project.&lt;br/&gt;