* 0408269
* Mathematical Finance
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Carr, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2008
* USD 100,000.00

Since the pioneering work of Fischer Black, Robert Merton, and Myron Scholes in
1973, which heralded the introduction of sophisticated mathematical ideas to the
problem of pricing options and, more broadly, to risk analysis in the financial
industry, advanced mathematical techniques have played an increasingly important
role in managing risk across a wide range of insurance and financial industries.
In recognition of their work, Merton and Scholes were awarded the 1997 Nobel
Prize in Economics, Black having died in 1995. These developments in finance
have benefited from ideas in many different fields, including the traditional
ones of mathematics and statistics, but also from fields such as electrical
engineering and condensed matter physics. The celebrated Black-Scholes-Merton
model is no longer viewed as adequate, however, and attempts to replace it with
improved models form the basis of intense current research activity in
mathematical finance. I plan to bring my research experience in both pure and
applied areas of mathematics -- mathematical physics, partial differential
equations, and control theory -- to investigate the following interrelated
research topics: First, risk analysis for portfolio insurance and related
structured investment products;&lt;br/&gt;second, the application of methods of
stochastic control theory to optimal portfolio management and trading models;
third, the development of new option pricing, trading and risk analysis models
for risky-asset stochastic processes, including stochastic volatility and jump
diffusion models, as replacements for the&lt;br/&gt;Black-Scholes-Merton model;
fourth, the numerical implementation of these models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I
will work on this project while at Bloomberg LP, New York, on leave from Rutgers
University, working with Patrick Hagan and Peter Carr, Head of Quantitative
Research at Bloomberg. Upon my return to Rutgers&lt;br/&gt;in Autumn 2005, I
plan to continue my work on the development of a new applied mathematics
master's degree program in mathematical finance, as well as my research in that
field. Our master's degree program will lead to better career opportunities for
our students in the financial, insurance, and risk analysis professions. The
research activities described in my proposal can benefit society by generating
improved&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for financial modeling and risk analysis, leading
to greater protection of pension funds and to lower borrowing costs for home
purchasers and for industry.&lt;br/&gt;