* 0408381
* Probabilistic Random Walk Solutions of Engineering Problems in Wave Scattering and Diffraction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* David Bogy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Probablistic Random Walk Solutions of Engineering Problems in
Wave Scattering and Diffraction&lt;br/&gt;David B. Bogy, UC
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal #0408381&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wave
scattering and diffraction are important phenomena in acoustics, optics,
electromagnetics and earthquakes. For example, how do we identify the shape and
size of an object measuring the amplitudes and phases of the waves it
scatterers? The rigorous description of wave scattering has long been associated
with cumbersome formulas that require large and expensive calculations and Ph.D.
level knowledge. However, the situation may soon be changed due to the
development of the proposed novel approach to wave propagation that provides
mathematically exact solutions in a simple form accessible to average
undergraduates or even high-school students. This approach to wave studies was
not published until the 21st century, but it already has made it possible to get
simple but rigorous solutions of a number of long-standing problems, including
the 3D problem of diffraction by a plane sectorial screen of arbitrary angle, or
the 2D problem of diffraction of acoustical waves in a half-space with surface
breaking cavities and cracks of arbitrary shape. The research proposed here
included further development of the method, solution of important applied
problems and integration of the method into graduate courses offered at UC
Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;