* 0408739
* Soil Treatment with a Thixotropic Fluid: An Autoadaptive Design for Liquefaction Prevention
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Vincent Drnevich, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2008
* USD 340,000.00

Liquefaction of loose cohesionless soils, associated with the effective stress
loss produced by rapid repeated loading, is an important cause of damage to
civil infrastructures during earthquakes. While many factors affect the
liquefaction resistance of soils, both laboratory studies and field observations
support the conclusion that the presence of plastic fines reduces the
liquefaction susceptibility of a site. This concept is the premise for the work
proposed here which is an in-depth investigation of the use of thixotropic
fluids, specifically bentonite-based suspensions, for treatment of sands for
liquefaction susceptibility mitigation. This idea, which originated from an NSF
sponsored workshop focused on the use of autoadaptive media in civil
engineering, is supported by the results of a short term project funded by NSF
through the Small Grant for Exploratory Research Program. This study
demonstrated that the presence of 5% bentonite (by dry mass of sand)
dramatically increased the liquefaction resistance of a loose sand. It also
highlighted the difficulties of delivering the bentonite into the sand pores due
to the rheological properties of bentonite suspensions. The proposed research
builds on the results of this preliminary study to a) provide a more in depth
investigation of the behavior of sand-bentonite systems; and b) to tackle the
challenge of delivering the bentonite to the pore space in a time-release
fashion. The work will be performed by an interdisciplinary team from Purdue
University's School of Civil Engineering and Department of Chemistry. The
specific objectives of the first component of the research are not only to
expand the range in testing conditions (CSR and frequency of load applied during
cyclic loading, confining stress level, bentonite percent, etc.) investigated,
but also to address the more fundamental question of the micromechanism(s)
responsible for the increased liquefaction resistance of sands in presence of
bentonite. In addition, work will also be performed to assess the self healing
nature of the bentonite treatment under repeated cyclic events, which
potentially makes the sand-bentonite system a truly autoadaptive material. For
delivering the bentonite to the pore space of sands, the research will explore a
novel treatment based on coating the bentonite particles with Chitosan, a widely
available and inexpensive biodegradable cationic carbohydrate. Chitosan will be
used to inhibit swelling of the bentonite thus facilitating permeation of the
suspension into the porous medium. The compound will then degrade due to the
action of soil bacteria restoring the swelling properties of the bentonite.
&lt;br/&gt;One broader impact of this research is to develop an innovative and
cost-effective solution for a problem that has great significance to society.
The novel approach for treating bentonite by means of a biodegradable compound
has the potential of being relevant for a number of other applications. An
interactive web page will be created to host a collection of images for use in
teaching the complexity of the micro/nanostructure of clays. The web page will
be complemented by a manual that will describe its use for education in junior
high through university level courses. Work will continue on the development of
modules for use in K-12 education with the mathematics teacher with whom initial
work has already been conducted thanks to a RET (Research Experience for
Teachers) grant from NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;