* 0408866
* Vibration Absorbers for Systems with Cyclic Symmetry
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Steven Shaw, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 07/31/2008
* USD 169,999.00

The goal of this work is to investigate the performance of order-tuned absorbers
for vibration reduction in cyclic and nearly cyclic systems. The applications of
interest are structural systems such as turbine blades, bladed disk assemblies,
blisks (integral disk-blade systems), and helicopter rotor blades. These
flexible structures rotate at a constant speed and are subjected to traveling
wave dynamic loading, resulting in component vibrations that can cause high
cycle fatigue failure, noise, reduced performance, and other undesirable
effects. A natural means of reducing these vibrations and their attendant
problems is the implementation of tuned vibration absorbers. Centrifugally-
driven, order-tuned vibration absorbers are ideally suited for this task, yet
this approach has received scant attention to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will consider a systematic study of the performance of order-tuned
vibration absorbers in individual rotating flexible components and in cyclic
systems of interconnected substructures. The basic design features of these
absorbers will be explored by considering a hierarchy of models for rotating
structural elements fitted with absorbers. The models for the structural members
will range from single-degree-of-freedom oscillators to industry-based finite
element models. The features of the absorber models will be focused on design-
related parameters, specifically: the placement of the absorber on the primary
structure, the absorber mass ratio relative to that of the primary structure,
the path along which the absorber travels (which sets its linear and nonlinear
tuning parameters), and the effects of impacts when the absorber reaches its
rattle space limitations. The response of these systems will be analyzed by
exploiting the symmetry of the system and will utilize a range of tools that
includes linear vibration analysis for cyclic systems, perturbation and
bifurcation techniques for symmetric nonlinear systems, matching methods for
impacting motions, hybrid time-frequency domain techniques, and simulations of
equations of motion. The effects of unavoidable imperfections that destroy the
perfect cyclic symmetry (such as blade mistuning) will also be considered. It is
known that certain patterns of mistuning among subsystems can drastically reduce
worst-case forced response levels, and we will examine the effectiveness of
using absorbers tuned to different orders to achieve these effects. In this case
the absorbers will serve a dual purpose: to attenuate vibrations in the blade to
which they are attached, as well as to provide a pattern of system detuning that
reduces vibrations in the overall structure. The general aim of these analyses
will be to provide predictive tools that can be used to help select absorber
parameters for optimal performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will impact the fundamental understanding of the performance of vibration
absorbers, as described above, and will also involve education, outreach, and
technology transfer. In terms of education, the PIs will include the linear
vibration analyses of these systems in standard vibration courses at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels, and some of the nonlinear aspects of the
systems will be used as motivating examples and exercises for graduate courses
in nonlinear vibrations. In addition, the Michigan State University PIs are
involved in a summer outreach program that exposes high school students to the
mechanical engineering profession. One topic presented to the students is the
practical use of vibration absorbers, and their application to systems such as
turbine blades in jet engines will be a natural fit into that program. In the
area of technology transfer, the University of Michigan PIs have considerable
experience in the area of turbomachinery, and a number of industrial contacts.
The results of the research will be shared with representatives from aircraft
engine manufacturers, and it is anticipated that the work on absorbers will be
guided in part by considerations raised during discussions with them. Overall,
the goal will be to transfer the basic knowledge gained by this research into
the classroom, to young aspiring engineers, and to industry.&lt;br/&gt;