* 0408077
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution and Diversification of Epiphytic Ferns
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Kathleen Pryer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 11,986.00

Vascular epiphytes-vascular plants that reside on an aboveground plant surface
but do not extract water or nutrients from the host plant or the ground-make an
important contribution to global plant diversity, comprising more than 10% of
the known vascular plant species. Epiphytism has evolved numerous times and in
all major vascular plant lineages, but not all transitions to the epiphytic
habit have resulted in comparable levels of diversity and the contribution of
epiphytes varies from lineage to lineage. Within ferns, 31% of the species are
epiphytes, and the epiphytic habit has clearly been of considerable importance
in the evolutionary history of this group. Nonetheless, remarkably little is
known about the evolution and diversification of epiphytic ferns and several
critical questions remain unanswered. How many times has epiphytism evolved in
ferns? What morphological and ecological transformations are associated with the
transition to the epiphytic habit? When did epiphytism evolve and what abiotic
or biotic events may have spurred the diversification of epiphytic ferns? This
award to Kathleen Pryer and Eric Schuettpelz will be used to address these
questions through ancestral character state reconstructions and divergence time
estimates within an explicit phylogenetic framework. There are three primary
objectives to this study: (1) resolve a global phylogeny for ferns to serve as a
tool for addressing evolutionary and ecological questions; (2) reconstruct the
evolutionary history of epiphytism within ferns and identify the morphological
and ecological innovations associated with the transition to epiphytism; and (3)
estimate the relative timing of epiphytic fern diversifications and assess how
these may have been impacted by the establishment of angiosperm-dominated
everwet tropical forests-a possible diversification trigger.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide training for Eric Schuettpelz in
systematic biology, make significant contributions toward a complete
understanding of plant evolution, and help in elucidating the origins of a part
of global biodiversity that is much neglected. The resulting phylogenetic tree
will further resolve the relationships among fern lineages, will allow for
improved classification, and will serve as a framework for future evolutionary
and systematic studies. Insight into the evolutionary history of epiphytism in
ferns will likely extrapolate to other plant lineages, and information
concerning the relative timing of epiphytic fern diversifications could have a
profound impact on future thoughts concerning the basis of tropical diversity.
If the establishment of angiosperm-dominated forest canopies is shown to have
been a likely trigger for the diversification of epiphytic ferns, then it is
highly probable that these canopies also spurred the diversification of
epiphytic angiosperms and bryophytes, as well as many other canopy and
terrestrial forest inhabitants. Much, if not all, of the extraordinary
biodiversity present in the tropics may have been generated directly as a result
of angiosperm-dominated everwet tropical forest establishment, but the magnitude
and extent of this possible impact has yet to be evaluated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;