* 0408476
* The Structure and Mechanical Significance of Off-Fault Fracture Damage
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Charles Sammis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2007
* USD 148,627.00

Studies of exhumed faults in crystalline rock indicate that most of the slip has
occurred on a very sharp "prominent slip surface" within a core of extremely
fine-grained fault gouge, which is sometimes altered to clay. A wider layer of
coarser fault breccia surrounds this gouge layer. Beyond the brecciated zone,
the wall rocks are fractured, with the fracture density decreasing with distance
to a regional background level. A dynamic slip pulse model is used to test the
hypothesis that this fault zone structure is formed in the "process zone" of
numerous earthquakes propagating on the prominent slip surface. The analytical
dynamic slip pulse model recently developed by Rice and the P.I. (Rice et al.,
2003) was used to calculate the crack tip stress field and a damage mechanics
model was used to calculate the spatial extent and orientation of fracturing and
fragmentation within that stress field. The analytical slip-pulse model was
inspired by seismological slip inversions that find slip in large earthquakes
propagates more as a dislocation (dubbed a "Heaton pulse") than as a growing
crack. This model explains Heaton's (1990) observations using physically
reasonable model parameters, and it yields an estimate of the fracture energy
that is consistent with previous independent estimates. The spatial extent of
damage and brecciation was calculated using the damage mechanics model developed
by Ashby and Sammis (1990). It depends on several model parameters including:
the size and density of initial damage, the orientation of the regional stress
field, the rupture speed, the slip pulse length, the total slip, and the stress
drop. Observational constraints include the width of the breccia zone, the
fracture damage in the wall rock and how it decreases with distance from the
slip surface, and the orientations and slip vectors on the myriad of small slip
surfaces within the breccia. A second major objective of this proposal was to
map these slip surfaces and their slip vectors in the breccia of natural fault
zones and to measure the fracture orientation and damage in the wall rock for
comparison with the slip-pulse/damage model predictions. Other potentially
observable dynamic implications of the slip-pulse/damage model were explored,
including the possibility that the slip (and time delay) required to form the
off-fault fracture damage may explain why the characteristic displacements, Dc,
inferred from seismological observations are orders of magnitude larger than
those measured in the laboratory. Another area of interest is the core
permeability (near the slip surface) established in the rupture-tip process
zone, which may influence dynamic friction. This permeability is an important
parameter in recent models for the effect of water on dynamic friction (Rice,
AGU abst. 2003). Finally, the possibility that the damage process may be
directly observed using near-fault broadband seismographs was explored. The
seismic moment was calculated for each growing flaw in the Ashby-Sammis damage
model. While each is weak and very high frequency, the integrated effect of all
flaws in a propagating process-zone produce an observable signal, comparable to
that calculated using this method for an underground explosion source (Johnson
and Sammis, 2001).