* 0408720
* Archaeological Investigations at Chaco Canyon, New Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2005,11/30/2008
* Wirt Wills, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2008
* USD 223,745.00

Funding from the National Science Foundation will support archaeological field
research in Chaco Canyon, New Mexico, directed by Drs. W. H. Wills and Patricia
L. Crown of the University of New Mexico. This project is designed to
investigate the role of water management during the beginning of a period of
rapid social change that occurred in the semi-arid Colorado Plateau of the
American Southwest just over one thousand years ago. Known to archaeologists as
the "Bonito phase" (ca. A.D. 850 - 1140), this transformation is marked by the
appearance of large masonry buildings called Great Houses in the midst of
dispersed farming communities comprised of small household settlements. Some
Great Houses were multistoried structures with more than 500 individual rooms,
and some were built outside Chaco, but the largest, best-known and most iconic
is Pueblo Bonito in Chaco Canyon. Pueblo Bonito is one of more than a dozen
Great Houses located in the canyon, which is in turn the physical center of a
very high density of archaeological sites and features within the larger San
Juan Basin of northwestern New Mexico. Researchers have proposed that Chaco was
the cultural center of an extensive social network that stretched from the Grand
Canyon to the Rio Grande, and from the southern Rocky Mountains to the highlands
of southern New Mexico. In the historical development of indigenous southwestern
societies, Chaco is thought to have been a major turning point that established
fundamental cultural patterns still evident among the Pueblo peoples of New
Mexico and Arizona.

However, despite more than 100 years of archaeological research in and around
Chaco Canyon, archaeologists and other researchers have made little progress
reaching agreement on the likely factors responsible for the shift from family-
based economies to corporate systems involving communal dwellings and massive
amounts of labor invested in architecture. The lack of consensus seems to stem,
in part, from a paucity of information about local environmental and cultural
conditions during the earliest phase of Great House development. Great Houses
were designed and built over periods of several human generations, and these
large structures typically grew on top of earlier settlements, eventually
destroying the oldest occupations or burying remnants under the massive walls.
The research program supported by NSF will attempt to improve our understanding
of this important period of change by examining deeply buried cultural deposits
and features beneath Pueblo Bonito. Access to these portions of the site will be
obtained by reopening deep trenches originally excavated by the National
Geographic Society in the 1920s and reexamining the cross-sections with new
analytical methods. The original excavations sought only to define relationships
between certain types of pottery found in the deposits and ignored almost every
other sort of data. The new work will bring together a team of geologists,
biologists and archaeologists to determine whether artificially constructed
adobe features noted in the 1920s (but largely ignored) are the remains of an
irrigation system. If these features are canals, then we would presume that
water control was a critical element in the rise of Great House communities.

The broader impacts of this study include the better appreciation of the
socioeconomic processes that characterize the transition from small-scale social
networks to dense, hierarchical societies based on agriculture, and a greater
understanding of the sustainability of irrigation economies in arid
environments. Graduate students participating in this research will gain
important training in field methods and new theoretical applications in
archaeology. The project is especially committed to training Native American
students in anthropology and allied fields and these students will be part of
the emerging generation of Native American scholars working on ancestral
archaeology in the American Southwest.

