* 0408856
*  Measuring Cross-Community Disaster Preparedness and Resiliency:  Theoretical and Practical Application Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* David Simpson, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2008
* USD 300,466.00

The primary goal of this project is to broaden our conceptualization of
community preparedness and resiliency in advance of crisis events. This will be
accomplished by exploring the manner in which we measure "preparedness" and
subsequently "resilience," at a community scale, seeking to develop a set of
characteristics and criteria that can be standardized and measured. By creating
a framework for measurement methodology, the research will seek to
operationalize a long-standing theoretical construct in the hazards and
emergency management fields, namely; that a disaster occurs when demands on the
system are greater than the community's capacity. Specifically, the project will
move closer to that goal by developing a foundation for meaningful measurement,
and then the examining, refining, and applying a Community Disaster Preparedness
index (DPi). The DPi, once applied, allows the development of a Community
Disaster Resilience index score (DRi). The creation of these measurements has
tremendous potential for multiple research and field applications. The indices
will provide an opportunity to make meaningful cross-comparisons among
communities with regard to their emergency preparedness, response capabilities,
and potential for recovery from disaster events. The overall disaster index (DI)
model would generate several important components, including a scoring or
indicator system (based on weighted functional factors) directed specifically to
a community's preparedness, and a systematic assessment of a community's
capabilities and resources (resulting in a composite score). The resiliency
index component would account for a community's exposure to a set of locational-
specific hazards.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The expected results will be of interest
to a wide spectrum of researchers, practitioners, and organizations involved
with hazard mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery. The development of
these indices will provide a first cut theoretical framework and the
identification of appropriate indicators that do not currently exist in the
research community. In other areas, the DI model could potentially have
substantial impact with regard to its use as: 1) a research instrument; 2) a
community preparedness and recovery audit or assessment; 3) a risk pricing
instrument for the insurance industry and others in risk management; 4) an
instrument for the allocation of federal funding, both for mitigation and
recovery activities; and 5) a political instrument to potentially increase
attention to the level of preparedness and resilience in any given
community.&lt;br/&gt;