* 0408356
* An Arctic Winter Balloon Campaign to Study Mechanisms of Relativistic Electron Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Robyn Millan, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 04/30/2006
* USD 252,673.00

Attaining a quantitative understanding of relativistic electron variability in
the radiation belts is a major focus of current radiation belt research.
Quantifying and understanding electron losses in now recognized as an integral
part of understanding this variability. A major question is how to quantify the
relative importance of acceleration processes versus the loss processes.
Balloon-based experiments directly measure precipitation and thus provide a
method for quantifying and studying losses. This project will use two small
balloons, each carrying an X-ray spectrometer for measuring relativistic
electron precipitation (REP) and a photometer tuned to detect proton
precipitation. The balloons will be launched from Ft. Churchill, Manitoba during
winter 2004/2005. The proposed campaign will support and take advantage of an
already existing balloon campaign funded by the NSF Antarctic Aeronomy and
Astrophysics Program entitled, "Balloon Observations of MeV Electron
Precipitation", lead by U. C. Berkeley, in which four small balloon payloads
carrying X-ray instrumentation will be launched from the South African Antarctic
station, SANAE. This project will obtain the first conjugate balloon
observations of REP sensitive to MeV energies. Since the northern hemisphere
observations being made by this project will take place during the northern
winter, it allows the use of sensitive optical measurements of proton
precipitation, which cannot be done in the sunlit Antarctic. The project will
involve several undergraduates in the research and thus promotes educational
goals as well as directly contributing to our knowledge of the radiation belts.