* 0408801
* The Relationship Between Post-Little-Ice-Age Isostatic Rebound and Active Tectonics in Southern Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Christopher Larsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2008
* USD 371,416.00

This study is determining the relationships between glacial rebound and tectonic
strain in southern Alaska. Very high uplift rates (25-30 mm/yr based on GPS) are
reported in the region where the Queen Charlotte-Fairweather fault system ends.
High horizontal velocities are associated with this transform system and the
area has experienced rapid deglaciation since the Little Ice Age. Numerical
isostatic rebound models are being used to generate three-dimensional
predictions of deformation, which will be constrained by the extensive data set
that has already been acquired. This existing data set is the product of an
interdisciplinary effort to determine the timing, magnitude and history of
uplift and ice load changes in southeast Alaska. The observations consist of a
regional Global Positioning System (GPS) crustal deformation array of 76 sites,
sea level rates at 18 tide gauge sites, raised shoreline measurements of total
uplift, and onset of uplift at 27 sites. These data characterize the regional
pattern of uplift on centennial, decadal, and annual time scales, and portray
the current regional pattern of three-dimensional crustal deformation. The
research team is: 1) refining current glacial isostatic rebound models using an
improved GPS and raised shoreline database; 2) developing numerical rebound
models that generate three-dimensional predictions of deformation; 3) using
model predictions of three-dimensional deformation to remove the horizontal
component of isostatically induced motion from horizontal velocity observations
to obtain the tectonic deformation of the region; 4) evaluating the resulting
tectonic velocity and strain fields in terms of regional crustal dynamics and
processes with specific emphasis on the implications for formation of the
Fairweather and St. Elias Ranges, genesis of the Denali fault, and dynamics of
the Yakutat Block collision; 5) evaluating seismic potential specifically
induced by unloading, as well as effects of unloading on tectonic seismic
potential. Using numerical models to quantify glacial isostatic rebound, crustal
and mantle viscoelastic properties will be resolved using the vertical
deformation signal, and thereby provide a means to separate tectonic and
isostatic signals in the horizontal deformation field.