* 0408896
* Collaborative Research: The Record of Recharge and Storage in the El Chichon Magma System Through Ar Isotopic and Experimental Petrologic Constraints
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* James Gardner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 91,923.00

This project, supported jointly by the Petrology and Geochemistry (EAR) and the
Americas Program (OISE), will focus on elements of the eruptive activity of the
El Chichon volcano in Mexico. The project plan seeks to better constrain the
effects of magma injection and the time between injection and eruption activity
over the past 8,000 years. At El Chichon, these investigations will involve
studying the effusive volcanic products exposed at the volcano in order to
identify any separate magma batches, detect closed- versus open-system magmatic
behavior, track magma bodies and their interactions through time, and identify
changes in magma storage conditions (pressure, temperature, volatile contents)
through time. These objectives will be met by analyzing stratigraphically
controlled samples for argon isotope, and combining those with textural, and
compositional variations in single mineral crystals, to determine magma
conditions at the time of eruption. A more detailed analysis of the evolution
and eruptive history of El Chichon activity will allow a better understanding of
the relationships between magma systems and resulting eruptions of this Mexican
volcano. Such understanding will enhance our ability to forecast its future
eruptive behavior. This project is a collaborative project between the
University of Alaska Fairbanks, University of Texas at Austin, and the
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico and will support graduate students and
scientific exchanges between the three institutions.