* 0408230
* IGMS:    Host Immunity and the Evolution of Infectious Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2006
* Louis Guillette, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,999.00

This award supports research and educational activities under the
Interdisciplinary Grants in Mathematical Sciences program. The principle
investigator who has background in mathematics proposes to obtain a broader
background in biology. The projected activities are expected to lead to
collaboration between the principle investigator and biologists in the Zoology
Department. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is centered on topics from
mathematical epidemiology and involves elements of evolutionary biology. The
investigator proposes to use partial deferential equation models and dynamical
system theory to study the role of host immunity and age-structure in the
competition and coexistence of multiple pathogen subtypes. In particular, she
will study a number of emerging phenomena related to the use of vaccines and
their impact on evolving pathogens: Strain substitution, subthreshols
coexistence and multiple coexistence regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational activities are directed towards building the PI's background in
biology and expanding the range of experiences for science students at
University of Florida. The PI will spend eleven months&lt;br/&gt;of the
2005-2006 academic year in the Zoology Department of University of Florida. She
will take several undergraduate and graduate classes in biology. She will read a
number of articles in theoretical ecology, she&lt;br/&gt;will interact closely
with biologists in the Zoology Department and their students and postdocs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI expects to use her broader background to
communicate with a wider range of scientists and to expand the experiences of
science students at the University. She will teach a graduate course in
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;biology. She will jointly co-mentor with biologists
students in mathematics and biology. She will share the results of her research
through talks and projects for interested students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
(DMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;