* 0408264
* Collaborative SGER: Investigation of Spatial and Temporal Patterns in the Concentrations of Redox-Active Chemical Species at a USGS NAWQA Cycle II Site
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Thomas Harmon, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2005
* USD 34,938.00

0408264&lt;br/&gt;Harmon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract. Biogeochemical cycling
within the hyporheic zone can significantly affect the flux of elements and
chemical compounds between groundwater and surface waters. This proposal
leverages existing USGS infrastructure and current NSF STC activities to monitor
(1) a more extensive array of redox active species and (2) more spatially and
temporally dense patterns of nitrogen species using a novel sensor network
deployment. Project personnel will analyze hyporheic zone porewater samples for
a range of trace elements not being considered by USGS, such as rare earth
elements, uranium, and arsenic. A parallel effort will deploy a continuous
hyporheic zone sensor network targeting nitrogen redox species. This network
will be deployed adjacent to the USGS manual sampling station, and will include
commercial nitrate, nitrite and ammonium sensors and developmental nitrate
microsensors, and will enhance the spatial resolution and add temporal
resolution to the overall investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit. While it is generally understood that groundwater-surface water
interactions play an important role in determining sediment and water quality in
streams, a quantitative understanding of the chemical flux and biogeochemistry
has been lacking for most elements and chemical compounds. The proposed effort
will expand the USGS-planned chemical analyses to encompass an array of chemical
species which have not been investigated in this environment. The species and
trends identified will yield new insight into the biogeochemistry of the
hyporheic zone and its capacity to buffer groundwater-surface water
interactions. At the same time, the sensor network deployment will reveal
spatial and temporal patterns with sufficient resolution to reveal between
spatial variability and gradients, and to identify temporal patterns on
different timescales (diurnal, seasonal, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. The results from this investigation will be useful to stakeholders
associated with watershed management issues such as setting total maximum daily
loads, determining the minimum width of riparian buffer zones necessary to
preserve habitat, and others. The successful deployment of the nitrogen species
sensor network will contribute to the movement toward an environmental
cyberinfrastructure by changing the way in which scientists observe streambeds.
&lt;br/&gt; The education and training of undergraduate and graduate students at
UC Merced will be enriched by this investment in environmental
cyberinfrastructure at this site, which is locate about 20 miles from this new
UC campus. The mission of UC Merced is to serve the people of the San Joaquin
Valley. Merced County census data from 2000 indicate that 45% of the county
residents are Latino or Hispanic, less than 11% have college degrees, and more
than 21% live below the poverty level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SGER Justification.
The proposed SGER project is possible in the context of on-going (though
temporary) USGS efforts. A timely start for the SGER project is critical so that
we can coordinate with the planned USGS sampling in March 2004; USGS sampling at
this site is planned to take place over a period of only 1-1/2 years.
&lt;br/&gt;