* 0408445
* Visible Light Induced Interactions with DNA by Rhodium Centered Supramolecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Brenda Winkel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 12/31/2008
* USD 315,273.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports Professors Karen Brewer and Brenda Winkel to study the visible-light-
induced interactions of a new class of supramolecular complexes that couple
charge transfer light absorbers into a central rhodium core. The DNA reactivity
derives from a unique metal-metal charge transfer excited (MMCT) state. Specific
goals are to: 1) construct photochemically activated supramolecular assemblies
displaying visible light induced interactions with DNA, 2) establish basic
chemical knowledge necessary to exploit the previously unexplored MMCT excited
state for oxygen independent photoactivated reactivity with DNA, 3) study the
visible light induced interaction of supramolecular complexes with DNA, 4)
modify the supramolecular architecture to enhance photoactivated reactions with
DNA. Results would generate fundamental photochemical knowledge applicable to
DNA detection and analysis, photodynamic therapy and the potential sterilization
of blood and other biomedical fluids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New ways of cutting
DNA with visible light will be developed with potential biotechnology
applications. Students would be trained in an interdisciplinary environment with
two female professors serving as mentors. Outreach to local K-12 would be
conducted by the professors, graduate students, and undergraduate students from
the project team and would include on site visits to classrooms, after school
programs, and establishing science clubs within local K-12
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;