* 0408517
* Collaborative Research:  Asymmetry in Gouge and Fault Zone Damage as an Indicator of Preferred Rupture Direction: In-Situ Test of Theoretical Models
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Thomas Rockwell, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2007
* USD 127,210.00

The studies focus on detailed tests of the hypothesis that earthquake ruptures
on a fault between rocks of different elastic properties propagate
preferentially in the direction of slip of the more compliant side of the fault.
Recent analytical and numerical studies of dynamic rupture along an interface
between dissimilar materials predict that one direction of rupture will be
favored over the other. This is supported by recent laboratory observations and
some seismic data. If unidirectional rupture is a persistent behavior for
natural fault structures with material contrasts, repeated unidirectional
ruptures should leave a distinct asymmetric imprint on the microstructure of the
fault zone. Preliminary observations at several exposures along the San Jacinto,
San Andreas and Punchbowl faults in southern California reveal several
signatures of asymmetry in both the gouge and damage zones that support this
model and warrant further work. The continuing investigations map systematically
the fabric and structure of fault zone gouge and damage at several sites along a
number of large strike-slip faults, with the specific purpose of developing
criteria to resolve rupture propagation direction. The observational work is
accompanied by a theoretical parameter-space study of rupture that can migrate
between and propagate simultaneously along several interfaces and theoretical
simulations of rupture that can produce off-fault damage. The studies can have
profound implications for many aspects of earthquake geology and physics of
rupture propagation on large faults, including effective constitutive laws,
suppression of branching, fault-interaction, triggering, the heat flow paradox,
short rise-time of earthquake slip, and estimates of seismic shaking hazard
associated with rupture of large faults.