* 0408526
* 4He/3He Thermocronometry and Noble Gas Diffusion Behavior via Proton Irradiation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Kenneth Farley, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 270,742.00

Techniques and applications of (U-Th)/He dating have evolved rapidly in the last
decade. The method is now in common use to study problems ranging from dating of
Quaternary volcanic rocks, to establishing the timing and magnitude of fault
motions, to documenting paleotopography. These applications have relied on
measurement of the bulk age of the dated grain. By introducing 3He into minerals
via proton bombardment followed by step-heat measurements of the 4He/3He ratio,
it is possible to produce an "age spectrum" developed as a 4He concentration
profile within the grain. The age spectrum carries unique quantitative
information on the sample's cooling path that complements the bulk age. 3He
measurements also provide a rigorous constraint on helium diffusivity that
cannot be obtained from measurements of natural radiogenic 4He alone. Work
supported by this grant will field-test the 4He/3He technique in several well-
constrained geologic situations including a deep crustal borehole and a normal
fault block with a large magnitude of exhumation of known timing. Numerical
models will be developed to interpret profiles and to evaluate recognized
potential pitfalls with the method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
enhance scientific infrastructure by further developing collaboration with
physicists at the Northeast Proton Therapy Center's cyclotron facility. Proton
beam time supported by this proposal may be shared with other interested users,
and if successful the ultimate product will be fundamentally new capabilities in
geochronology and geochemistry. Farley's geochronology laboratory at Caltech has
been used by many outside investigators in the last several years, and this
proposal will support the infrastructure necessary to continue this defacto
multi-user facility for the coming years. The proposed work will also support
the education of a Caltech PhD student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;