* 0408773
* Collaborative Research:  The Lu-Hf Composition of the Earth and Implications for the Future of Hf Isotope Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* P. Jonathan Patchett, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2007
* USD 163,868.00

This research project is directed at solving pressing problems that currently
hinder the application of the Lu-Hf isotopic system to mantle and crust
evolution. The value of the decay constant of 176Lu is known to no better than
6%, and the Lu-Hf composition of the Bulk Silicate Earth (BSE), essential for
studies of Earth differentiation, could vary by around 10% in Lu/Hf ratio,
leading to vastly different interpretations of Hf isotopic data for old rocks.
It is proposed to conduct Lu- Hf isotopic analyses of (1) phosphate mineral
separates from chondrite meteorites, to constrain the 176Lu decay constant and
(2) powders of chondrites prepared from 6- to 30-gram masses of meteorite, to
constrain BSE. This project will be done in collaboration with Christa Gopel
(Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris), who has extensive experience
separating phosphates from chondrites. She will supervise and conduct mineral
separations using powders of large volumes of chondrites made 20 years ago that
are available from the Smithsonian Institution. Chemical and mass spectrometric
work will be split between Arizona and Washington State, with no resulting
increased cost to NSF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this
work will contribute materially to training of professional isotope geochemists
at a postdoctoral level. In addition, one or more undergraduate students at both
institutions will learn elements of laboratory procedure and approaches to
research. &lt;br/&gt;