* 0408487
* Thin Film Fracture and Decohesion in Micro- and Nano-Patterned Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Philippe Geubelle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2008
* USD 156,000.00

Proposal ID: 0408487 PI: Sottos, Nancy Organization: University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Title: Thin film fracture and decohesion in micro- and nano-
patterned devices

This research focuses on the unique fracture and decohesion problems associated
with micro-and nano-patterned thin film devices fabricated via soft lithographic
methods. Soft lithography encompasses a group of techniques, such as
microcontact printing (m-CP) and nanotransfer printing (n-TP) that use a
flexible elastomeric stamp to form patterns of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs)
on the surfaces of substrates. The SAMs can then serve as resists for selective
etching or templates for selective deposition to form the final thin film
device. These additive methods of patterning are used to create complex 2-D and
3-D structures with feature sizes ranging from hundreds of microns to tens of
nanometers for a broad set of applications in electronics, sensors and MEMS. A
collaborative experimental and computational approach is proposed to investigate
the relationships between surface chemistry, interfacial fracture energy,
processing induced residual stress, and cracking in patterned thin films.

Intellectual Merit: The research described in this proposal will result in
several new experimental and computational tools to quantify the interfacial
fracture energy in ultra-thin, patterned films that are difficult to
characterize by conventional adhesion tests. Thin film adhesive strength will be
characterized under a full range of mixed-mode dynamic loading conditions using
a laser induced pulsed loading technique. Laser pulse absorption generates high
amplitude, short duration stress wave pulses to load the interface between a
film and a substrate. A dynamic edge delamination test will be developed to
obtain the initiation and propagation fracture toughness of the interface. The
link to meaningful fracture parameters is achieved with the aid of appropriate
analytical and numerical tools to support the experiments. Powerful numerical
schemes that combine spectral methods with cohesive volumetric finite methods
will be developed to accurately extract interfacial fracture toughness. The
experimental and computational tools developed under the current research will
provide a quantitative understanding of patterned film fracture that can guide
the design and development of new inks, transfer chemistries, and stamps for the
next generation of devices fabricated by soft lithography. Broader Impact: This
project integrates research activities involving thin film processing,
experimental mechanics and numerical fracture analysis, providing an excellent
setting for the education and training of two graduate students at the
University of Illinois. Moreover, these students will be part of an
interdisciplinary research group at the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science
and Technology that will facilitate broader interactions with other students and
faculty from Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, and Materials Science. An
additional REU supplement will be requested to support two undergraduate
researchers to work on both experimental and computational aspects of the
project. Efforts will be made to recruit graduate students from underrepresented
groups for these positions. The PIs participate in a number of outreach
activities to increase the pool, recruit and retain underrepresented students at
the undergraduate and graduate levels.