* 0408751
* Collaborative Research: Elasticty of Hot-Pressed Polycrystalline High-Pressure Minerals of the Earth's Transition Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Gabriel Gwanmesia, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 93,689.00

Increasingly sophisticated Earth models are being developed that show how
processes in Earth's interior affect conditions near the surface. These models,
however, must be constrained by accurate and precise laboratory data. The
elastic properties of high-pressure mineral phases in Earth's interior, and how
these properties are affected by changes in temperature, pressure, and mineral
structure and composition, are data of special interest and importance. This
project represents a collaboration to investigate the elastic behavior of
polycrystalline specimens of several mineral phases in Earth's transition
zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaboration will draw on individual expertise
in two areas of research. Gabriel Gwanmesia (Delaware State University) will
assume responsibility for synthesizing polycrystalline specimens of high-
pressure phases. Donald Isaak (University of California at Los Angeles) will be
responsible for measuring the elastic properties of these specimens at room
temperature and elevated temperature using the resonant ultrasound spectroscopy
(RUS) technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous attempts to study temperature
effects on elasticity of high-pressure phases using special techniques such as
RUS have been hindered by the lack of quality single-crystals. These limitations
can be avoided through use of polycrystalline specimens synthesized by
specialists at facilities developed over many years through NSF funding. A
specific goal of this project, therefore, is to investigate how temperature
effects of elasticity of polycrystalline specimens vary with Mg/Fe and water
concentrations in the olivine/wadsleyite/ringwoodite system and with Ca
concentration in the clinopyroxene/majorite/garnet system. When used with data
on pressure effects of elasticity and seismic tomography, results from this
study will better constrain geochemical and geodynamical models of whole-Earth
tectonics and help elucidate the role of the transition zone in dynamic and
thermal processes from Earth's core to
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also address a
primary goal of the Elasticity Grand Challenge of the NSF-sponsored COMPRES
consortium which is to reconcile elasticity data reported from a variety of
measuring techniques. Specifically, the project represents an attempt to use an
existing elasticity measurement technique (RUS) to provide significant new cross
checks on reports of elasticity measurements done with other techniques, and to
help discriminate, in some cases, between data that are in serious conflict
regarding composition and temperature effects on elasticity for high-pressure
phases.