* 0408624
* 2004 Thin Film and Small Scale Mechanical Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Zhigang Suo, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 03/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference on "Thin Film and
Small Scale Mechanical Behavior" will be held in 18-23 July 2004, at Colby
College, in Waterville, Maine. Financial support is requested to help to defray
the costs for the speakers and discussion leaders, including three women and
eight young researchers. The support will also assist postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of the proposal is twofold:
the singular importance of the subject field to the discipline of the mechanics
and materials, and the interdisciplinary nature of the field. For over a decade,
the field of small scale mechanical behavior has been at the leading edge of the
discipline of the mechanics and materials. Scientific challenges include
mechanically manipulating objects, imaging dynamic processes, measuring
properties, and modeling mechanical behavior, all at exquisitely small length
scales. Industrial applications range from integrated circuits, to MEMS, and to
lab-on-a-chip. The field of small scale mechanical behavior is the most visible
link between the new science of nanomechanics and the advanced technologies that
affect daily lives of people. &lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Conference has a broad
impact on knowledge dissemination and intellectual infrastructure. The
Conference is known to initiate new, unexpected research directions. The 2004
Conference will introduce two brainstorming sessions: The Future of Thin Film
Mechanics and Linking Biology and Mechanics, on Tuesday and Wednesday evenings.
In addition, two poster sessions will offer all attendees a chance to present
relevant research work. One of the poster sessions will specifically give young
researchers an opportunity to introduce themselves and their research programs
to the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;