* 0408709
* Validation of a Numerical Granular Flow Simulation Model for Pyroclastic Flows and Debris Avalanches
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Barry Voight, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 275,178.00

Pyroclastic flows and volcanic debris avalanches are among the most hazardous
volcanic events and have been responsible for tens of thousands of deaths in the
20th century. However, reliable hazards assessments are difficult to accomplish
and improved modeling is a major key to improved assessments. This research will
test a recently developed, very powerful, flow model code (TITAN2D) and compare
its output to a unique body of field data (from select sites with very high
quality data). The intellectual merit of this research is to increase our
understanding of the physics of hazardous phenomena, and to aid the use of
TITAN2D via its validation, calibration, and code improvements. Validation is
the process of determining the degree to which a model is an accurate
representation of the real world. Its focus is on physics issues, on solving the
right equations for the problem at hand. With validation it is anticipated that
this model could be used in a reasonably reliable way to investigate flow
processes, to aid hazards and risk assessments, make hazards and risk maps, and
contribute to hazards mitigation. The information intended for validation
exercises include remarkably detailed data on 30 large to major dome collapses
and slope failures. Broader impacts include societal benefits through improved
understanding of hazardous processes, improved hazards assessments and risk
communication, and more effective zoning in volcanic and slope instability
crises. This research should contribute data and foster computer code
enhancements by collaborating SUNY scientists that will make the method
generally more effective and reliable for applications. Research results will be
communicated frequently and interactively to code developers, and disseminated
in timely fashion at meetings and workshops, by publications, and through the
web.