* 0408834
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Monique Scott, Monique                 Scott
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences Minority Research and
Training Post-Doctoral Fellowship addresses the question of how Afro-British
natural history museum audiences relate to British museums as institutions, and
how they receive the representations of heritage posed by such museums. The
proposed research extends from the researcher's dissertation research that found
that human origins exhibitions often alienate and exclude Black audiences. This
sense of alienation was particularly felt amongst Afro-British audiences to
traditional British natural history museums. The post-doctoral project seeks to
closely examine Black British perceptions of the natural history museum as an
institution, as well as its anthropological representations of African
evolutionary and cultural heritage. It aims to probe perceptions of visitors to
the Natural History Museum (London), the Horniman Museum (London) as well as
among a non-museum visiting pool of respondents derived from British cultural
organizations. To probe perceptions, the project uses innovative methodological
approaches, including quantitative questionnaire data, qualitative interview
data, inter-generational focus groups and children's groups. The comparative
approach will offer insight into how museum studies can better gain access to
the complex ways meanings are made in museums. The research will be conducted
over the course of twenty-four months while at the University of Southampton's
archaeology of art and representation program, and under the mentorship of
foremost anthropology of museums scholar, Stephanie Moser. The Southampton
program is the premier academic center for critiquing the role of anthropology
in popular culture, and is also pioneering novel methods of involving varied
communities in museum archaeology. Once an understanding of the relationship
between Black audiences and museums has been ascertained, the project will offer
strategies British natural history museums can use to better reach out to and
incorporate their diverse audiences. Such strategies will be applicable to
museums worldwide, and will be made available through published findings, as
well as through the researcher' ongoing involvement in museum outreach
initiatives

