* 0408348
* Integrated Control and Mechanical Design of Biped Robots for Stable and Efficient Dynamic Walking
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* James Schmiedeler, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 06/30/2008
* USD 294,905.00

0408348 Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Integrated Control and Mechanical Design of Biped
Robots for Stable and Efficient Dynamic Walking: &lt;br/&gt;E.R. Westervelt and
J. Schmiedeler, The Ohio State University, Columbus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators propose to formulate and experimentally validate the first
framework that formally integrates controller design and mechanical design for
the development of biped robots that walk with gaits that are a priori known to
be stable, robust, and energy efficient. Current biped control design is
decoupled from mechanical design due to a lack of formal understanding of how to
systematically generate controllers that induce dynamic walking in a given
mechanical design. By devising a procedure to generate such controllers, an
iterative design framework will be possible. The ability to quantify closed-loop
system characteristics will enable the development of superior designs and the
identification of principles upon which they are based. The framework will be
applied to design a prototype biped for experimental validation of the
methodology. Furthermore, the framework will be used to investigate the control
and design issues related to joint compliance, foot utility, and learning. The
proposed work enable researchers to develop biped prototypes of different
morphologies that walk with dynamically stable gaits more robust and more
efficient than any achieved to date. The framework will provide the foundation
for the systematic development of autonomous bipeds endowed with a variety of
useful behaviors ranging from walking and running to stair climbing and
crawling.&lt;br/&gt;