* 0408345
* SGER: Numerical Study of Biomass Burning Aerosols in Southeast Asia: Smoke Impact Assessment (BASE-ASIA)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Wen-yih Sun, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2006
* USD 69,999.00

Southeast Asia is a rapidly developing region that has very polluted air due to
biomass burning and inefficient, low technology fossil fuel combustion. In
addition to the impact on the local air quality, these gaseous and particulate
pollutants my have regional and global influences on atmospheric composition,
radiation, the hydrological cycle, biogeochemical cycles and biodiversity. This
project involves numerical modeling of emissions and plume transport, in support
of the deployment of the University of Maryland aircraft package (Dickerson et
al., 0412040) in Thailand during the first phase of the multi-disciplinary,
multi-institutional, multi-agency supported BASE-ASIA (Biomass burning Aerosols
in Southeast Asia: Smoke Impact Assessment) project. The BASE-ASIA program
involves the collection of in situ and remote observational data, and analysis
with numerical models to address questions related to the type, frequency,
intensity and geographical extent of key pollutant emissions in the southeastern
Asia region, and to attempt to understand how these pollutants impact regional
air quality, radiation, and weather. The aircraft package will provide airborne
a number of climate and chemistry related quantities during the first phase
pilot study in March and April, 2004. Measurements will be conducted aboard a
Thai King Air weather aircraft, and will allow the vertical and horizontal
structure of the observed species to be quantified in the regions near Bangkok
and Chiang Mai. This pilot study will set the stage for future studies of a
larger geographical region and more observations. There will be significant
collaboration and leveraging of the NASA-funded part of the study making use of
satellite remote observations and surface radiation measurements. The present
study will perform daily, fine resolution forecasts of wind, temperature,
moisture, clouds, and radiation in support of the aircraft observations. The
location and dispersion of plumes will be predicted. The observations and models
will be combined to yield time evolution of the 3-dimensional aerosol field, and
interactions between clouds, aerosols, hydrology and climate will be studied due
to the presence and evolution of the aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will provide support and research experience for the one PI and one post-
doctoral fellow. The project will support the collection of the first airborne
chemical composition data over Southeast Asia, data until now unavailable due to
security concerns of host countries. This pilot study will move the community a
step closer to understanding the chemical and climatic impacts of emissions from
this rapidly developing region.