* 0408484
* Collaborative Research:    Head-Disk Interface for Hard-Disk Drive Areal Data Density of 1 Terabit per Square Inch
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* David Bogy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2006
* USD 60,000.00

Collaborative Research: Head-Disk Interface for Hard-Disk Drive Areal Data
Density of 1 Terabit per Square Inch Andreas A. Polycarpou (UIUC), David B. Bogy
(UCB), Frank E. Talke (UCSD)

In magnetic recording hard-disk drives the read/write transducer known as head
must be very closely separated from the rotating disk that carries the magnetic
media in order to achieve extremely high areal data densities. Modern state-of-
the art hard-disk drives are capable of storing 80 Gbits per square inch (1 Gbit
is 80 billions bits) and it is projected that the magnetic spacing for 1 Tbit
(trillion) per square inch will be 5-6 nanometers. The success of magnetic
recording to such high areal densities depends on the successful design and
implementation of low flying and pseudo-contacting head-disk interfaces. For
reliability reasons, such interfaces will also require protective layers of
carbon overcoat and lubricant, thus the physical spacing or flying-height will
be of the order of only few nanometers. In such ultra-low flying-height regimes,
the mechanical integrity and stability of the head-disk interface is a main
concern, since high-speed head-disk contact and flying-height modulations are
unavoidable. Recent experimental and simulation results support the presence of
attractive adhesive forces in ultra-low flying HDIs and the possibility of head-
disk interface instabilities occurring when the flying-height is only few
nanometers. In this collaborative research the investigator and his colleagues
will undertake a systematic study to investigate the head-disk interface
instability, develop models to predict it, design head-disk interfaces based on
these models, and fabricate then and test them, in collaboration with the
Information Storage Industry Consortium and its industrial partners.

The impact of this research will be to advance the state-of-the-art of
nanotechnology related to magnetic storage hard-disk drives and to enable
extremely high recording densities of Tbytes capacities. This will be
accomplished by specifically designing, building and testing magnetic heads that
will fly over a magnetic disk at only few nanometers distance. Specific
technological sectors that will directly benefit are magnetic storage industries
and other companies that heavily rely on high areal density data recordings such
as information technology, civil infrastructure and others. The broader impacts
of this research will be accomplished via integrated research and education
programs. The research plan will advance the knowledge of nanotechnology and
nanotribomechanics, dynamics and friction, while the education plan will
disseminate it outside the research groups and beyond the Universities.