* 0408308
* SGER:    Morphological Study of a Key Avian Fossil from Antarctica:   New Data from X-Ray Computed Tomography and Histology
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Julia Clarke, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 02/28/2006
* USD 13,617.00

Clarke has submitted an SGER proposal to support time critical work on bird
fossil that must be returned to Argentina by the end of March 2004. The
specialized work is x-ray computed tomography imaging to gather detailed
anatomical data in a non-destructive fashion. This fossil is a late Cretaceous
bird fossil and is important because of its relative completeness and because
existing information suggests that it may be a key link in evolution of birds
that demonstrates the importance of the Antarctic Peninsula region for bird
evolution.

The rational for consideration of this as an SGER award is that the work must be
completed very soon, before the fossil is returned to Argentina. It would be
detrimental to the fossil material to require that the PI's seek to return it to
the US at some later time. Also, the work involves two novel approaches to study
of fossil material and this work would inform scientific discussions and debates
about avian evolution that is occurring now. Delay of acquisition of these data
would mean that this debate would not benefit from the new data and this would
at least leave open questions in the discussions about bird evolution. Hence, it
is very reasonable to use this mechanism to get this work done now, while the
material is undergoing other non-destructive work and while the data would be
particularly timely to scientific debates.

The SGER program does not allow external merit review (see Grant Proposal Guide:
NSF 03-041, part II.D.1).