* 0408744
* Prediction of hyporheic exchange and solute transport dynamics in a headwater tributary of  the Illinois and Mississippi River systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Aaron Packman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2008
* USD 359,983.00

0408744&lt;br/&gt;Packman&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary: Water and solute exchange
between streams and the surrounding subsurface&lt;br/&gt;(hyporheic exchange)
has recently been recognized as a critical process in the cycling of many
important&lt;br/&gt;substances in watersheds. Hyporheic exchange has
particularly been shown to influence nutrient and&lt;br/&gt;carbon dynamics, and
the fate and transport of contaminants in surface waters. These issues have
risen to&lt;br/&gt;the forefront in the Midwestern U.S. because substantial
nitrate loads from agriculture and urban centers&lt;br/&gt;contribute to chronic
hypoxia in the Gulf of Mexico. Despite the clear link that exists between
hydrologic&lt;br/&gt;processes in headwater streams, denitrification efficiency
in removing stream nitrate, and nitrogen loads&lt;br/&gt;reaching the Gulf, our
current understanding of these processes in low-gradient, sand-bed streams
is&lt;br/&gt;largely empirical. Most glaring is the lack of, fundamentally-
based, predictive models for hyporheic&lt;br/&gt;exchange in sand-bed streams,
which has prevented the transfer of experimental observations gained
at&lt;br/&gt;one site to other sites, or even to the same site under different
flow conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Our objective is to collect a definitive data set
from a low-gradient, sand-bed stream and test the&lt;br/&gt;applicability of
several fundamental, process based models of hyporheic exchange that have
proven&lt;br/&gt;successful in laboratory flumes. We seek to both advance our
fundamental understanding of hyporheic&lt;br/&gt;exchange processes in real
stream, but also to assess the improvements in prediction of solute
transport&lt;br/&gt;that are possible for a variety of flow and geomorphic
conditions. The stream selected for intensive study&lt;br/&gt;is Sugar Creek, a
headwater stream in the agricultural region along the northern Illinois-Indiana
border.&lt;br/&gt;Sugar Creek is representative of many low-gradient streams in
agricultural headwater areas that are&lt;br/&gt;tributary to the Illinois and
Mississippi River systems. We propose to conduct detailed tracer
experiments&lt;br/&gt;and related physical measurements that will be notable
because they will resolve hyporheic flow paths,&lt;br/&gt;solute transport, and
controlling processes with an unprecedented level of detail. In-stream
solute&lt;br/&gt;injections will be undertaken in several seasons in a 3 to 4
kilometer long reach of Sugar Creek. Stream-tracer&lt;br/&gt;data will be used
to assess bulk transport integrated over 8 to 10 sub-reaches (50 300 m
long)&lt;br/&gt;representing variable geomorphic conditions. Several of those
sub-reaches will be thoroughly&lt;br/&gt;characterized in terms of their
streambed topography and morphology, cross-channel flow
variability,&lt;br/&gt;sediment characteristics, and subsurface movement of the
solute tracer. This unprecedented level of&lt;br/&gt;detail will be made
possible using state of the art measurement technologies. The resulting data
sets will&lt;br/&gt;support the application of a suite of fundamental,
predictive, process-based models of hyporheic exchange&lt;br/&gt;and its effects
on downstream solute transport. The models will be evaluated in terms of their
ability to&lt;br/&gt;predict not only reach-averaged tracer concentration data,
but also point estimates of interfacial hyporheic&lt;br/&gt;flux and porewater
tracer concentrations. Based on fundamental theory, we will develop and
test&lt;br/&gt;approaches for upscaling rates of hyporheic exchange to predict
solute transport in the entire study reach&lt;br/&gt;under seasonally varying
conditions. In sum, we will apply several modeling approaches of
differing&lt;br/&gt;sophistication in order to 1) evaluate our current ability
to predict hyporheic exchange in sand bed streams&lt;br/&gt;from first
principles, and 2) develop reasonable approaches for upscaling the computations
so that solute&lt;br/&gt;transport can be predicted with a specified level of
uncertainty for longer stream reaches.&lt;br/&gt;Because this study is focused
on fundamental processes that occur widely, this work will have
very&lt;br/&gt;broad scientific impacts and will be used to address multiple
pressing societal concerns. Detailed&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the relationship
between stream/sedimentary conditions and hyporheic exchange
will&lt;br/&gt;facilitate improved understanding of nutrient dynamics, carbon
cycling, and releases from contaminated&lt;br/&gt;sediments. Our goals for
predictions (in terms of uncertainty and spatial resolution) are compatible
with&lt;br/&gt;future applications in reach and basin-scale water-quality
models. In particular, the choice of Sugar Creek&lt;br/&gt;as the intensive
study site will provide critical hydrologic information to support complementary
studies&lt;br/&gt;on nitrate fluxes and sedimentary denitrification in the
headwaters of the Mississippi River basin. The&lt;br/&gt;project's broader
impacts will also be increased by the synergistic activities of the PI's. Both
PI's have a&lt;br/&gt;strong history of involvement in scientific organizations,
and the project's themes will be reflected in&lt;br/&gt;activities such as
special sessions at major technical meetings. We will particularly seek to
broaden the&lt;br/&gt;general contribution of this work by encouraging
interdisciplinary and international communication and&lt;br/&gt;inter-site
comparisons. The project will also contribute considerably to human resource
development,&lt;br/&gt;both through direct training of students and via the use
of the field site for educational demonstrations.