* 0408462
* Collaborative Research: The Time Scales of Magmatic Differentiation and Their Relationship to Eruptive Style
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Dennis Geist, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 172,587.00

Hekla volcano in southern Iceland displays a remarkable correspondence between
its style of volcanic activity and extent of petrologic evolution. Most
eruptions are zoned, especially the ones that punctuate long repose, initiating
with an explosive siliceous phase and ending with effusion of mafic icelandite.
The pioneering work of Thorarinsson showed that the extent of differentiation at
Hekla correlates with the repose between eruptions. This project is designed to
study in detail the zoned products of the historical eruptions, in order to
elucidate the mechanisms and timescales of differentiation. Field work will be
conducted in order to collect sequences of samples from each historical
eruption; because the eruptions are all historical, the minimum time for
crystallization, mixing, and differentiation is well-constrained. Each of the
rocks will be analyzed using modern, state of the art techniques, but the focus
of this study is microanalysis of phenocryst phases, which are tracers of the
liquid compositions from which they crystallized. Major and trace element zoning
profiles of phenocrysts and analyses of melt inclusions will help determine the
parentage of the phenocrysts, as well as the duration they have been entrained
in their host magmas. Oxygen isotopic ratios of the phenocrysts and water
analyses of melt inclusions record the extent to which water influences magmatic
evolution. Finally, relatively short-lived actinide-series isotopic analyses of
the phenocrysts will constrain their age, the amount of time they have resided
in the magmatic plumbing system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader
impacts, this award will support the research endeavors of a doctoral student at
the University of Idaho and six Colgate University undergraduates. The PIs have
designed a plan to provide the PhD student with teaching and mentoring
experience working with the undergraduates on a protracted basis. The Colgate
students, in turn, will have the opportunity to participate in extended
fieldwork, interact with research scientists, work on independent, focused
research questions. Results will also be incorporated into both undergraduate
and graduate level courses at Colgate and the University of Idaho, as well as
outreach programs designed to bring hands-on science investigation to local K-12
students and community groups. &lt;br/&gt;