* 0408035
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Structure, Performance and Evolution of the Primate Auditory System
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Callum Ross, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 05/31/2006
* USD 8,000.00

The auditory system is the most mechanically complex sense in mammals, comprised
of numerous bones, muscles, and other soft tissues. Consequently, this region
provides many opportunities to study acoustical function and structural
differences between various groups of animals have also been used to help infer
their relationships to each other. Despite substantial investigation of the
function of the auditory system in other groups of mammals (e.g., rodents),
primates have received only limited attention in this regard even though
considerable variation in the auditory structures both within and between
different primate groups has been documented. &lt;br/&gt;To help understand the
functional and evolutionary implications of primate auditory diversity, this
dissertation will measure a set of functionally relevant auditory structures in
ten species of primates and one species of tree shrew. The structures that will
be examined include the eardrum, middle ear bones and cavities, and the cochlea
and will be analyzed using state-of-the-art techniques including micro-computed
tomography, impression molding, and digital imaging and measurement. In addition
to examining a large comparative data set of extant specimens, a 30 million year
old fossil primate specimen from Africa will also be evaluated. Lastly, the
hearing sensitivity of a relatively large-bodied prosimian (a "primitive" group
of primates), weighing approximately 3.5 kg, will be determined. This final step
is necessary since hearing sensitivity data are available for only 18 species of
primates and only four of these are prosimians, all four of which weigh 2 kg or
less. &lt;br/&gt;These data will be used to test hypotheses relating ear
structure and function and will be useful for studying the evolution of hearing
in primates and other closely related groups. In turn, this type of fundamental
data can be applied to further test and generalize broader ideas utilizing
acoustic theory in comparative analyses of other mammalian groups. This line of
research may eventually be used to investigate the evolution of hearing in
humans and its relationship to the unique aspects of human
communication.&lt;br/&gt;One of the broader impacts of this project relates to
its integration of multiple scientific disciplines, bringing together research,
researchers, and educators from various fields such as functional morphology,
paleontology, behavioral ecology, anatomy, geology, and acoustics. This will
help foster partnerships between research facilities such as the Duke Primate
Research Center, Duke Medical Center Hearing Research Laboratories, and the
Computed Tomography Facility at the University of Texas at Austin. Beyond
providing heuristic value in acoustical and evolutionary studies, the
information gleaned from this study will expand our understanding of the
implications of invasive surgical techniques that require damaging certain
auditory structures in order to repair others. The multifarious nature of this
investigation will permit the data and results to reach a wide professional
audience through publications in acoustical, evolutionary, behavioral, and
medical journals.&lt;br/&gt;