* 0408125
* Doctoral Dissertation: The Link Between Parental Care Behavior and Recruitment in Largemouth Bass
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* David Wahl, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2006
* USD 10,450.00

The goal of the proposed study is to examine the importance of parental care
behavior to recruitment (defined here as survival of a year class to age-1) of
largemouth bass. Largemouth bass males build nests, court females to those
nests, spawn with them, and then provide care for their young as they develop
from newly spawned eggs to independence as age-0 juveniles. Individual variation
in behavior and nest-specific DNA fingerprints, generated with microsatellite
DNA markers, will be used to determine both the relative contribution of each
nest to the population of juveniles surviving their first growing season and the
influence of care behavior on these contributions. Variation in parental
protection of young likely causes differences among nests in vulnerability to
nest predators, however, the effect of this nest-level variation on recruitment
has not been tested.

This study addresses the growing need in population ecology for examination of
links between important population processes, such as recruitment, and
individual differences in behavior. Furthermore, identification of mechanisms
responsible for determining recruitment success in fishes is crucial for proper
management of commercial and sport fisheries. More specifically, this study will
advance our understanding of the role of parental care in largemouth bass
recruitment.