* 0408690
* Zircon Geochronology and REE Geochemistry of High- and Ultrahigh-Pressure Metamorphic Rocks:  North Qaidam and South Altun Terranes, Northwest China
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Dennis Bird, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2007
* USD 143,348.00

Ultra-high pressure (UHP) metamorphism (at depths &gt;80 km) is a product of
continental subduction and collision. Investigation of UHP metamorphic rocks and
the processes responsible for their exhumation and exposure at the Earth's
surface aids our understanding of continental evolution and crust/mantle
geochemical processes. This study will employ zircon U-Pb geochronology, linked
to pressure, temperature, and mineral paragenesis by REE geochemistry, mineral
inclusion analysis, and thermobarometry, to study the ages of metamorphism in
the North Qaidam and South Altun UHP terranes in northwest China, as well as the
exhumation rates associated with their eclogite- to granulite- and amphibolite-
facies decompression. The results will significantly advance our knowledge of
the geologic history of the N. Qaidam and S. Altun terranes, and will evaluate
the geochronological correlation proposed between them. In addition, this study
will also aid our general understanding of UHP processes, especially those
responsible for the preservation of UHP rocks during exhumation and subsequent
exposure at the Earth's surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
addresses significant questions both in the field of metamorphic petrology, as
well as central Asian tectonics. The PI, graduate student Chris Mattinson,
together with collaborators J.L. Wooden, J.S. Yang, and Mattinson's thesis co-
advisor J.G. Liou have both the field and laboratory experience necessary to
address the questions posed, and the required resources are available at
Stanford University. This research is an integral part of graduate student Chris
Mattinson's doctoral research, and will result in multiple publications in peer-
reviewed journals and presentations at national and international meetings.
Central to this research is collaboration with Chinese colleagues, thereby
enhancing international scientific exchange and cooperation. The REE analysis
routine developed during the preliminary study supports and enhances the state-
of-the-art, multi-user Stanford-USGS SHRIMP-RG facility, thereby enhancing the
infrastructure for research and education.&lt;br/&gt;