* 0408009
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Possible Neural Mechanisms for Steroidal Control of Aggressive Behavior in Adult Individuals
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2005
* Michael Moore, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 10/31/2005
* USD 9,309.00

The adult brain is capable of change (plasticity) and alterations in its
structure may lead to changes in exhibited behavior: The Structure-Function
Hypothesis. However, although neural plasticity is an important theme in
neuroscience, its incorporation within animal behavior research has been
limited. The goal of this proposal is to assess whether testosterone-dependent
changes in brain structure determine neural activity and resultant aggressive
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;Methods employed involve staging aggressive encounters,
altering and measuring hormone levels, measuring brain regions, and using
immunocytochemical methods to tag and identification brain regions that are
activated during aggressive encounters. The feasibility of this research is high
as all of these methods are established in the investigator's laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;Demonstrating effects of neural structure on aggression would benefit
the scientific community by allowing subsequent research both identifying and
manipulating the exact neural alterations induced by hormones. Researchers could
then apply such an approach to relating hormone-induced changes in behavior with
changes in other neural structures. &lt;br/&gt;Impacts of this proposal include
applications to management and conservation programs, where social and
environmental variables may affect hormone levels. This approach can also be
used when assessing impacts of anthropogenic change in the environment on
hormone level, neural structure, and behavior. Results will be published and
presented at major conferences.&lt;br/&gt;