* 0408000
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of Generalism and Specialism in the RNA phage Phi6
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Paul Turner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2006
* USD 11,982.00

Biologists have long puzzled why most organisms specialize on few resources,
rather than generalize by broadly exploiting the wide variety of resources that
nature offers. Generalism seems a more tempting strategy, because it allows a
larger niche space and the ability for organisms to thrive across a vast range
of habitats. However, specialists appear to predominate in nature, perhaps due
to their greater efficiency at exploiting a lesser number of resources. The
costs of generalism (and their underlying mechanisms) have proven difficult to
study. This research will use mutants of the RNA virus phi-6 that show an
expanded ability to infect new host bacteria (i.e., generalist viruses), to
examine hypothesized costs of generalism. The mutants will be evolved for
hundreds of generations on a single novel host in order to test whether
adaptation to the new host necessitates specialization (narrowing of the virus
niche). Also, genomes of the evolved viruses will be sequenced to test two
competing theories on how mechanisms for specialization evolve at the molecular
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is powerful because it uses a harmless
virus of bacteria to study general questions regarding host shifts by viruses
onto hosts. Virus phi-6 is an especially informative model for studying
evolution of segmented RNA viruses, such as Hantavirus and Influenza which
infect humans. Thus, results of the study should further the understanding of
host-shifts involving pathogenic RNA viruses of higher organisms.&lt;br/&gt;