* 0408653
* Collaborative Research: Three-Dimensional Kinematic History of the Wyoming Salient: Implications for Development of Curved Orogens
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* W.A. Yonkee, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2008
* USD 89,513.00

Most mountain belts display varying degrees of curvature over a range of scales,
recording complex, three-dimensional deformation histories. However, despite
their ubiquitous occurrence, few examples exist where deformation histories and
processes responsible for orogenic curvature have been adequately quantified
from geologic evidence. These histories are embedded in regional structural
trends, paleomagnetic directions, mesoscopic structures, and grain-scale fabrics
of deformed rocks. The Utah-Idaho-Wyoming salient of the Sevier orogenic belt is
an ideal location to study processes that produce curvature over a range of
scales. Regional trends of major thrust faults and folds curve through 90
degrees from the north to south end of the salient, with additional local
curvature near cross-strike transfer zones. Rocks in the salient also carry
multiple paleomagnetic components and display systematic suites of mesoscopic
and microscopic structures (including cleavage, minor folds, minor fault
networks, and deformed fossils), providing a record of rotations and internal
strain within individual thrust sheets.

Initial studies in the Wyoming salient reveal both primary pre-thrusting and
secondary syn-folding paleomagnetic components that record complex rotation
histories related to thrust curvature. Initial studies also reveal broadly
consistent regional strain patterns, with widespread layer-parallel shortening
at high angles to thrust trends, minor tangential extension parallel to thrust
trends, and minor wrench shear. Calcite-twin strains, which accumulated during
early layer-parallel shortening prior to large-scale thrusting, provide another
reference frame that records locally significant rotations. Ongoing work is
focused on combined paleomagnetic and structural studies of three 'swaths'
located in the southern, central, and northern frontal parts of the salient, and
on two stratigraphic levels (Jurassic Twin Creek Limestone and redbeds of the
Triassic Ankareh Formation) that are well exposed, carry multiple
magnetizations, and contain multiple strain markers.

Analysis of slip lineation data from major thrust faults and construction of
two-dimensional cross sections indicate that thrust transport directions change
overall from ENE in the northern part to ESE in the southern part of the
salient, and fault slip magnitude decreases toward the north and south ends of
the salient. Three-dimensional cross sections, constrained by abundant seismic
data, and incorporating new strain and rotation data from this study, are being
constructed to develop a robust kinematic model of the salient. The model will
be used to identify controlling mechanisms responsible for mountain belt
curvature, including variations in stratigraphic thicknesses, strength changes
along faults, motion of indentors, and foreland buttress effects.

This investigation addresses several fundamental questions concerning the
evolution of mountain belts. (1) What are the relations between rotations,
strain, changes in thrust fault slip, and salient curvature? (2) What are the
consequences of incorporating strain and rotation data into three-dimensional
models of orogenic belts? (3) What factors are most important in developing
curved mountain belts and how can these factors be best identified? Ultimately,
findings from the Wyoming salient will be compared with similar ongoing studies
of other curved mountain belts, providing an array of viable models for the
development of curved orogens. Lastly, inclusion of strain and rotation data
into three-dimensional restorable deformation models should improve our general
understanding of hydrocarbon accumulations in fold-thrust belts.