* 0408521
* Structure of the Hawaiian Mantle Plume: Geochemical-Isotopic Mapping Using Post-Shield Lavas
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Donald DePaolo, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 321,482.00

The geochemistry of Hawaiian lavas provides clues about the nature of the deep
mantle. This project will use geochemical measurements on post-shield, and late-
shield lavas of the islands of Hawaii and Maui, along with both selected
offshore samples and samples of core from the shield of Kilauea volcano, to
complete a geochemical-isotopic "map" of the magma-producing region of the
Hawaiian mantle plume. The data will be integrated with fluid dynamical models
of the flow, temperature structure and melting in the plume to evaluate the
properties of the lower mantle plume source, and the nature of plume flow
beneath the lithosphere. The primary geochemical characterization will be for
the isotope ratios of Sr, Nd, Hf, Os, Pb, O, and He. Intellectual merit: The
proposed research will contribute to our understanding of fundamental aspects of
planetary processes and volcanology, and will combine geochemistry, petrology,
and fluid dynamics. The U-Th-He method will be evaluated for application to
volcanic rocks for the first time. The PI has 28 years of experience in isotope
geochemical research, has an extensive publication record, trained more than
twenty Ph.D. students who have gone on to successful careers in academia,
government, and private industry, and has experience with research on Hawaiian
isotope geochemistry and dynamics. Broader Impacts: The results will have broad
impacts for geophysics, planetary science, and the origin and behavior of
volcanoes. The multidisciplinary aspects of the project provide a rich venue for
advanced earth science education and technical training. The funding will help
support a research facility that, in the previous 15 years has benefited 22
graduate students (9 women) 8 postdoctoral fellows (4 women), plus more than 20
visitors, undergraduates and collaborators.