* 0408078
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Does Herbivory Signal Plants to Increase Nitrogen Uptake and Bolster Nitrogen and Starch Storage?
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Colin Orians, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 04/30/2006
* USD 11,895.00

When plants are attacked by leaf-chewing herbivores, they must cope with the
loss of leaf tissues, which hold an abundance of the plant's nutrients and are
important for capturing energy from sunlight for growth. Plants can store some
of their energy and nutrients in tougher tissues, such as stems and roots that
many herbivores cannot eat as readily. Starch and proteins are the most common
storage compounds in plants. The use of radioactive carbon in recent research
has allowed the study of allocation processes in living plants. One such study
indicates that plants might increase storage in response to herbivory. An
important signal molecule, jasmonic acid (JA), involved in plant recognition of
herbivore attack increased the amount of radioactive carbon transported to the
lower stem and roots in poplar and aspen tree saplings. The research proposed
here will determine whether JA and insect herbivory cause increases in storage
compounds in the stem and roots and increased nutrient intake by the roots of
poplars and aspens. Short-term processes will be studied in living plants using
radioactive isotopes of elements important to plants (carbon-11, nitrogen-13).
The longer-term build-up of storage compounds will be examined using stable
isotopes (carbon-13, nitrogen-15) and chemical analysis. Increased nitrogen
uptake and increased build-up of carbon and nitrogen storage compounds following
the initiation of herbivore leaf-chewing would indicate that plants can adjust
their metabolism to maximize their ability to survive leaf loss and damage and
to improve their re-growth. This pioneering research of storage regulation in
response to herbivore signals will be necessary to understand how plants have
evolved to cope with herbivory. Moreover, an improved understanding of how
plants tolerate damage may influence commercial agricultural and forestry
practices, and could generate insights for manipulating plants to improve
survival and growth.