* 0408878
* Collaborative Research: Comparison of Numerical, Physical and Natural Extensional Fault Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Roy Schlische, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2007
* USD 68,614.00

Two fundamental fault patterns accommodate extension in the brittle, upper
crust: horst-and-graben geometry and book-shelf geometry. With a horst-and-
graben geomety, neighboring normal faults are inclined in opposite directions;
with a book-shelf geometry, neighboring faults are inclined in the same
direction. Numerical models and scaled physical models with dry sand commonly
produce a horst-and-graben geometry. The book-shelf geometry only develops under
specific, asymmetric boundary conditions. Scaled physical models with wet clay,
however, produce a book-shelf geometry with either symmetric or asymmetric
boundary conditions. These observations raise the following questions. Is the
book-shelf geometry in nature generally the result of fundamentally asymmetric
stress patterns? What are the significant differences in the mechanical behavior
of sand and clay? Can numerical models reproduce more clay-like behavior? Is the
mechanical behavior of many rocks in nature more clay-like than sand-
like?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical, sand, and clay models, with a range of
boundary conditions, are underway to address these questions. The analyses of
these models has several objectives: (1) to define which numerical parameters
best reproduce the fault patterns observed in sand and clay models; (2) to
examine the transfer of deformation with depth in the sand and clay models; and
(3) to numerically simulate low-viscosity behavior, anisotropic behavior, and
pore-pressure changes near faults to better understand the results of the clay
models. The ultimate goal of this collaborative numerical/experimental research
is to quantify and understand the ranges of geologic conditions and material
behaviors that can produce the geometries of faults observed in natural zones of
continental extension. The project has economic impact because extensional fault
systems are commonly associated with hydrocarbon-producing regions. Also,
constraining fault and lithospheric properties may improve the understanding of
earthquake dynamics.