* 0408698
* Collaborative Research with the Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT): Probing Fundamental Physics Through Observations of Cosmic Structure
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2010
* Lyman Page, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Barvainis
* 12/31/2010
* USD 12,981,621.00

AST-0408698&lt;br/&gt;Page&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exciting recent discoveries in
observational and theoretical cosmology have given us a glimpse of new
fundamental physics. Our conception of the contents and fate of the Universe is
clearer and dramatically different than it was just five years ago. We now
believe the Universe is geometrically flat and comprised of ~5% baryons, ~30%
dark matter, and ~65% a new form of dark energy. Through a highly interlocking
program of observations, sophisticated data analysis, and theory, the
researchers involved in this collaborative project expect to expand our
knowledge well beyond the capabilities of the current generation of
investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A revolution in detector technology,
namely thousand-element bolometric arrays, has opened the door to new
discoveries about the physical Universe. This group will couple a three-color
millimeter camera based on these field-tested arrays to a specialized, 6-meter
diameter telescope to be located at an altitude above 5000 m in Chile.
Observations with this instrument can map out the formation of cosmic structure
from the high-redshift (z &gt; 1000) linear regime through the low-redshift (z
&lt; 5) non-linear regime when structures form. Optical spectroscopy with
10-meter class telescopes and measurements with modern X-ray satellites will
enable the determination of the redshifts and masses of hundreds of galaxy
clusters, the latest stage of cosmic evolution. Through a combination of
observations - Cosmic Micowave Background (CMB), optical, X-ray - the
researchers will probe the picture of the Universe to greater depths than have
yet been plumbed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals of the Atacama Cosmology Telescope
(ACT) project are to: 1. Map the CMB temperature anisotropy over 100 square deg,
beyond the resolution limits of the WMAP (operating) and Planck (launch 2007)
satellites. The primary anisotropy constrains the fundamental physics of the
infant Universe and provides the initial conditions for structure formation; the
secondary anisotropies reflect the emergence of structure. 2. Find and study
galaxy clusters in the CMB map region through the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect and
determine the spectroscopic redshifts of over 400 of them. The masses of these
clusters will be measured with X-ray observations and with galaxy velocity
dispersions. 3. Combine the high fidelity CMB map data and the cluster
measurements to find the equation of state, w = p/p of the "quintessence" or
"dark energy" to +0.1. 4. Limit or determine the mass of the neutrino to +0.1 eV
from the combined CMB map and cluster measurements. 5. Use the CMB maps to
construct gravitational lensing displacement maps at 0.2 degree resolution,
which will probe the total mass distribution directly on length scales of 1 Mpc
at z ~ 1 to 2. This technique is independent of and complementary to lower
redshift galaxy surveys (which involve bias). 6. Detect reionization of the
Universe from the formation of the first stars at z ~ 10 through the Ostriker-
Vishniac effect in the CMB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research team will conduct
a range of activities in education, outreach, and technology transfer in
conjunction with the ACT project. One program of special note gives research
experience to minority students at City University of New York. Undergraduate
and graduate students as well as postdocs will receive advance training through
participation in all aspects of the ACT project. Cosmology research captures the
public imagination, and the results of this project are expected to generate
considerable media attention. Within NSF, the funding partners for the ACT
project are the Division of Astronomical Sciences, the Division of Physics, and
the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;