* 0408874
* Collaborative Research:     Analysis of Defects and Their Causes in Bulk Aluminum Nitride Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* James Edgar, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/2008
* USD 237,458.00

This project aims for greater understanding and control of defects associated
with growth mechanisms of bulk aluminum nitride crystals produced by
sublimation. Defects such as dislocations, stacking faults, grain boundaries,
polytypoids and inversion domains will be correlated to impurities in crystals,
growth conditions, and thermal and mechanical stresses. The types, densities,
and the spatial distribution of defects will be measured by x-ray topography,
transmission electron microscopy, defect selective etching, and decorative
oxidation. Specific types of defects caused by oxygen and carbon will be
determined. These impurities are typically present at relatively high
concentrations (~1019 cm-3) in AlN crystals as a result of their high
concentrations in the original source AlN powder, graphite heating elements, and
furnace fixtures. The tendency for these elements to cause stacking faults,
precipitates, and other defects will be investigated by comparing crystals with
a broad range of impurity concentrations. Differences due to the crystal
orientation and polarity will also be determined. The impact of temperature and
nitrogen pressure on anisotropic growth rates and defects subsequently present
in the crystals will be resolved. A series of crystals produced at different
temperatures and nitrogen pressures will be examined to determine which defects
are present, and their resulting influence on surface steps. Effects of sample
mounting and other physical constraints on stress and subsequent spatial defect
distribution will be examined. Residual stress in crystals will be measured and
modeled. Surface and subsurface damage caused by mechanical action of polishing
the AlN crystals will also be measured. Feedback from this information on
defects in AlN is expected to allow the crystal growth process to be modified in
a knowledgeable way so that crystal quality can be improved. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues associated with
electronic/photonic materials having technological relevance, and integrates
research and educational activities. The project provides graduate students with
unique opportunities to learn fundamental aspects of crystal growth and defect
characterization. Through the established collaborations, students will be able
to study research issues in greater depth than would be possible under separate
investigations. Students will visit national laboratories, gain valuable
experience working with state-of-the-art equipment and interacting with
experienced scientists. The results of the research will be broadly disseminated
by publication in high quality scientific journals and by organizing a materials
research society symposium. Students will be actively involved by presenting
their findings at professional society meetings. Workshops will be arranged for
women and under represented group high school students to learn about AlN
crystal growth and characterization. Principal investigators and their students
will also visit middle school and high school to discuss this project, and to
provide special encouragement to women and minority students to join science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;