* 0408448
* SGER: Exploratory Fieldwork with the Nedebang Language of Eastern Indonesia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Gary Holton, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2005
* USD 9,913.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gary Holton will conduct
&lt;br/&gt;six weeks of exploratory field work with Nedebang, an endangered
&lt;br/&gt;non-Austronesian language spoken by fewer than one thousand persons
on &lt;br/&gt;Pantar Island, eastern Indonesia. The project has three primary
objectives: (1) to gather basic phonological, lexical, and grammatical
information from which to compile a short sketch of Nedebang; (2) to conduct a
survey of the grammatical and typological properties of the non-Austronesian
languages of Pantar Island; and (3) to assess the feasibility of future longer-
term field investigations of the languages of Pantar. Data and recordings
gathered during the course of the project will be archived for use by other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is significant for three main
reasons. (1) The Pantar &lt;br/&gt;languages are currently being replaced by
languages of wider &lt;br/&gt;commuication. The timing of this research will
ensure that information &lt;br/&gt;regarding Nedebang and other Pantar languages
is recorded before the &lt;br/&gt;language ceases to be spoken. (2) The Pantar
languages appear to belong &lt;br/&gt;to the Trans-New Guinea language family, a
putative grouping of more &lt;br/&gt;than 500 languages spoken in the New Guinea
region. However, their &lt;br/&gt;precise genetic relationship is unclear. Data
from Pantar languages will contribute to a better understanding of both internal
and external &lt;br/&gt;genetic relationships. (3) What data are available
suggest that the &lt;br/&gt;grammatical structures found in the Pantar languages
differ &lt;br/&gt;significantly from those found in other languages. The results
of this &lt;br/&gt;research will add to our knowledge of human language and
linguistic &lt;br/&gt;theory by providing detailed documentation of a
typologically unusual &lt;br/&gt;language.&lt;br/&gt;