* 0408742
* Ocean-Solid Earth Interaction: Seismic and Satellite Data
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Toshiro Tanimoto, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 171,543.00

During the past few decades, it has become clear that the Earth's components -
atmosphere, ocean and solid Earth - interact in complex ways on various time
scales. Seismograms reveal such interactions, mainly on days without large
earthquakes. One example is the continuous background oscillations that were
first reported in 1998, whose cause is actually still unknown. The goal of this
proposed study is to understand the cause and mechanism of these ubiquitous
seismic oscillations and to learn the implications for mechanical couplings
between the ocean and the solid earth. Thus, it represents a scientific pursuit
for understanding a novel enigmatic phenomenon. While the detection of this
phenomenon was achieved by solid earth scientists, the phenomenon is relevant to
the state of the atmosphere and oceans and thus could be of interest to a
broader range of earth scientists. This is a global phenomenon for the entire
Earth system.

As with any other scientific pursuit of new knowledge, it can have some future
benefits. For example, in solid earth science, it may be critical for detection
of slow earthquakes in the future, within the frequency band 2-15 mHz, because
the continuous oscillations are the principal source of noise in this frequency
band. There is some hint that previous seismological slow-earthquake studies
have been hampered by these oscillations. Understanding the nature of this
phenomenon will give us insight into how to reduce noise and enhance other
signals in the same frequency band.

This study takes advantage of seismic and satellite ocean data whose
complementary use have not been examined before. It may be a good example of
what can be done with accumulation of large amount of data, happening in
geosciences as well as in broader scientific disciplines. Truly surprising
discoveries will be made beyond the walls of small disciplines that have been
categorized in modern sciences. In order to advance our understanding of the
Earth as a dynamically connected system, there is no question that conscious
efforts toward connecting data in different disciplines will be required. In
addition, this project will educate a graduate student working for a Ph.D.
degree.