* 0408123
* Dissertation Research: Human Harvest of Snow Lotus (Saussurea laniceps and S. medusa)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Jan Salick, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2006
* USD 13,300.00

Tibetan medicinal plants have recently become popular in China, Japan, Europe,
and the United States. Snow Lotus (Saussurea laniceps and S. medusa) are slow-
growing plants that may not be able to withstand the harvesting pressures
necessary to sustain global demand. Past studies have primarily focused on
harvesting effects on population growth rates. However, these studies have not
considered additional evolutionary and ecological effects that harvesting
produces (e.g., alteration of a trait as human-mediated selection removes plants
with certain qualities, or interference with essential pollinators). These
effects play a large role in destabilization of plant populations. By monitoring
plants under heavy collection pressure and those protected from collection in
sacred areas, this study analyzes harvesting effects of Snow Lotus. These plants
are particularly susceptible to harvesting effects because collection of the
whole plant occurs during the plant's only flowering stage, before pollination
and fertilization occurs. First, the investigators will gather demographic
information and use matrix models to study the effects of plant removal on the
population growth rate. Second, they will assess the evolutionary impact that
selection may have on the size of the plants by using historic data provided by
herbarium specimens. Finally, the consequence of harvesting (reduced population
density) on the interaction of Snow Lotus and its pollinators will be examined.
This information will help provide a scientific basis for determining the level
of threat to Snow Lotus. This study will not only help provide information on
effects of harvesting, but will also have broader impacts in supporting the
conservation of threatened plants that are important components of Tibetan
medicinal culture.