* 0408963
* Resource Depression and Subsistence Change in Northland, New Zealand
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Lisa Nagaoka, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2008
* USD 79,859.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Lisa Nagaoka, will
conduct an analysis of faunal remains from two archaeological sites on the North
Island of New Zealand to examine the role of human-induced resource depletion on
prehistoric subsistence. As with many other island situations, the arrival of
people to New Zealand marked the beginning of dramatic changes to the abundance
and distribution of native fauna. One of the best examples of the effects of
human colonization is the decline and extinction of the moas in New Zealand.
Moas were an order of large wingless birds endemic to New Zealand that became
extinct after the arrival of Polynesian colonists between 1000 to 500 years ago.
The abundance of moa remains in archaeological sites suggests that moas were an
integral part of the diet for the prehistoric human foragers of New Zealand. Dr.
Nagaoka's previous research on the South Island of New Zealand has shown that
the hunting and gathering economy of the prehistoric inhabitants was
dramatically affected by the depletion of moas and other fauna. The diet of the
human foragers shifted from mainly seals and moas to a very generalized diet
that included up to 70 taxa of fish, birds, and mammals. To harvest this wider
range of resources, people also began exploiting areas that were less productive
than those previously exploited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research funded by
this grant continues to examine prehistoric subsistence change resulting from
resource depletion, but on the North Island where horticultural crops were an
important part of the diet by European contact. Using foraging theory models
hypotheses were generated that examine changes in 1) the number and kinds of
resources exploited; 2) the number and kinds of habitats utilized; and 3) the
pattern of butchery and transport of moa and seal carcasses. To test these
expectations, two faunal assemblages from the Northland region of the North
Island are analyzed. These assemblages were selected because they are from
relatively well-stratified sites with large samples of faunal and artifactual
material that date to the period just after Polynesian colonization. In
addition, they are from the same region as the well-known and well-studied
Houhora (Mt. Camel) site, which will provide an excellent complement and
comparison to these assemblages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to increasing
archaeological knowledge of North Island subsistence change, this research is of
interest to researchers studying in both prehistoric and modern examples of
human-induced environmental change and its consequences for faunal populations
and humans. In addition to the intellectual interest, this research will also
have broader impacts on two different populations: Maori iwi (native tribes) and
students. The results of this analysis will be available to the iwi through the
New Zealand institutions that house the collections, and who are committed to
bicultural representation in its public displays as well as in research. The
results will be further disseminated to the public through the undergraduate
courses taught to elementary and middle school
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;