* 0408290
* THE GORDON RESEARCH CONFERENCE ON PLASMA PROCESSING SCIENCE (GRC-PPS-2004): SUPPORT FOR GRADUATE STUDENTS AND POSTDOCS.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Alexander Fridman, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 02/28/2005
* USD 15,000.00

A biennial Gordon Conference on Plasma-Processing Science will be held in
Plymouth, New Hampshire, on August 15-20, 2004. This award will support the
participation of graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in the conference.
The evaluation of this proposal took into account the two primary NSF criteria
for support as well its potential contribution to development of technical
capabilities among the engineering and science research-and-teaching community
to deal with an important field of technology.

Low-temperature plasmas provide an industrially indispensable technology with
applications in integrated-circuit manufacture, materials synthesis, surface
treatment, film deposition, environmental remediation, and other important
applications. The purpose of the symposium is to convene experts from around the
world to discuss the challenges and opportunities in the field. The proposal
requests funds to support participation of graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers in the conference. The timing of this particular symposium is
especially advantageous for NSF and CTS as there will be a change of Program
Director in the Combustion and Plasma Systems Program this year. The discussions
and recommendations of the meeting can serve as a useful guide for setting
priorities of the program as it moves into the next fiscal year. The
intellectual merit of the activity arises from the participation of plasma
experts, their discourse, and their ultimate recommendations for future research
directions. The broader impact arises primarily from the involvement of graduate
students in the meeting to encourage their participation in this field. Also,
the conference will promote international collaboration and communication of
research progress in other countries.