* 0408157
* Dissertation Research: Effect of Leaf Traits on the Decomposibility of Leaf Litter
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Peter Vitousek, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2006
* USD 10,250.00

When plants discards their leaves the resulting litter decomposes in the soil
litter layer. Because different decomposition rates can change the amount of
organic matter that is stored in the soil as well as the speed of nutrient
cycling, understanding the controls on decomposition rate is an important goal.
One important factor affecting decomposition is the physical and chemical traits
of the leaves. In different environmental conditions plants (both within a
species and between different species) have different leaf physical
&lt;br/&gt;and chemical characteristics. That is, some leaves are thick and
nutrient-poor while others are thin and nutrient-rich, and these different leaf
types are often matched to the environment in a way that is advantageous to the
plant. This project seeks to connect the leaf characteristics found in certain
environmental conditions to the decomposability of different leaf litters.
Specifically, it will test the effect of leaf traits found on fertile and
infertile soils at both high and low precipitation. The effects of leaf traits
on decomposition will be studied in two systems-in Hawaii within a species, and
in Australia across species. The resulting data will allow a new test for the
interactive effects of precipitation and soil nutrients on the decomposability
of leaf litter.&lt;br/&gt;