* 0408163
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Homology of Dermal Ossifications in Reptiles
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Kevin Padian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 05/31/2006
* USD 10,819.00

Most bone forms in one of two ways: through a cartilage model (endochondral
bone) or directly in the skin (dermal bone). Turtle shells and crocodile scutes
are formed of dermal bone, and although some aspects of their development are
well understood, it is not clear how their development is initiated. Some
researchers have proposed that these bones come from a tissue called the neural
crest; however, this origin has not been demonstrated. The neural crest is a
tissue formed in the ectoderm of the vertebrate embryo that contributes the
dermal bones of the skull. A separate embryonic tissue, the mesoderm,
contributes endochondral bone to the skull and forms the rest of the skeleton.
This study investigates gene expression as a means to trace the contribution of
neural crest and mesoderm to turtle shells and crocodile scutes. Genes expressed
in neural crest or mesoderm in other vertebrate animals will be studied as
potential markers for these tissues in turtle and alligator embryos using RNA
hybridization techniques. The importance of this study for systematics lies in
its assessment of the evolutionary developmental origin of dermal bone. It may
also aid in understanding the evolutionary relationships of turtles to other
reptiles.

This study harnesses approaches from evolutionary biology and molecular biology
to analyze a very old problem in new terms. Normally, studies using these
methods are performed on model systems, such as fruit flies, frogs, chickens, or
mice. By using turtles and alligators, this study expands the knowledge and
technical resources that can be used for the study of evolutionary history. The
doctoral student is a Hispanic female, her training is broad, and she
disseminates her work through seminars, courses, scientific meetings, and the
worldwide web.

