* 0408055
* Dissertation Research: Morphological Adaptations to Individual Pollinator Taxa in a Generalist Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Jeffrey Conner, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2007
* USD 12,000.00

Species in nature vary greatly in how specialized they are in resource use. For
example, some predator species are extremely specialized, eating only one
species of prey, while others are extremely generalized, feeding on many
different species. Trade-offs in resource use are often thought to play a
critical role in the evolution of specialized species, because an adaptation for
the use of one resource may prevent the efficient use of another resource. The
evolutionary importance of such trade-offs in generalist species that use many
resources is not well understood. This research examines the importance of
trade-offs in the adaptation of floral traits to different pollinators (an
important resource for plant reproduction) in a generalist plant, wild radish
(Raphanus raphanistrum), using measurements of selection on floral traits by
individual pollinator taxa. If selection by one pollinator opposes selection by
another pollinator, then this indicates a trade-off, because a plant cannot be
well-adapted to both pollinators at the same time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Floral
adaptation to pollinators can have important consequences for reproduction and
population growth in native species. In addition, many organisms such as
pathogens, major agricultural weeds (such as wild radish), and invasive species
are generalists. Therefore, results from this study will have broader impacts on
our understanding of adaptation in economically, medically, and environmentally
important generalist organisms. &lt;br/&gt;