* 0408312
* Air Circulation Within Beds of Hot Fragments and Mobility of Pyroclastic Flows
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 180,877.00

Pyroclastic flows are among the deadliest of volcanic phenomena because of their
high velocities, long run-out distances, high temperatures and large volumes. It
has been suggested that their long run-out distances could be due to
fluidisation. The fluidising gases are also probably responsible for the
elutriation of fines and the generation of the giant co-ignimbrite plumes that
override moving flows. These plumes produced the most historically significant
injections of aerosol and ash into the stratosphere. Interestingly, only
relatively small airflow velocities are necessary to fluidise volcanic ash. The
goal of this project is to study with an experimental approach the fundamental
processes and variables that affect airflow generation within beds of hot
fragments that deform because of shear stresses and/or expand because of
particle collisions. Of particular interest is whether ambient air is ingested
by expanded beds of hot particles and whether this airflow can fluidise and/or
elutriate the fines whose presence between larger rock fragments can affect the
mobility of pyroclastic flows. The apparatus that will be used for the
experiments produces scale models of pyroclastic flows whose temperature,
interstitial fluid pressure and interstitial fluid velocity can be monitored
using thermocouples, pressure transducers and flowmeters respectively. Scaling
dimensionless parameters will be used to relate the processes in the lab to
those in nature. This project will lead to a better understanding of pyroclastic
flows dynamics and if thus of importance in the mitigation and forecast of
volcanic hazards. This project will be carried out by one postdoc and will
provide training for graduate and undergraduate students. In order to involve a
larger number of persons and broaden the perspective of the research, a graduate
level class based on the topics addressed in this proposal will be offered. This
project will also lead to new interdisciplinary collaborations between the
engineering and volcanology communities.