* 0408154
* Dissertation Research: Circadian-Clock Genes and Variation in Photoperiodic Time Measurement: a Role for Timeless?
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* William Bradshaw, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The two major cycles in terrestrial environments are daily and seasonal. Plants
and animals use an internal circadian clock to time their daily activities. Many
plants, vertebrates, and insects use the length of day (photoperiod) to
anticipate the changing seasons and to time their seasonal activities of growth,
development, reproduction, flowering, hibernation, or migration accordingly.
This research is concerned with the molecular connection between the timing of
daily activities (circadian rhythmicity) and seasonal activities
(photoperiodism). The strongest environmental cue affecting the timing of both
daily and seasonal events is light. Whereas the light-input pathway and
molecular basis of circadian rhythmicity are well understood, little is known
about the molecular basis of the regulation of seasonal cycles. This research
uses the pitcher-plant mosquito, Wyeomyia smithii, to focus on the connection
between the mechanisms regulating daily and seasonal cycles by examining the
expression and role of the timeless gene, a gene known to be essential for the
input of light and the central functioning of the circadian clock in insects and
vertebrates. Wyeomyia smithii lives over a broad latitudinal range and, as the
length of the growing season changes over this range, so also does the day
length used to switch between active summer development and winter dormancy.
This divergence of response to day length will be used to determine (1) how the
expression patterns of timeless vary with latitude of origin and day length and
(2) how polymorphism at the level of DNA varies with latitude of origin and day
length. This research is unique in that it will be evaluating not only the
connection between the daily and seasonal timing processes, but also show how at
the molecular level that connection varies over a gradient of climate through
evolutionary time.