* 0408829
* Energies of Mineral, Rock, and Magma Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2011
* Guy Hovis, Lafayette College
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2011
* USD 204,002.00

The goals of this research are to (1) predict on a thermodynamic basis the
conditions of stability of various rock forming minerals, (2) discover
fundamental principles of mineral behavior, and (3) learn how various geologic
processes utilize the heat budget of the earth. Pertinent to these aims,
multiple solution calorimetric studies will be conducted on zeolite minerals to
examine the energetic effects of chemical substitution and order-disorder in
these minerals. Research also will be conducted on the energetic effects of
chlorine-fluorine substitution in apatite. Solution calorimetric measurements
will be made on hydrous andesitic and haplogranitic glasses in order to measure
compositional effects on H2O and alkali mixing energetics, as well as the
effects of polymerization on H2O-silicate mixing in magmas; this work is
pertinent to the expulsion of H2O during volcanic eruptions. High-pressure
sodium aluminosilicate compositions also will be examined to explore the
energetics of glass/liquid structure. Several projects on the thermal expansion
of minerals, designed specifically for undergraduate participation, will be
accomplished through high-temperature X-ray measurements. These projects will
give information critical to understanding how minerals behave at depth in the
earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal role of this solution calorimetry
laboratory is the collection of fundamental thermodynamic data on geologically
important materials. In some cases data apply to conditions that are otherwise
inaccessible through other types of experimentation. Research projects have been
chosen on the basis of processes, not just the materials themselves. This
laboratory constitutes a unique research facility in the United States and is
committed to disseminate results through peer reviewed articles and
presentations at professional meetings. It also serves the scientific community
through cooperative relationships with other individuals and
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the scientific value of the studies to
be undertaken, projects developed specifically for undergraduate participation
are worthwhile because they teach students how research is conducted and why the
results are important. Research involvement also is important to the retention
of students in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;