* 0408276
* Synthesis and Characterization of High-Performance Polymer-Intercalated/Exfoliated Cements
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Yu Qiao, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 01/31/2007
* USD 186,671.00

Advanced cement-polymer composite has been an active research area for decades.
By adding polymeric materials in cements, the inorganic particles can be
strongly bonded together through the polymer matrix, and as a result the tensile
strength, which is usually&lt;br/&gt;the weakest aspect of cements, is increased
by order of magnitude. Based on the intercalation and exfoliation techniques
developed recently in the research on polymer-silicate nanocomposites, it is now
possible to reinforce cements by using polymers of high thermal/moisture
resistance and cost efficiency, and keeps the processing condition similar to
that of ordinary precast concrete segments. Preliminary research has shown
encouraging results. The intercalation of the polymer chains between the
interlayer of inorganic particles could be achieved under mild conditions with
the ihby-productlc of the exfoliation of the silicate nanolayers. The PIEC will
be stronger than the MDF cements and at least as durable as the ordinary
cements, and offer an excellent cost-performance balance. Materials
characterization and computer simulations will also be carried out to provide a
scientific basis for optimizing the processing
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the proposed research we will develop
the high-performance PIEC, which will&lt;br/&gt;promote the application of
precasting techniques and impact various aspects of construction industry, such
as structure design, construction procedures, maintenance and repair techniques,
and so on. It will be immensely beneficial to the economy due to the
considerable reduction in the costs of materials, transportation, handling,
placing, as well as the environment and energy conservation. The developed PIEC
and testing devices will be used in a number of undergraduate and graduate
courses, as well as a series of seminars, which will have significant impacts on
the curriculum of the Department of Civil Engineering. Female students and
under-represented minorities will be particularly encouraged to attend these
seminars and courses. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be actively
involved in this project and acquire comprehensive experiences. Exhibits of the
results will be organized in local museums and libraries to enhance the exposure
of engineering research to the public. This, together with the development of a
web-based virtue museum of advanced cement-polymer composites, will be very
helpful for high school students and freshmen to maintain interests in
engineering fields in the early stage of their career
path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;