* 0408413
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Women's Advancement in Political Science, A Proposed Workshop for 2004 in Washington, DC
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Susan Clarke, American Political Science Association
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2005
* USD 23,390.00

Women have been and continue to be a minority of full-time faculty within
political&lt;br/&gt;science, and current statistics suggest they will remain
below parity with men in the&lt;br/&gt;discipline for the foreseeable future,
despite substantial gains in the number of women&lt;br/&gt;political scientists
over the last several decades. Women constituted 24% of all full
time&lt;br/&gt;faculty in 2001 (APSA 2002) an increase of 6% over 1991 when they
made up 18% (Sarkees and McGlen 1999). And while they have made gains at all
academic ranks since the early 1970s there is growing evidence that the
percentage of women assistant professors has stalled at roughly 35% over the
last 5 years. This is real cause for concern, suggesting a stagnant pipeline
that will place clear limits on the number of future women political science
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;There are various possible reasons for women's continuing
minority status within&lt;br/&gt;political science but research on this point is
far from definitive, in part, because&lt;br/&gt;research on women's progress in
the discipline is not as well developed an area of&lt;br/&gt;research as in
other social sciences. To better understand the factors linked
to&lt;br/&gt;women's success within academia, political scientists could benefit
from an&lt;br/&gt;informational exchange with researchers in sociology and
economics for whom women's&lt;br/&gt;advancement in academia is an explicit
topic of research investigation. &lt;br/&gt;This Small Grant for Exploratory
Research is to to hold a planning workshop in early 2004 to evaluate the current
knowledge base regarding women's advancement in political science, and to
identify the major barriers to their numerical increase in the discipline. To
foster exchange across social science fields and benefit from evidence obtained
by sociologists and economists, the investigators will invite several scholars
who have studied women's development in the sciences and social sciences. In
addition, invited participants will include political scientists who direct
large-scale team-based research projects, hold leadership positions in the
field, and/or have an active interest in gender issues and
the&lt;br/&gt;advancement of women. The workshop will lay the foundation for a
grant proposal to be&lt;br/&gt;submitted to the NSF ADVANCE leadership
program.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop has the following goals: (1) Clarify the rate of
progress of women in&lt;br/&gt;political science at all levels of academic rank.
(2) Clarify the key advancement problems&lt;br/&gt;confronted by women in
political science; for example, are women having greater difficulty&lt;br/&gt;in
getting promoted to full professor than in gaining tenure? (3) Explore the
origins of&lt;br/&gt;women's differential rate of advancement by prestige of the
university and by&lt;br/&gt;subfield in political science. (4) Identity the key
barriers to women's academic success at different transition
points.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Social Value: The workshop is intended to improve
knowledge of women's progress within academic political science in order to
design a program that will improve the recruitment and retention of women in the
discipline. This has far reaching implications for the attractiveness of
political science as a field of graduate study for women. An increased number of
women graduate students should, in turn, increase the pool of women for a wide
variety of non-academic careers including elective government office, the
diplomatic corps, domestic and international intelligence, polling and
elections, and public policy planning, Moreover, an increased number of women
political science faculty should increase women's interest in the political
process very generally, in part, because women&lt;br/&gt;faculty are most likely
to teach courses that touch on the history and importance of&lt;br/&gt;women's
political involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;