* 0408324
* The Khipu Database Project
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Gary Urton, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,999.00

With the support of the NSF, Dr. Gary Urton, with the assistance of Carrie
Brezine, Harvard Khipu Database Manager, will continue a project, begun in 2002,
which involves the design, construction and querying of a database containing
all available information drawn from scientific studies of the Inka khipu
(Quechua: "knot"). Khipus were the knotted-string devices used for recordkeeping
in the Inka empire. Khipus recorded statistical data (e.g., census and tribute
records), as well as information used by Inka recordkeepers for the construction
of narratives of Inka myths, histories, genealogies and other such discursive
accounts. It is not known how the Inka recordkeepers recorded information in
these knotted-string devices. The database that we have developed and have begun
to query in increasingly more complex ways is intended to provide us with
detailed, comparative information from which to search for patterning in khipu
structural and symbolic elements, which may allow us eventually to decipher
these enigmatic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the construction of
our database, which has now been populated with information drawn from some 220
of the ca. 600 extant khipu samples in museum collections around the world, the
objectives of the khipu database project in 2004-05 are: (a) to enter new data
into the database from our own and other researchers' studies of previously
unstudied, or restudied, khipus (we hope to enter full or partial data on
450-500 samples by the end of the 2004-05 project period); (b) to perform
increasingly complex queries on the database, including those aimed at attempts
to understand khipu classifications based on statistical analyses of khipu
construction variables, such as patterns in directional variation in spinning,
plying, knotting and attachment of strings; (c) to continue to search for
examples -- several of which were discovered in research in 2003-04 -- of
matching numerical accounts in samples that belonged to the same "archives" --
i.e., khipu having the same provenience on the coast or in the highlands of
Peru; (d) to continue to search for ethnohistorical documents from areas where
sizable collections of khipus were found with the objective of locating
documents from colonial Peru that were drawn up as khipu transcriptions made by
Spanish administrative officials; such transcriptions may provide the keys to
eventually deciphering the khipu; and (d) to expand our project website
(http://khipukamayuq.fas.harvard.edu/) to include more detailed information
about specific khipus stored in the database, and to build querying
functionality into the site so that the public can ask standard questions of the
database. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The ultimate result of this research could be
the decipherment of the Inka khipus. The expected result is that we will shed
considerable light on the procedures, practices and intellectual traditions
whereby the largest state in the Pre-Columbian Americas -- the Inkas -- recorded
information in the strings, knots and colors of these remarkable, three-
dimensional fabricated texts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;