* 0408012
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny of Helianthus Including New Methods to Detect Reticulate Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* C. Randal Linder, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 06/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Project summary for general readers &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Despite the agronomic and research importance of the genus Helianthus
(sunflowers), the evolutionary relationships among the species are still largely
unresolved. In addition to H. annuus, the cultivated species of sunflower, the
genus contains an additional 48 species that are distributed across North
America. The annual species are a model system for studying diploid hybrid
speciation - speciation caused by normal sexual hybridization between two
species - so their relationships have been closely researched. But relationships
among the rest of the species, especially the perennials, are not well
understood. This lack of resolution is mostly due mostly to recent rapid
speciation and hybrid speciation. Resolving these relationships along with
testing the existing parental hypotheses of the perennial hybrid sunflowers will
be addressed using (1) a comparatively faster evolving marker; (2) tools for
reconstructing reticulate evolution (an evolutionary history that has evolved in
a net-like fashion, due to hybridization, instead of a tree-like pattern); and
(3) multiple nuclear markers. Currently the number of nuclear markers that are
accessible for inferring phylogenetic history is very limited. Our goal at the
end of this project is to provide the plant systematic community with a set of
universal nuclear primers for plants. In conjunction with colleagues in The
Department of Computer Sciences, a comparative analysis of two entire plant
genomes (Oryza and Arabidopsis) has produced a series of primer pairs that are
conserved between these genomes. Using these primer pairs 18 plants are being
screened across a wide taxonomic sampling: six species in Helianthus, six in
Phalaenopsis (an orchid), and six that span other flowering plant groups. Data
collected from these markers will be used with the new algorithms for
reconstructing reticulate evolution and together these methods will be tested on
the known parentage of the annual hybrid sunflowers. If these methods correctly
infer these relationships then they will be applied more broadly to the less-
studied perennial sunflowers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Scientific significance:
The advancements made by project will be key in the reconstruction of the Tree
of Life, both locally and globally. The resolution of sunflowers completes one
lineage on the Tree of Life, while these new methods and markers will focus more
widely on the accurate construction of the tree. Although the markers being
collected will be used specifically for methods under this project, the
capability for their use in other flowering plants will be of tremendous
benefit. Additionally, the computational efforts used in this research have
resulted in a new collaboration between computer scientists and biologists that
has greatly enhanced the creativity of future research questions. An immediate
educational impact has also been felt: at present, five undergraduates have been
trained in valuable molecular techniques that can be applied in their future
research. &lt;br/&gt;