* 0408107
* Dissertation Research: Bone Morphogenetic Protein (Bmp) Function in Teleost Dental Evolution and Development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* David Stock, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 05/31/2007
* USD 10,150.00

Teeth are examples of tissues that vary both within an organism and between
species. The genetic factors that govern developmental and evolutionary
variations in teeth morphology are unknown. The timing of the gene expression of
members of the gene family of bone morphogenetic proteins (Bmps) have been found
to differ in developing teeth of different teleost fish species, specifically
zebrafish and Mexican tetras. To test whether these expression differences
actually cause differences in tooth development in these species, two strategies
will be used to alter Bmp gene expression in fish tooth development. First,
beads soaked in Bmp proteins or Bmp antagonists (such as noggin) will be applied
to the developing oral regions of fish embryos. Second, normal Bmp gene
expression will be inactivated in embryos of both fish species by injecting
morpholino antisense oligonucleotides (modified RNA sequences which prevent
normal mRNA processing or translation). The effects of these two types of
treatments will be measured using in situ hybridization for genes likely to be
regulated by Bmp expression. The morphology of teeth in older experimentally
perturbed embryos will also be examined with the use of histological stains.
Perturbation of Bmp gene function is expected to alter or prevent the
development of teeth, and to alter the expression of genes important to the
development of teeth. The results of this work will determine the function of
Bmp genes in tooth development in fishes, and test whether changes in Bmp
expression could be involved in the evolution of different patterns of tooth
development in fishes. Overall, this work will shed light on mechanisms of
morphological evolution in vertebrates.