* 0408933
* Magnetocaloric Effect in Nanoparticle Assemblies for Refrigeration Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Hariharan Srikanth, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 09/30/2007
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0408933&lt;br/&gt;S. Hariharan, U of South
Florida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed research
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Magnetocaloric effect has been observed in a number of
materials where the intimate coupling between the magnetic order and structural
properties result in changes in lattice temperature under application and
removal of an external magnetic field. Promising materials such as Gd5Si1.5Ge2.5
and Gd3Ga5O12 exhibiting large MCE have been discovered. However, the cooling
produced by these materials is restricted to regions close to the magnetic
ordering temperatures typically lower than 20K. Other drawbacks include the need
for large external fields and the difficulty in processing them into thin film
forms required for most electronic device applications. Other than the standard
magnetic ordering temperatures like the ferromagnetic Curie (Tc) and
antiferromagnetic Neel (TN) temperatures in bulk materials, there is a versatile
order-disorder transition temperature in nanoparticles that is determined by the
average particle size. This is the blocking temperature (TB) above which
nanoparticles are known to exhibit superparamagnetism (disordered state) and
below which the size-dependent anisotropy energy (KV) overcomes the thermal
energy (kBT) resulting in freezing of the particle moments (partially ordered
state). The key advantage is that TB can be varied over the intermediate
temperature range from 20 to 300K and this can be used for magnetic
refrigeration in this temperature range. We propose to investigate the entropy
change across the blocking transition through systematic MCE measurements in
nanoparticle assemblies of monodisperse Fe, ?-Fe2O3 and other ferrites. It has
been theoretically proposed that the entropy change can be maximized when the
inter-particle interactions are increased. Using Langmuir-Blodgett (LB)
technique, we will use self-assembled, ordered nanoparticle multilayers with
different surfactant coatings to tune the inter-particle interaction strength. A
very sensitive RF susceptibility method will be used to monitor the magnetic
anisotropy in different systems and correlating these measurements with the MCE
measurements. The LB deposited films automatically provide us a simple test
device scheme to directly measure the temperature changes. Once the choice
material, particle size, optimum temperature range are identified, we will test
the cooling efficiency by directly depositing the films on a high thermal
conductivity substrate like Kapton and attaching a thermocouple to this device.
Our proposed study has the potential to contribute to fundamental understanding
of MCE in nanoparticles and also advance the state-of-the-art in magnetic
refrigeration. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed research
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will lead to understanding
functional response in new materials and devices that could essentially impact a
broad base of refrigeration technology. Magnetic refrigeration is
environmentally friendly and does not use ozone-depleting, global-warming
volatile liquid refrigerants. A notable aspect of the proposed project is the
capacity to provide hands-on experience in topical research areas. Students will
acquire specialized skills in areas like nanotechnology, cryogenics, electronic
instrumentation, materials synthesis and processing, radio frequency (RF) and
thermal management techniques that are sought after by a large number of
employers. Postdoctoral scientists, graduate and undergraduate students in the
PI's group will particularly benefit from working in the topical area of
nanoscience and nanotechnology that are expected to become as socially
transforming in the future as the development of running water, electricity,
antibiotics and microelectronics. The PI currently has a diverse group of
students that includes two women graduate students. In addition, the PI will
make all efforts to recruit minority students particularly from the large
Hispanic community base in South Florida. The collaborations identified and
supported by letters documented with this proposal will lead to enhanced
networking and partnerships through further possibilities of multidisciplinary
research. The PI will broaden the scope of integrating research and education
through curriculum enhancement targeted for USF Physics department students
pursuing their MS and PhD degrees in the Applied Physics program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;