* 0408827
* Auschwitz's Techno-Scientific Core
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Michael Allen, Allen                   Michael        T
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 122,110.00

Project Abstract SES 0408827 Michael Allen, Independent Scholar "Auschwitz's
Techno-Scientific Core: The Holocaust and the Political Religion of Science and
Technology"

This project proposes a new history of the techno-scientific core of the
Holocaust at Auschwitz. Although previous studies have focused upon the
crematoria and gas chambers for the factory-like extermination of the European
Jews, scholars have done so without any foundation in science and technology
studies (STS). In consequence, existing histories are unconvincing and even
distorted. In particular, they have operated under the implicit assumption that
a "technological determinism" caused the unique dynamism of the Holocaust at
Auschwitz. They rely upon what the PI labels a "technocratic" interpretation.
This holds that engineers and scientists were unaware of the implications of
their work and remained in ignorance due to engrossing petty technical detail or
opaque large, hierarchical bureaucracies. In consequence, the Holocaust at
Auschwitz slowly evolved under their hands without any intent upon their part
for it to do so. This is readily believable only if one concedes that
technocrats routinely lack the intellectual capacity or freedom of inquiry to
discern what they are doing or why. But if Auschwitz truly was a modern techno-
scientific bureaucracy, which it surely was, this seems unlikely. The PI
proposes to introduce new sources and new approaches drawn from STS to Holocaust
Studies and German history. The PI will apply the more sophisticated approaches
to science, technology, politics, and ideology developed within STS. Conversely,
a history of the techno-scientific core of the Holocaust at Auschwitz will
advance the sustained interest in STS in interactions between ideology, science
and technology. The PI will investigate the substantive ideology of those who
built and operated the Auschwitz death camp through a variety of sources
including technical and scientific journals as well as institutional records. In
addition, by treating the techno-scientific core of the Holocaust at Auschwitz
as a large technological system in its entirety, the PI will open up research to
the voices of the Holocaust's victims. Technocratic interpretations of Auschwitz
can remain tenable only as long as one summarily dismisses the experience and
testimony of these highly qualified professionals. Many were compelled to serve
within the SS's machinery of extermination as workers, technicians, drafters,
doctors, or engineers. Their perspective allows a more accurate assessment of
the Holocaust. Not infrequently they possessed training that was equal and even
superior to that of their captors. In post-war testimony, they repeatedly
related how the responsible engineers and managers of Auschwitz communicated
steadily with their fellows throughout Europe during the entire course of the
war; and how they were cognizant of the Nazis' quest for mechanical means of
killing and expressed enthusiasm for the engineering of genocide.