* 0408707
* Collaborative Research:  Phenocrysta and Bubbles in the Bishop Tuff Rhyolitic Magma
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Alfred Anderson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 94,690.00

Most of the crust of continents is made of intrusive igneous rocks rich in
silica. The bulk earth composition is relatively silica poor and continental
crust is not in equilibrium with earth's interior. Rather, continental crust is
a differentiated product that has developed and evolved over billions of years
of earth history. Silicic rocks appear to be rare on other planets, and it is
thought that water plays an important role in the formation and evolution of
silica-rich igneous rock such as granite. Granite forms kilometers below the
surface. The volcanic counterpart of granite, rhyolite, erupts as deposits that
are easily eroded and make almost no lasting contribution to continental crust.
A planetary enigma is why some silicic magmas erupt and form ephemeral rhyolites
whereas others crystallize at depth and form granites. The formation of
continental crust requires intrusive granite, not surficial rhyolite. Water
vapor is the main source of energy for eruption of rhyolitic magma and it is
likely that water plays a key role in determining whether silicic magma will
erupt and form rhyolite rather than crystallize at depth and form granite. The
PI's will investigate this by studying the textures and compositions of crystals
and bubbles in the Bishop Tuff rhyolite, one of the most thoroughly studied,
large silicic bodies. In their previous work they found an apparent accumulation
of gas in the earliest-erupted part of the Bishop magma body. It is likely that
accumulation of gas facilitates eruption, and gas accumulation requires motion
of bubbles relative to melt. The extent to which and process whereby gas
accumulates in pre-eruptive silicic magma is uncertain. The PI's will document
the extent of crystal motion and mixing within individual parcels of magma
(pumice clasts) that were rich and poor in pre-eruptive gas. Their work will
test the idea that rhyolitic magmas are stably stratified (have minimal mixing),
accumulate gas and thus erupt. In contrast, granitic magmas may convect and
release accumulated gas, and therefore, end up crystallizing at depth and
becoming part of the continental crust. The broader impacts of the proposed
study include the involvement of both graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of Chicago and the University of Oregon. The students will learn a
broad range of approaches to develop and test new concepts based on observations
in the field and lab. They will learn to use a number of sophisticated
techniques including X-ray tomography, infrared spectroscopy,
cathodoluminescense imaging, and gas porisimetry, and will have an opportunity
to present their results at national meetings.