* 0408334
* IGMS:     Control Theoretic Models of Cerebellum-like Sensory Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Gerardo Lafferriere, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 09/30/2007
* USD 83,399.00

This grant will support the training and investigations of the PI in the area of
computational neuroscience at the Neurological Sciences Institute of Oregon
Health and Science University (OHSU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will immerse
himself in the field of neuroscience by taking the core sequence of courses in
the neuroscience program at OHSU, participating in seminars at the Neurological
Sciences Institute, and interacting with the research team of Dr. Patrick
Roberts' Laboratory in the Neurological Sciences Institute for the duration of
the residency. The research will focus on modeling the storage of sensory
information in the electrosensory lateral line lobe of mormyrid electric fish.
The current mathematical models investigated by the Roberts lab will be analyzed
with new tools from the control systems field, including nonlinear stability
methods, as well as techniques from hierarchical and hybrid control systems. The
PI will&lt;br/&gt;apply the new knowledge and experience to develop a long term
research collaboration with neuroscientists at OHSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
developing of new research areas of the PI will broaden the career options for
the students in the Ph.D. program at PSU. The PI will incorporate the new
application areas in various graduate and undergraduate courses and, in
particular, in mathematical modeling courses taught at PSU. Some of these
courses may be team taught and cross-listed across the two institutions, OHSU
and PSU, as other courses already are.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of the proposed activities will be to strengthen the link between OHSU and PSU
at several levels within the framework of the Metropolitan Collaborative Model
compact signed by the presidents of both institutions. The work will start a
long term research collaboration between faculty members at both institutions,
lead to curricular development benefiting students of both institutions, and
create a citywide learning community.