* 0408062
* Dissertation Research: Diversity, Distribution, and Cultivation of Novel Soil Bacteria from Snowmelt-Saturated Alpine Tundra
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Steven Schmidt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

The activity of microorganisms is the fundamental driver of global nutrient
cycling. Yet, the vast majority of these microbes are uncultivated, and thus
completely unknown. It is critical to investigate the biology of novel microbes
to understand their function, response, and feedback on a rapidly changing
biosphere. Soil is a particularly complex habitat for microbes. It harbors high
microbial diversity and biomass, and is a frontier for research as studies of
specific novel microbes within their natural soil environment are completely
absent. The goal of the proposed work is to determine the roles of newly
discovered bacteria from snowmelt-flooded alpine tundra soil. Preliminary
results suggest that these bacteria are geographically ubiquitous, are located
beneath the soil surface where oxygen is depleted, but are also prevalent at the
soil surface under winter snowpack. DNA sequence-based approaches will be used
to correlate the presence of these novel bacteria with various environmental
characteristics. The novel bacteria are predicted to thrive in cold, oxygen-free
habitats, and will be targeted for cultivation by mimicking these conditions.
Indeed, a major goal of this work is to isolate the novel bacteria in the
laboratory. This study will yield the first insights into the ecology of
specific uncultivated, novel soil bacteria, and reveal the extent and structure
of oxygen-free soil zones, an overlooked factor in nutrient cycling.