* 0408104
* Dissertation Research - Phylogeny and Trichome Evolution in the Brassicaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Elizabeth Kellogg, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 06/30/2006
* USD 10,111.00

Phylogeny and trichome evolution in the family
Brassicaceae&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on determining
relationships between plants in the mustard family and the use of this
information in determining how the development of epidermal hairs on plants
occurs. The mustard family (Brassicaceae) is of interest agronomically because
it contains the Brassica species, whose variants include the crops broccoli,
kohlrabi, kale, brussels sprouts, cabbage and cauliflower (among others). Canola
oil is produced from the seeds of Brassica napus, and oils from the family are
used in cooking as well as for industrial purposes. Brassicaceae is also an
important plant family from a scientific perspective, due to the inclusion in
the family of the plant genetic model species Arabidopsis thaliana, whose entire
genome has been sequenced. The work builds collaboration between three research
institutions in the St. Louis metropolitan area: University of Missouri St.
Louis, Missouri Botanical Garden, Donald Danforth Plant Science
Center.&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of the Brassicaceae, our understanding
of the relationships of different Brassicaceae species to one another has
lagged. Here, a detailed framework of the relationships of species within the
family will be produced. And, genetic information obtained from published
studies of Arabidopsis thaliana will be applied to other closely related species
to help determine gene function. While studying genes in the context of model
organisms gives insight into how particular genes function within the context of
that organism, such studies cannot determine the likelihood that the genes in
question evolved for that particular function, or if the genes play the same or
similar roles in other plants. This question is addressed in this study by using
the relationships determined within the plant family Brassicaceae in conjunction
with genes known to affect the shape and size of epidermal hairs found on the
leaves of many Brassicaceae species. The developmental progression associated
with epidermal hairs in Arabidopsis will be compared with the development of
hairs on closely related species of Brassicaceae to determine how development
differs between them. This inquiry permits future studies to narrow the number
of potential genes affecting differences in hair shape to only those active
during developmental stages that differ between species. Furthermore, it
provides valuable information about the cellular mechanisms that control cell
shape, an important aspect of cellular development. &lt;br/&gt;