* 0408676
* RUI: Mathematical Analysis of Voting and Representation in Multimember Electoral Districts
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Duane Cooper, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 68,549.00

The principal investigator of this project will conduct mathematical analysis of
voting and representation, integrating his research with educational activities
in which he will direct undergraduate student research projects and develop a
course on mathematical models in politics. The research component applies
theoretical models and analytical results to describe the comparative fairness
of methods of voting and composing representative bodies. The P.I. examines
voting systems in multimember electoral districts, with emphasis on the method
of cumulative voting, searching for predictive equilibrium conditions and
analyzing their potential to enable a minority population to achieve a fair
share of a representative body. The project requires considerable development of
the theory of spatial modeling of at-large elections, in addition to application
of measures of inequality and of optimization methods to minimize
misrepresentation. The P.I.'s theory will describe and analyze voter tendencies,
distributions of voters' policy ideals, and candidate behaviors in multimember
electoral districts. In collaboration with political science colleagues, the
P.I. will prepare for subsequent work analyzing data from elections and
experiments so as to address the implications of the theory on the empirical
data and use the empirical results to inform the theoretical models.
Additionally, the P.I. will guide undergraduates on research projects
interrelated with his own work, and he will develop a course, Mathematics and
Fairness: Applications to Political and Economic Systems, in which students from
mathematics, political science, and economics will examine formal theory and
models of political phenomena with respect to measures of fairness and
inequity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the body of knowledge
about the theory of voting and representation. The P.I.'s work will help to
quantify fairness of election methods to populations and to groups and
individuals therein. Particular attention is devoted to the method of cumulative
voting, comparing its potential against other election methods to make fair
representation possible, especially to minority populations, who are vulnerable
to denial of representation under certain voting methods. The research will
provide some mathematical basis for public discourse about the relative fairness
of multimember district election methods. This mathematical basis also can serve
policy makers and judicial officials who consider election methodology in
resolving disputes, such as alleged violations of the Voting Rights Act.
Numerous students associated with this project will benefit from research and
course experiences that should inspire and help prepare them for graduate study
and careers in the mathematical and social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;