* 0408098
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Identification and Characterization of Incompatibility Genes that Contribute to Postzygotic Reproductive Isolation Between Species of Mimulus
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2006
* John Willis, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Speciation occurs when a single species splits into two or more reproductively
isolated populations. The evolution of reproductive isolating barriers among
these descendent species is essential to prevent gene exchange and preserve
species differences. Thus far, few studies have identified which genes cause
reproductive isolation. This proposal focuses on one type of post-mating
reproductive isolation, hybrid sterility, which is thought to evolve by an
accumulation of genetic changes that are incompatible when they come together in
species hybrids. The proposed research will investigate a simple genetic
incompatibility that causes hybrid male sterility between two closely related
species of monkeyflower, Mimulus guttatus and M. nasutus. The objectives of this
project are to clone these hybrid sterility genes and to characterize their
developmental and molecular functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing the
molecular identities and functions of Mimulus "speciation genes" will be an
important step towards understanding the evolutionary forces that shape species
divergence. Furthermore, the proposed research will provide a detailed analysis
of the coordination and timing of flower and pollen development in Mimulus, a
model system for studies of floral adaptation and speciation. This project will
also provide opportunities for high school and undergraduate students to conduct
collaborative laboratory research.&lt;br/&gt;