* 0408489
* Development and Application of Subgrid Upscaling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Todd Arbogast, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 244,001.00

The investigator considers a physical system representing a
porous&lt;br/&gt;medium, such as a groundwater aquifer or a petroleum reservoir.
The&lt;br/&gt;movement of, e.g., a contaminant or oil over several kilometers
is&lt;br/&gt;strongly influenced by the properties of the intervening rock.
What&lt;br/&gt;appears to us to be bulk fluid flow is actually a complex process
of&lt;br/&gt;fluid flowing through high and low permeability regions. To
simulate&lt;br/&gt;the flow, one generally uses a coarse computational grid. In
subgrid&lt;br/&gt;upscaling, one incorporates fine-scale processes within the
coarse&lt;br/&gt;grid cells through a local and easily computed subgrid
technique. The&lt;br/&gt;projects objective is to obtain provably improved
accuracy and&lt;br/&gt;computational efficiency. Moreover, since this technique
provides a&lt;br/&gt;good and easily computed approximation to the fine-scale
movement of&lt;br/&gt;the fluids, the technique will be adapted so that the full
fine-scale&lt;br/&gt;problem itself can be solved in significantly less time.
&lt;br/&gt;One post-doc, two graduate students, and one undergraduate
student&lt;br/&gt;will be involved in the research, and educated in
the&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary environment. The work will be disseminated
at&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary meetings and in the mathematics, groundwater,
and&lt;br/&gt;reservoir simulation literature to maximize its
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contamination of groundwater is one of the most
serious&lt;br/&gt;environmental problems facing the nation. Improvements to
the&lt;br/&gt;predictive capabilities of groundwater simulations in
heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;formations would have a wide-ranging impact. The
engineering of&lt;br/&gt;petroleum and natural gas production uses heavily
subsurface&lt;br/&gt;simulation technologies as well. The subgrid upscaling
method has&lt;br/&gt;shown great promise, and this proposal will further its
development&lt;br/&gt;while promoting important educational and societal
objectives.