* 0408186
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Scaling up From Individual Behavior to Composition of Communities in Tropical Forest Remnants
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* William Robinson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,705.00

Habitat fragmentation is the process by which large areas of continuous habitat
are divided into smaller pieces (i.e. "habitat islands" or "patches"), usually
due to human activity. Understanding why some species are intolerant of habitat
fragmentation and disappear from isolated patches, whereas other species are
widely distributed and maintain a presence even in remote fragments is a central
issue in both basic community ecological research and conservation biology. A
key hypothesis is that differences in dispersal abilities among species strongly
influence distribution patterns. The connection between how easily species move
between patches and their presence in isolated communities has often been
hypothesized but rarely experimentally evaluated. The goal of this project is to
uncover the relationship between dispersal ability and community composition for
tropical understory forest birds in an archipelago of forested islands. This
will be accomplished by evaluating the Restricted Dispersal Hypothesis, which
states: Variation in behavioral or physiological traits among species of forest
understory birds, such as willingness or ability to cross a habitat gap,
explains biogeographic patterns of island occupancy. To assess dispersal
ability, I will conduct a series of simple experiments where birds are
transported by boat to various distances away from mainland forest and released
to document their abilities to fly successfully back to mainland. Preliminary
results show a strong positive correlation between the maximum distance flown in
release trials and the distance to the most isolated island inhabited by each
species. Broader scientific impacts are clear: connectivity of fragments in
tropical landscapes is critical to ensure persistence of entire regional
avifaunas. Without corridors of habitat through which birds may move among
patches, fragmented landscapes will lack the subset of avifaunas which are poor
dispersers.