* 0408638
* Fluctuation Phenomena and Measurement Theory in Mesoscopic Electronic and Optical Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Alfred Stone, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2008
* USD 375,000.00

This theoretical research has two different focus areas: nanoelectronic devices
for ultrasensitive detection and amplification, and microcavity resonators and
lasers, typically on the size scale of 10-100 microns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
electronic aspect of the project will analyze the conditions under which a
mesoscopic detector achieves quantum-limited detection, which refers to a
measurement with the minimum degree of backaction on the measured quantum system
allowed by the uncertainty principle. Such questions are of relevance in quantum
information physics where the measured quantum system would be a quantum bit and
the detector is the read-out device. The same condition determines the minimum
noise associated with any quantum system that acts as an amplifier due to the
presence of zero point fluctuations. Earlier work analyzing mesoscopic
scattering detectors without electron-electron interactions found a simple
condition for reaching the quantum limit which can be expressed information-
theoretically: There should be no information about the measured system
imprinted in the input variable to the detector which is not extracted by
measuring the output variable. In the current project the quantum limit
condition will be analyzed for interacting detectors, specifically mesoscopic
scattering detectors (resonant tunneling structures) in the presence of
dephasing, and semiconducting quantum dots near the charge degeneracy points. It
is hoped that general information-theoretic principles will also be developed to
understand qualitatively the approach to the quantum limit of detection in wider
classes of quantum amplifiers such as metallic and superconducting single-
electron transistors and superconducting quantum interference
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optics aspect of the project treats dielectric
microcavity resonators and lasers, which, due to their asymmetric shape,
generate complex, and at least partially chaotic, ray dynamics. Despite the
presence of ray chaos, such resonators have high-Q resonances with directional
emission, making them potentially useful for integrated optical devices when
compared to standard whispering gallery resonators with circular symmetry. The
project will analyze the predicted enhancement of the rate of evanescent leakage
(tunneling of photons) out of such high-Q resonances due to the effect of ray
chaos. It will also analyze the mode-locking behavior, which is expected to
occur in the non-linear regime of such resonators, specifically focusing on the
case of stable orbit multiplets which can be calculated analytically. A more
general theory of lasing in such complex resonators will be developed with the
aim of understanding mode competition and the enormous increase in output power
such lasers display in comparison to microcylinder lasers. The photon statistics
of such resonators and lasers is predicted to be very different from
conventional lasers and will be studied in detail during this project with the
goal of proposing novel and interesting experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
of these focus areas of research have a broader impact on current science and
technology. The properties of quantum amplifiers have become of great importance
in the field of quantum information physics and quantum computation. As is now
well known, quantum information processors are predicted to have revolutionary
properties such as an exponential speed-up of factoring algorithms for decoding.
Solid-state superconducting qubits are a reality and the measuring devices to
manipulate them and read them out are being developed worldwide; this has
brought the abstract topic of quantum measurement theory into the real world of
the physics of nanostructures. This research addresses several important
questions in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optics area relates to several
problems of current technological interest. First, it relates to the development
of integrated optical technology for communication applications; and second it
relates to the development of novel blue and ultraviolet semiconductor light
sources which will be important for lithographic, sensing, display and data
storage applications. Three inventions relating to these areas have been
patented based on earlier stages of this research.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt; This
theoretical research has two different focus areas: nanoelectronic devices for
ultrasensitive detection and amplification, and microcavity resonators and
lasers, typically on the size scale of 10-100 microns. With both topics, the
research blends fundamental research with possible technological applications.
Besides the fundamental nature of the research, the technological applications
touch on quantum information systems and novel light sources for application in
advanced computers. Both graduate students and postdoctoral associates will
participate in the project.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;