* 0408840
* Practical Solution to Diminish Restrained Shrinkage Effects in Bridge Decks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Andrzej Nowak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/2007
* USD 258,090.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on a practical solution to diminish
early-restrained shrinkage cracks in bridge decks. Current practice shows that
service life of a reinforced concrete deck slab can be much shorter than the
design life of the bridge. Observed deterioration scenarios indicate that
degradation process of bridge decks is very often initiated by shrinkage cracks.
These early, small cracks develop in time due to freeze and thaw cycles,
application of dynamic load and evolution of restrained shrinkage. It is
proposed to address the main source of problems, a restrained shrinkage, which
is the main reason for the initiation of cracks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
proposed to create initial stresses in the deck, of opposite sign to those
caused by restrained shrinkage and thus to eliminate the problem. The initial
stress will be induced by a camber created in the girders at the beginning of
construction process, and by adjusting it during the first period of concrete
maturing when shrinkage rapidly increases; than, the camber will be gradually
released. Prior to pouring of concrete slabs, camber is induced using hydraulic
jacks. The proposed research will be initially focused on developing of a
mathematical model for calculation of the restrained shrinkage in concrete
bridge decks composite with steel girders. The model will be based state-of-the
art knowledge on free shrinkage of concrete, the design of a typical highway
bridge composite cross section, the behavior of shear connectors to provide the
continuity in deformation of composite cross section or possible slip at shear
studs. The model will allow for longitudinal strain/stress computations in the
early phase of concrete maturing. These values will be calculated according to
restrains induced to the free shrinkage development by a connection with
girders.&lt;br/&gt;After the evaluation of possible restrained shrinkage
stresses, a practical solution will be proposed to decrease the early tensile
stresses in deck caused by shrinkage. The theoretical analysis will be followed
by lab tests to validate the proposed solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
economical and technically viable method could substantially decrease tensile
stresses caused by restrained shrinkage and effectively eliminate early cracks
in concrete bridge decks. The proposed method can result in significant savings
in bridge maintenance costs. The method to limit early tensile cracks in
concrete decks will be easy to use and possible without any changes in typical
deck design. It will not require any longer traffic interruptions than during a
typical deck construction process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;