* 0408281
* DEFORMATION-BASED DESIGN OF GEOTECHNICAL COMPOSITE FOUNDATION SYSTEMS INCORPORATING COLUMNAR SUPPORT WITH OR WITHOUT GEOSYNTHETIC REINFORCEMENT
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2009
* George Filz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Daniel
* 02/28/2009
* USD 295,506.00

An important type of geotechnical composite system incorporates columns of
strong material installed in soft clay, with an overlying layer of coarse-
grained soil that may include geosynthetic reinforcement. The purpose of the
overlying "bridging" layer is to transfer loads from embankments or structures
into the columns, thereby reduceing differential settlements. Existing design
methods for such systems provide widely-varying requirements for geosynthetic
reinforcement, and there is no consensus regarding which of these methods, if
any, is accurate. Furthermore, none of the existing methods provide means for
predicting differential settlement magnitudes. This research will include (a)
pilot-scale tests of square and round columns moving up into a geosynthetic-
reinforced soil layer; (b) new data collection from two contemporary, full-scale
field installations, (c) three-dimensional mathematical analysis of the behavior
of geosynthetic reinforcement layers considering orthotropy, orientation, and
stress concentrations, and (d) three-dimensional numerical analysis of the
entire geotechnical composite system. These tasks will be coordinated to
determine the effects of the important system parameters, including: the layout,
spacing, diameter, stiffness, and strength of the columns; the size and shape of
caps on top of the columns; the material properties, depth, orientation, and
ultimate strength of the geosynthetic layer(s); the properties of the bridging
layer above the columns; the properties of the soft clay between the columns;
the depth of the bridging layer; the interface behavior at the top and bottom of
each geosynthetic layer; and the surface loading. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this research include the development of tools for more
economical and reliable design of foundation systems for transportation
embankments and structures. The investigators will engage minorities, women, and
undergraduates in their research. They will involve interested individuals,
committees, and organizations from the U.S. and international community in the
research, and they will promote communication, networking, and partnerships
related to geotechnical composite foundation systems incorporating columnar
support and geosynthetic reinforcement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;