* 0408732
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Paleoecology of Ankilitelo, Southwestern Madagascar: Implications for Late Quaternary Megafaunal Extinctions
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,07/31/2005
* David Rasmussen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 07/31/2005
* USD 6,000.00

Holocene megafaunal extinctions, which included the loss of giant subfossil
lemurs, have been documented from subfossil sites in virtually every region of
Madagascar. Evidence from these sites point to interregional disparities in the
tempo and potential cause of the extinctions. To arrive at a better
understanding of human impact and/or environmental change in Madagascar,
regional records of ecological history must be developed. In particular,
southwestern Madagascar is an area of great significance because it documents
both the earliest arrival of humans to Madagascar, and the latest survival of
giant subfossil lemurs. This study will draw on microvertebrate paleontology to
develop a paleoecological framework for the giant subfossil lemurs in
southwestern Madagascar. The subfossil assemblage of Ankilitelo, a late Holocene
cave-site, will be investigated in order to establish the taxonomic and
ecological relationships between the Ankilitelo fauna and modern Malagasy
forests. Ankilitelo is unique in that preservation of giant lemurs
(Palaeopropithecus, Megaladapis, and Archaeolemur) occurs in association with
paleoecologically-relevant small vertebrates, including primates, tenrecs,
carnivores, rodents, bats, reptiles, amphibians and birds. This project will be
the first comprehensive comparison between subfossil and extant small vertebrate
faunas in Madagascar. The specific objectives of this study are to: document the
taxonomic structure of the Ankilitelo fauna; compare the Ankilitelo subfossil
assemblage with fifteen modern communities; use these comparisons to reconstruct
the ecological community and habitat of the extinct fauna in southwestern
Madagascar; elucidate ecological changes that occurred in the Holocene of
southwestern Madagascar through a comparison of the ancient habitat at
Ankilitelo and that occurring in the region today. These objectives will be
accomplished through the study of comparative samples to facilitate proper
taxonomic identification of the Ankilitelo material. Based on taxonomic
identifications, species will be assigned to diet, locomotor, activity pattern
and body size categories. These categories will be used to capture the
ecological structure of the fifteen modern communities and Ankilitelo, and
describe their habitat. The ecological structure of Ankilitelo and each modern
community will be analyzed and compared with multivariate statistics. Niches
that appear to be differentially compromised in the Ankilitelo sample will be
identified and further explored. The recent loss of the subfossil lemurs in
Madagascar is an example of the kind of extinction that threatens biodiversity
worldwide. The results of this project will illustrate ways in which species are
affected by dramatic changes to their ecosystem, and will inform conservation
efforts in Madagascar. The broader impacts of this study also include the
creation of a "virtual collection" by 3D scanning a taxonomically representative
sample of dentitions, crania and postcrania of the Ankilitelo microvertebrate
fauna. An important component of the collaborative new work on the small
vertebrate fauna is to make a database of this information available for
scientific study. Such a virtual collection will not only be valuable to
researchers interested in the subfossil assemblages, but also to biologists
working on the poorly known microfauna of Madagascar. Additionally, the Co-PI
will establish collaborative research with Malagasy scientists and graduate
students at the Universite d'Antananarivo.



