* 0408390
* Statistical Elastodynamic Inversion for Pavement Nondestructive Evaluation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Lu Sun, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* lawrence bank
* 05/31/2008
* USD 361,692.00

Abstract

Non-destructive evaluation (NDE) has generated great interest in assessing
structural capacity of road, highway and airfield pavements. While considerable
effort has been devoted to static analysis based inversion, little has been done
to investigate inverse problems based on dynamic analysis while taking
uncertainty into account. The proposed research will establish a rigorous and
unified theoretical framework for pavement NDE that integrates statistical
science, optimization theory, and computer simulation, and will develop an
elastodynamic inverse analysis software toolkit for practical engineering
applications. By using the entire time history of forward dynamic analysis in
inversion, the proposed research will provide more stable and more accurate
results. By formulating unknown parameter reconstruction using maximum
likelihood estimate and its robust counterpart within the framework of Bayesian
decision theory and Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation, the research promises
to bring tremendous benefits. These include allowing uncertainty to be treated
naturally, allowing the effect of measurement noise and outliers to be
mitigated, allowing engineers' experience to be incorporated as a priori
information, and enabling the accuracy and reliability of reconstructed
parameters to be quantitatively assessed using the provided parameter
uncertainty. By investigating a variety of classical and non-classical
optimizations algorithm and artificial neural network in the context of NDE in
both the time and the transformed domain, the research promises to develop
efficient, accurate and robust optimization methods for the implementation of
the project, and to retrieve much richer information of unknown physical
properties from measured pavement responses. The proposed methodological
framework can be generally applicable to similar types of NDE, thereby adding
new scientific knowledge to other fields. The project will generate cost-
effective, fast and reliable pavement NDE techniques, which will result in
significant economic benefits. As an inter-disciplinary research effort, the
project will provide students cross-disciplinary exposure and unique experience
in analytical, computational and experimental work.

