* 0408008
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An Investigation of the Evolution of Telomere Regulation and Longevity
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Carol Vleck, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 04/30/2006
* USD 11,930.00

This research will investigate the underlying physiological and molecular
mechanisms responsible for the wide variation in life spans of different
species. One potential mechanism underlying adaptive variation in species
maximum lifespan is regulation of telomere dynamics. Telomeres cap the ends of
all eukaryotic chromosomes and function in protecting chromosomes and aiding in
the completion of duplication. Telomeres shorten with each cell division,
however, because of physical limitations of DNA polymerase. Once telomeres
shorten to a critical length, cells enter replicative senescence, so while these
cells are metabolically active they can no longer divide. Replicative senescence
has been suggested as a causal agent of aging and age-related diseases. Previous
research has shown that species with longer lifespans lose telomeric repeats at
a slower rate than species with shorter lifespans. This suggests that selection
may adjust the rate at which telomeres shorten to modify lifespan. This research
involves a comparative analysis of 17 bird species that vary in maximum lifespan
from 5 to 44 years. It will foster large-scale collaboration between many
scientists and promote undergraduate and graduate training in the biology of
aging. The results will determine whether telomere regulation has jointly
evolved with species maximum lifespan. If so, it will support the hypothesis
that telomere regulation acts as a molecular mechanism to adjust lifespan. This
project will offer valuable insight into the evolution of mechanisms that
influence lifespan.