* 0408910
* A Multiscale Study of Ratcheting Failure Mechanisms in Austenitic and Ferritic Steel Welded Joints
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2009
* K. Linga Murty, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 01/31/2009
* USD 326,500.00

This award by the Division of Materials Research to North Carolina State
University Raleigh is to study failures in austenitic and ferritic steel welded
joints subjected to displacement controlled low-cycle fatigue. The progressive
accumulation of strain with cycle known as ratcheting is believed to result in
unexpected failures of defect-free joints. With this award, Professors Hassan
and Murty will investigate the micro-structural processes of welded joint
ratcheting failures in both austenitic and ferritic steel pipes. This project
research will perform transmission electronic microscopy (TEM) studies of
dislocation substructures of the heat affected zone (HAZ) and base metals. The
TEM studies will be carried out at various stages of ratcheting response. A
systematic set of uniaxial and biaxial cyclic loading experiments of the base
and weld metals will be performed on smooth-tubular specimens. These tests on
smooth specimens with simulated microstructures and loading conditions make it
feasible to study the metallurgical processes of the HAZ metal in a more
controlled manner. In addition, efforts will be made to develop a numerical
scheme for simulating the ratcheting responses of welded joints using both
macroscale and multiscale based constitutive models. The numerical scheme will
include detailed residual stress calculations for investigating its influence on
ratcheting failure mechanisms for two types of steels (austenitic and ferritic)
with varied crystal structures (FCC and BCC).&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the project lie in the fact that the new knowledge gained from this research may
reveal inherent reasons for the unexpected welded joint failures of steel
buildings and bridges during earthquakes, and of components and structures in
chemical, nuclear, offshore, shipbuilding, automotive and aerospace industries
during regular operation. Outcomes from this integrated multiscale investigation
will facilitate improving the designs for all these industries. Since the
research will develop fundamental knowledge of failure mechanisms as well as
numerical scheme for its simulation, the design improvement can be made
scientifically towards bringing a paradigm shift in design methodologies.
Students and teachers will realize the educational impacts through the College
of Engineering program on partnerships with the primary and high schools by
their participation in the experimental studies of the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;