* 0408369
* Gas-Phase Anti-Stiction and Lubrication for MEMS Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Seong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 03/31/2006
* USD 156,000.00

Proposal ID: 0408369&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kim, Seong&lt;br/&gt;Organization:
Pennsylvania State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Gas-phase anti-stiction and
lubrication for MEMS applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the
full potential of MEMS devices, stiction, friction and wear in these devices
must be minimized. These are key challenges to MEMS technology, limiting device
realization and reliability. The proposed research develops a gas-phase
lubrication process that allows the delivery of lubricant molecules to all
surfaces of the MEMS device including sidewalls as well as underneath suspended
parts while preventing excess delivery of lubricants that can cause destruction
of the device. The gas-phase lubrication will also allow in-use lubrication of
the device, i.e., the lubrication molecules can be continuously delivered to the
working surface through the gas phase. The continuous supply of the lubricant to
the working surface while the device is working has been the key element for the
success and wide use of liquid lubricants in the modern machinery such as
automobiles, ships, airplanes, etc. Virtually all moving and rubbing parts are
currently lubricated with viscous liquid materials. Unfortunately, the presence
of viscous liquid causes severe power dissipation problems in the MEMS device
operation. This is one of the main reasons that solid-phase lubrication such as
surface coatings is most widely investigated. However, any surface coatings are
subject to wear, which will limit the reliability of the device. The gas-phase
transport of the lubrication molecules to the working surfaces will avoid these
problems associated with the liquid and solid lubricants and achieve anti-
stiction, effective lubrication, and anti-wear operations of MEMS devices
without interfering with the device function such as mechanical motion, optical
reflection, and electrical contacts. The gas-phase lubrication can be used alone
or in combination with the solid-phase
lubrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: This research will
improve fundamental understanding of thermodynamic adsorption equilibrium at the
solid-gas interface as well as molecular structures in the adsorbed lubricant
film. Nano-mechanical studies of adsorbed molecular films will elucidate how the
films modify adhesion and friction under tribological conditions related to MEMS
and other nano-device operations. Based on the fundamental understanding of film
structures and properties, a very efficient gas-phase anti-stiction and
lubrication process will be developed for end-fabrication release and in-use
lubrication of MEMS devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The gas-phase
lubrication process is suitable for operation over a wide temperature range and
can be applied to encapsulated operation of MEMS devices as well as open-
structure, ambient operation. The success of this research will stimulate more
research on molecular encapsulation inside MEMS devices. This will benefit not
only the development of MEMS lubrication but also other nanotechnology areas.
This research will provide participating students with multidisciplinary
trainings from scientific fundamentals to engineering applications. Students
trained in this way are very likely to make significant contributions in advance
of nanotechnology that requires multidisciplinary problem-solving skills. The
graduate student of this project will be nominated for the Elmer Klaus
fellowship of the Society for Tribologists and Lubrication Engineers (STLE) as
well as sent to national conferences. The outreach program offering research
opportunities to undergraduate students in a primarily undergraduate institution
will provide valuable experience that can lead the students to higher degree
education.&lt;br/&gt;