* 0408086
* IGMS:     Cancer Data Analysis and Survival Modeling Using Wavelets and Splines
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Don Hong, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 10/31/2005
* USD 99,999.00

This grant will provide an immersion experience for the principal investigator,
a Professor of Mathematics with Dr. Yu Shyr, an Ingram Professor of Cancer
Research, and his group at the Ingram Cancer Center of Vanderbilt University.
The PI wishes to learn more about molecular biology, specially on gene
expressions, and applying mathematical techniques to medical science. He will
focus primarily on three projects during the proposed period: (a) Improvement of
peak detection and quantification of mass spectrometry (MS) data from lung
cancer patients by using wavelets, (b) Survival modeling for lung cancer
patients using spline functions, and (c) Mathematical analysis of support vector
machine (SVM) classification and applications in cancer data.

The proposal is an interdisciplinary research project with an educational
emphasis in statistics, computational mathematics, actuarial science, and
quantitative biological study in cancers. The PI plans to participate in variety
of seminars on matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) mass
spectrometer, biostatistics, and on support vector machine classification and
applications at the medical school of Vanderbilt University. He will audit the
courses of topics in molecular biology and biostatistics to broaden his
knowledge and enhance skills in molecular data analysis and classification. The
PI will select some projects for his masters students as thesis topics for
further study using splines for modeling. At the same time, the PI will focus on
topics on wavelet applications to gene expression data and will study SVM for
data classification.

The objective of the proposal is both research and educational. On the research
side, the PI expects to establish a long term collaboration with researchers in
biostatistics and medical science, with results disseminated in both the
mathematical and statistical literatures, as well as directly to medical science
and actuarial science. On the educational side, the PI will give seminar talks
on splines and wavelets for biostatisticians and students at Vanderbilt
University. He will bring new methods and ideas, and the experiences gained back
to his home university with the goal of enhancing both graduate and
undergraduate education in multiple programs there.

The PI believes this experience will contribute to the development of a new
Institution of Quantitative Biology at ETSU, which will greatly enhance the
research and education program among the college of medicine and the departments
of mathematics, biology, and public health. Also, areas of expertise of the PI
such as in wavelets, splines, multivariate approximation, mathematical
statistics, and risk analysis will provide to the biostatistics group, which is
useful for medical data study at Vanderbilt University.

This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).

