* 0408525
* Storm Preparedness and Recovery for the Electric Power System
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Arthur DeGaetano, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 380,023.00

This project aims to improve ice storm and hurricane preparedness and recovery
for electric power distribution systems by building a set of interrelated
mathematical models to better estimate future storm-related damages, and to
support decisions that can minimize storm-related disruption, specifically the
design of tree trimming policies and post-storm restoration procedures. The
project will consist of four main steps. First, ice storm and hurricane hazard
models will be developed and applied to predict the ice and wind loads placed on
the system by ice storms and hurricanes, respectively. Second, statistical
damage models will be developed to predict damage for ice storms and hurricanes
in terms of characteristics of the storms, system inventory, and region. Third,
a discrete event simulation model of the post-storm restoration process will be
developed. Finally, two case studies will be conducted to investigate the cost-
effectiveness of various alternative tree trimming policies, a costly and
important aspect of maintaining the electric power distribution system, and to
examine the relative effectiveness of alternative post-storm restoration
procedures.

The investigators will collaborate with 4 large power companies on this research
(Dominion Energy, Duke Energy, New York State Electric & Gas, and Progress
Energy). The companies, which will provide data and consultation about system
operations, collectively have had considerable recent experience with ice storms
and hurricanes, and are at a turning point in terms of their desire and ability
to collect and make use of better outage, damage, and other data. Because any
one company has limited experience with storms, pooling the data and expertise
of these 4 companies offers a unique opportunity for the investigators to gain
insights into the response of the electric power distribution system to storms.
The collaboration will also facilitate dissemination of results.

This study will benefit all users of electric power by helping utility companies
reduce the frequency and duration of power outages through better preparedness
and recovery. Negative societal impacts of power outages include economic loss;
business interruption; general inconvenience; irreversible loss of electronic
data and perishable goods; health impacts (e.g., if power outages result in loss
of heating); secondary interruptions of water supply, traffic signaling, and
other infrastructure systems. As society's dependence on and expectation of
uninterrupted electric power increases, it becomes more and more critical to
reduce these effects. Through an improved understanding of storm impacts on
power systems, and an improved ability to manage them with more efficient outage
prediction, tree trimming, and restoration, this study will contribute
significantly to that worthwhile goal.

The proposed methodology will also advance the state-of-the-art in natural
hazard risk analysis for infrastructure systems. Most previous research on
lifeline risk analysis has focused on earthquakes, leaving many unanswered
questions about the most effective way to prepare for and recover from major ice
storms and hurricanes. Lessons learned and methods developed in this study may
be extendable to other lifelines in the future.

