* 0408832
* Exploratory Research in Microbial Remediation of Liquefiable Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Mary Roth, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2006
* USD 56,123.00

Saturated loose sand deposits subjected to seismic loads are susceptible to
liquefaction, a phenomenon in which there is a rapid loss of strength of the
soil caused by a sudden increase in porewater pressure. Structures built on
these soils may suffer severe deformations or failure during liquefaction due to
excessive settlement caused by the loss of support from the foundation soils. At
undeveloped sites, proven methods of soil improvement - e.g., dynamic compaction
and vibro-compaction - can reduce the likelihood of liquefaction. However, at
locations where structures already exist or exist nearby, these methods are
either impossible to implement or are impractical as they may cause damage to
these structures.

The aim of this research is to determine whether the addition of bacteria,
either simple adhering bacteria or biofilm formers, increases the strength and
stability of liquefiable soils. It is hypothesized that the microbes will
provide some cohesion/cementation between the particles, thereby increasing
their resistance to liquefaction. Very little research has been done on the use
of microbes to improve the strength properties of soil. Loose sands will be
inoculated in separate tests with two organisms, Cytophaga U67 (a biofilm
former) and a mutant Cytophaga U67 (a non-biofilm former). Cytophaga are
naturally found in a saturated, low-nutrient environment. The attachment of the
microbe to the solids is expected to create cohesion/cementation between
particles, thereby reducing the susceptibility of the soil deposit to loss of
strength during rapid increases in porewater pressure. Cohesive strength gains
in the sand will be measured using vane shear tests and/or unconfined
compression tests.

This project will provide information on the potential use of microbes in the
remediation of liquefiable soils. It will also initiate the first collaborative
research project between the civil engineering and biology departments at
Lafayette College. The results will be disseminated to the wider scientific
community through poster presentations and published research papers.