* 0408454
* Field-scale study to evaluate the role of bacterial chemotaxis in natural attenuation of groundwater contaminants
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Ronald Harvey, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 250,923.00

0408454&lt;br/&gt;Ford&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remediation of polluted
groundwater is often limited because chemical contaminants trapped within
interstices of the soil matrix are not accessible to groundwater flow paths. One
mechanism by which pollutant-degrading bacteria may penetrate these less
conductive regions is chemotaxis, the ability of bacteria to sense chemical
concentration gradients and swim toward higher concentrations of contaminants.
Chemotactic bacteria able to migrate from highly conductive regions of the
aquifer toward the contaminant source would increase the microbial population in
the vicinity of the contaminant and thereby enhance the overall rate of
degradation and removal. &lt;br/&gt;Objective and Approach: The objective of
this project is to determine the degree to which chemotactic bacteria may
enhance the degradation of chemical pollutants near a source zone in natural
groundwater systems. A series of field-scale investigations will be conducted at
the USGS Cape Cod Toxic-Substances Hydrology Research Site. To aid in the design
of the field-scale study, preliminary studies will be conducted in well-
controlled two-dimensional sand box systems. The sand box design provides the
added benefit of being able to visualize the flow patterns and analyze the
spatial distributions of contaminant and bacteria along the flow path without
all the complexities of a large field study.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Although number of laboratory-scale experiments have implicated bacterial
chemotaxis as an important mechanism for transport of bacteria through saturated
porous media, its ramifications at the field-scale have not been evaluated. A
culminating experiment at the field-scale will address the question of whether
chemotactic responses observed over length scales of centimeters in the lab give
rise to larger scale effects that are observable in the field.&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact: A new partnership between researchers at the University of Virginia and
the US Geological Survey brings together expertise in bacterial chemotaxis and
extensive field experience involving motile microorganisms. Investigators with a
proven commitment to recruiting underrepresented groups in engineering will
broadly educate one graduate and two undergraduate students through the
University of Virginia's Program for Interdisciplinary Research in Contaminant
Hydrology. Outreach to two local high schools will introduce students and their
teachers to molecular biology techniques and the use of engineered organisms in
laboratory and field-scale investigations. Results from this study will be used
to assess the feasibility of monitored natural attenuation as a treatment option
at contaminated sites where biological degradation has been
documented&lt;br/&gt;