* 0408777
* Vibration Control of Rotordynamic Systems using Motors
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Brian Fabien, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 06/30/2008
* USD 224,131.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The control of vibration in rotordynamic systems is an
important problem in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;These unwanted oscillations can lead
to premature failure or poor performance of the system.&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally
active vibration control of rotordynamic systems is accomplished by
adding&lt;br/&gt;actuators (electromagnets or active magnetic bearings) that
apply a radial force to the shaft&lt;br/&gt;of the rotor. These actuators are
used in feedback control systems that are designed to&lt;br/&gt;ameliorate the
effects of the unwanted vibration.&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an approach
to the control of vibration in rotordynamic systems&lt;br/&gt;that does not rely
on external actuators. Here we consider rotordynamic systems that
are&lt;br/&gt;driven by electromagnetic motors. By modifying the commutation and
control of these&lt;br/&gt;motors they can be made to produce a torque and a
radial force. This radial force can&lt;br/&gt;then be controlled to suppress the
vibrations in the system. To evaluate the torque/force&lt;br/&gt;generating
capability of motors this project has set three broad objectives; (1) To
develop&lt;br/&gt;and experimentally validate models, suitable for use in
control system design, that accurately&lt;br/&gt;predict the behavior of motors
that are used as torque and radial force generators. (2)
To&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate the practical feasibility of using motors as
torque/force generators in actual&lt;br/&gt;rotordynamic systems. Specifically,
a ywheel energy storage (FES) device and a a hard&lt;br/&gt;disk drive (HDD)
system. (3) To integrate these new techniques into the
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;curriculum and provide research opportunities for women
and underrepresented minority&lt;br/&gt;students.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits:
The use of axial and radial ux permanent magnet motors to
generate&lt;br/&gt;radial forces for vibration suppression is believed to be a
novel approach. In addition, the&lt;br/&gt;actuator modeling and control
techniques developed in this project can be applied to other&lt;br/&gt;AC/DC
motor designs.&lt;br/&gt;Practical FES devices that use magnetic bearings
require precise regulation of the air&lt;br/&gt;gap between the rotor and the
stator. The controllers must provide stable operation over&lt;br/&gt;a range of
speeds while rejecting the harmful effects of disk imbalance and base
excitation.&lt;br/&gt;This project will design and implement a multiple model
controller for a FES device that&lt;br/&gt;uses an axial ux motor for torque and
radial force production.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By eliminating the need for
external force actuators this research will&lt;br/&gt;lead to FES devices with
higher energy densities. This would make FES systems a practi-
cal&lt;br/&gt;alternative to electrochemical energy storage systems. When used
in conjunction with&lt;br/&gt;renewable energy sources these improved FES
devices can help reduce national dependence&lt;br/&gt;on fossil
fuels.&lt;br/&gt;This research can also provide a low-cost means for suppressing
vibration in HDD sys-tems,&lt;br/&gt;thus improving the data storage
capabilities of these devices. It is estimated that the&lt;br/&gt;United States
digitally stored more than 400 billion documents in 1997, with 72 billion
new&lt;br/&gt;documents being added each year. Thus, it is important to conduct
research that will lead&lt;br/&gt;to increased reliability of HDD
devices.&lt;br/&gt;The education initiatives of the proposed project will focus
on bringing modern techno-logical&lt;br/&gt;developments in bearing design and
motor control into the undergraduate classroom.&lt;br/&gt;Also, in collaboration
with the UW/NSF LSAMP program the the project will focus on&lt;br/&gt;outreach
activities by providing opportunities for underrepresented minorities and
women&lt;br/&gt;to work in an engineering setting.