* 0408623
* Bond Stress-Slip of Reinforcing Bars and Prestressing Strands in HPFRC Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Antoine Naaman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 01/31/2008
* USD 332,732.00

High quality bond between the concrete matrix and reinforcing bars or
prestressing tendons is vital for reliable structural behavior. Recent advances
in micro-mechanics design and tailoring of fiber reinforced cement composites
(FRCCs) allow us to obtain high-performance composites (HPFRCCs) with strain-
hardening response in tension using less than 2% fibers by volume. In effect,
this opens the way to a whole range of practical structural applications
including on site construction and precast products. The main objective of this
research is to study the fundamental mechanisms that control the bond stress
versus slip response of reinforcing bars and prestressing strands embedded in
HPFRCCs under both monotonic and cyclic loading. The bond-stress versus slip
relationship is a constitutive property of the interface between reinforcement
and concrete and allows the estimation of bar development length and strand
transfer length in reinforced and prestressed concrete structures. While
providing a better solution for numerous current designs, this proposal also
opens the way to the next generation of infrastructure where fiber reinforced
concrete will be considered a readily available alternative in structural
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The experimental program is aimed at generating the
necessary information to understand the interaction between steel rebars or
prestressing strands and HPFRCC materials under monotonic and reversed cyclic
loading conditions. The main objective of the analytical study is to formulate
bond-stress versus slip models for reinforcing bars and prestressing strands
based on the main mechanisms observed in the experiments, and from the test
results obtained. Based on the findings, recommendations will be made to modify
the current development length, splice length, and transfer length equations
given in the ACI code for reinforcing bars and prestressing strands, or new
equations will be proposed if needed.&lt;br/&gt;The global building industry
faces a growing need for advanced materials to address increasing complexity,
more stringent code requirements, demand for longer service life, needs to
reduce repair-rehabilitation-maintenance cost, and escalating security and
protection requirements. This research addresses the above needs by making the
use of high performance fiber reinforced concrete readily possible; this will
allow the development of new structural concepts, and offers the means to
improve the performance of existing designs. In the area of education, emphasis
will be placed on attracting undergraduate students, especially women and
minorities by working with the Society of Women Engineers and the Minority
Engineering Program Office of the University of Michigan. A website, dedicated
to this research, will be developed and will contain pertinent information
related to the experimental and analytical studies, as well as the course
material. Overall, this research will add to the knowledge base, and will expose
students to the use of advanced materials in structural
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;