* 0408790
* Micorstructural Analysis of Late Holocene Sediments Deformed by the San Andreas Fault at Point Arena, California
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Susan Cashman, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2007
* USD 75,302.00

Differentiating between earthquake rupture-related (coseismic) structures and
creep-related (aseismic) structures in active faults such as the San Andreas,
Hayward, and Calaveras faults in northern California is commonly not possible,
yet assessing the presence or absence of past earthquake-related surface
ruptures is critical for evaluating seismic hazard. Recognition of individual
surface-rupture earthquakes in trenches excavated across faults is commonly the
basis for interpreting the paleoearthquake history of a site and thus for
evaluating earthquake recurrence intervals along a given fault segment. However,
aseismic creep also deforms surficial deposits and can produce features in
trench exposures that resemble those from coseismic rupture. Uncertainty in
distinguishing these two types of fault features may result in an erroneous
interpretation of earthquake timing and recurrence. This research is extending
traditional paleoseismologic investigations to include analysis of microtextural
features in sediment samples deformed by active faults. The Alder Cr. study
area, on the segment of the San Andreas Fault that last ruptured in 1906, is
providing microstructural information from a site that records unambiguous
coseismic rupture and allowing direct comparison with an earlier study of the
creeping segment of the San Andreas Fault.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer-based
image analysis is a new tool that can be used to measure microscopic-scale
characteristics of faulted sand samples. Scanning electron microscope images of
oriented sample of faulted sand collected from the San Andreas Fault are being
studied using image analysis software. Features such as degree of grain size
variation and preferred grain orientation of fault zone samples are measured,
and then compared to those from creeping fault zones, from liquifaction vents,
and from undeformed sand near the fault zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
is: (1) characterizing the degree to which coseismic strain is localized on
individual fault strands and describing microstructures formed at high strain
rate (coseismic slip); (2) providing a better understanding of fault zone
architecture in porous, poorly lithified materials. (3) adding to a small but
crucial data set describing deformation processes and strain rates in the time
period of hundreds to tens of thousands of years, and (4) yielding information
that is directly applicable to assessing the presence or absence of past surface
ruptures on faults throughout the San Francisco Bay region.