* 0408172
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Importance of Alternative Mating Types to Speciation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Barry Sinervo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,998.00

The mechanisms by which a single species diverges to form two separate species
remains a central question in biology. This research will test the hypothesis
that sexual selection (competition for mates) promotes rapid evolution and
speciation. This study will be conducted on the side-blotched lizard, Uta
stansburiana, a species that has three distinct male mating strategies that
compete for females. First, phylogenetic methods (methods that reconstruct the
evolutionary history of populations) will be used to test whether there is rapid
evolution of multiple traits when mating types are lost in a population. Then,
both behavioral and mating experiments will be done to test if reproductive
isolation (the hallmark of speciation) results when mating types change between
populations.

Understanding the mechanisms of speciation can inform research on genetics,
conservation, ecology, and all other areas of biology since species are the
fundamental unit of study in biology. As part of this project, at least three
undergraduates will gain hands on experience in multiple fields of biology
including behavioral ecology, evolution, and phylogenetics. The undergraduates
will also learn experimental design and some of the most common methods of
molecular biology including DNA extraction, the polymerase chain reaction, and
DNA sequencing.

