* 0408496
* Collaborative Research - Small Grant for Exploratory Research:     An Interdisciplinary Approach to Coastal Vulnerability and Community Sustainability
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Shirley Laska, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2006
* USD 18,781.00

Title: Collaborative Research - Small Grant for Exploratory Research: An
Interdisciplinary Approach to Coastal Vulnerability and Community Sustainability

This collaborative research project offers a unique, exploratory methodology for
hazards research for a small coastal community, Grand Bayou, Louisiana. This
intercultural Native American (Atakapa, Houma) and Cajun community of 125
represents a natural research laboratory well-suited to the study of community
sustainability in an area of high coastal vulnerability. The Grand Bayou
community is struggling to balance the threat of natural hazards, economic
development and community sustainability. It is perched on the edge of survival
due to repeated natural disasters, coastal erosion, and economic losses, as well
as threats to cultural heritage and social networks. It is only accessible by
water, is located in coastal wetlands south of New Orleans, and lies one mile
west outside the protection of the Mississippi levee.

Participatory action research (PAR) represents a viable and culturally
appropriate research strategy that will: (1) observe and record their efforts;
(2) document and understand their heritage orally and visually; (3) assess
human, built and natural systems; (4) apply a methodology unique to hazards
research that uses a broad based interdisciplinary team. Rapid data collection
is imperative due to the precariousness of this community from natural disaster,
anticipated deaths among the elders, and migration for economic and physical
survival. Small unincorporated and rural communities such as Grand Bayou often
lack adequate attention, advocacy and resources in facing, responding to, or
recovering from disasters. Grand Bayou represents an appropriate location for
inquiry designed to generate knowledge on communities most vulnerable to loss
but with a culturally based potential to survive.



