* 0408566
* SHOT Summer Writing Workshop, Massachusett, 2004
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Rosalind Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Project Abstract SES 0408566 Rosalind Williams, MIT "SHOT Summer Writing
Workshop"

Project Description: This is a pilot project for SHOT to develop into an annual
event. The workshop will bring together participants with a staff of experienced
writing teachers. It will also include discussions with book and magazine
editors, science and technology journalists, and publishing industry
representatives. Intellectual Merit: The purpose of the workshop is to improve
the writing ability of the participants in preparing academic publications and
also in writing for the larger public. The precise balance between these two
goals will depend upon the career stage and trajectory of each participant. Such
a project has never been attempted by an STS academic society, thus underscoring
the importance of this proposal.

Broader Impact: The workshop will have multiple benefits. It will improve the
general level of writing ability among scholars; broaden awareness of the range
of publication opportunities available to scholars; encourage writing for the
larger public as well as for academic audiences; and develop an informal network
of peer-to-peer editing and mentorship that over the years could provide ongoing
motivation to improve writing skills and could significantly improve the
communication abilities and range of academics. It is anticipated that this
workshop will serve as a model for the rest of the STS community.