* 0408675
* Collaborative Research: Reconciling Geologic and Geodetic Rates of Deformation: The Role of Distributed Strain in the Upper Crust
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Douglas Burbank, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 47,980.00

Understanding the spatial and temporal distribution of surface deformation over
various timescales can yield insight into lithospheric rheology, rupture
behavior, and nature of slip transfer along fault networks. However, new
insights provided by GPS bring new challenges: in particular, how does elastic
strain accumulation measured over geodetic timescales (less than 10 yr) relate
to geologic slip inferred over longer timescales (10,000 - 1,000,000 yr)? Over
the past few years, much effort has been focused on an apparent discrepancy
between geodetic rates of surface deformation and geologic rates of fault slip
across the Eastern California Shear Zone. Recent hypotheses for this discrepancy
center on temporal variations in the strain field which result from: 1)
clustering of seismic strain release, 2) oscillatory strain release on conjugate
fault systems, or 3) viscoelastic deformation following recent earthquakes. In
order to fully understand the pace and tempo of variations in fault system
behavior, however, a complete characterization of fault slip over geologic time
is required.

This investigator team is collecting the basic geologic and geomorphic data
necessary to critically assess rates of fault displacement across Owens Valley,
California. In particular, the project is aimed at understanding the role played
by diffuse arrays of small faults in accommodating strain across the region. The
hypothesis that these fault networks may account for a significant component of
geologic slip not considered by current interpretations of geodetic data is
being tested by determining fault slip rates (exploiting geomorphic markers such
as glacial moraines, river terraces and alluvial fans) on numerous fault arrays
distributed throughout central and northern Owens Valley. Moreover, an
alternative hypothesis holds that the discrepancy between geologic and geodetic
data may reflect temporal variation in the rate of strain release. A refined
understanding of the pace and tempo of distributed faulting across the region is
being developed by exploiting sites with offset markers of varying age.

This project contributes towards larger goals articulated by the broader
geologic/geophysical community by improving interpretations of geodetic data
across the diffuse North American - Pacific plate boundary, and by developing
new insight into the problem of temporal variations in fault slip.