* 0408005
* Dynamic Subduction Zone Thermal Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,09/30/2007
* Scott King, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2007
* USD 210,000.00

The pressure-temperature environment of the subducting slab is critical for a
variety of research fields. Hence, slab thermal structure calculations are used
in seismology, mineral physics, gravity, petrology, and heat flow studies. The
work proposed here is a major departure from previous slab thermal structure
studies because the plate and slab motion in these models will be calculated
dynamically. This will enable the investigators to test the validity of one of
the most critical underlying assumptions used in the majority of slab thermal
structure calculations: the kinematic slab approximation. Current slab thermal
structure models are not able to consider the effect of deformation within the
slab. Furthermore, current models are dynamically inconsistent because the
density structure of the slab does not feed back into the plate and wedge flow.
With the increased resolution of seismic tomography and the ability to predict
flow patterns from seismic anisotropy measurements, it appears that the
resolution in the observations is reaching a point that serious reconsideration
of the slab thermal structure tools is warranted. In addition, there are now
much better estimates of slab rheology, both from the lab and from observational
constraints, and testable models of slab density structure. In order to use
these new constraints to their fullest potential, a new generation of slab
thermal models is needed. With a new slab thermal modeling tool, the researchers
plan to focus on two specific issues: what is the impact of slab deformation on
the thermal structure of the slab; and to what extend are estimates of slab
buoyancy inconsistent with the observed motion of the incoming plate and the
slab itself?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work will be the
development of a tool for calculating a new generation of slab thermal structure
models. The investigators envision that this will impact subduction zone
researchers in several ways. First, they will be able to quantify a range of
temperatures that bound the effect of slab deformation on thermal structure.
This will give researchers temperature bounds to place on simple kinematic
models. The new tool for generating slab thermal structure models will be
significantly more complex and computationally intensive than current tools.
However, they will also generate a set series of thermal fields for a variety of
geometries approximating the major currently active subduction zones. These
would be available for downloading from a website so that other researchers
could work with them. In addition, they plan to make the source code for this
new tool available to researchers on request and plan to create a reasonably
friendly GUI front-end so that non-specialists will be able to work with
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;