* 0408105
* Dissertation Research:Global Alpine Biogeography: Insights from Phylogenetics, Phylogeography and Population Genetics of the Trans-Pacific Alpine Plant Genus Oreomyrrhis (Apiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Barbara Schaal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2006
* USD 11,910.00

The alpine biome is the only terrestrial ecosystem that is distributed globally.
Understanding genetic variation and evolution of plant species in these
widespread yet isolated ecosystems will provide insight into the origins of
global biodiversity. The plant genus Oreomyrrhis is found in alpine and sub-
Antarctic environments around the South Pacific Rim, a unique distribution well
suited for studying the evolution of alpine plants. This grant will support
travel to Central America to complete worldwide sampling of Oreomyrrhis species.
By applying molecular genetic approaches, interspecific relationships will be
reconstructed to elucidate histories and mechanisms underlying Oreomyrrhis's
distribution. Dr. Barbara Schaal and Kuo-fang Chung will also compare population
genetic structures of Oreomyrrhis species in Ecuador, Taiwan, Australia, New
Zealand, and the sub-Antarctic islands of Tierra del Fuego and Falkland Islands,
illuminating evolutionary forces that have shaped genetic variation of alpine
life.

To survive harsh alpine environments, organisms evolve distinctive adaptations
that characterize the alpine ecosystems. However, this unique ecosystem is now
diminishing rapidly as global warming triggers an upward migration of mountain
vegetation belts, narrowing alpine zones to higher and more arid environments.
Results of this study will provide data to evaluate and predict the impacts of
global warming on alpine plant communities, information necessary for designing
effective polices to conserve the intriguing and fragile alpine biodiversity.