* 0408999
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2004
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Daniela Bell, Bell                    Daniela        L
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2006
* USD 110,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY2004.
The goal of the fellowship is to increase the participation of minority
scientists at the postdoctoral level and to prepare them for positions of
scientific leadership in academia and industry. To attain this goal, the
fellowship provides opportunities for postdoctoral training and research of the
highest quality to recent doctoral recipients. It is expected that Fellows
supported through these fellowships will play important roles in training of the
future workforce.

The research and training plan is entitled "How and why populations of Silene
latifolia (white campion) differ for floral and leaf traits." This study of
selection mechanisms uses European populations of Silene latifolia, a native
short-lived perennial, that are differentiated for floral and leaf traits. These
traits are negatively correlated across populations. Estimates are being made of
the relative importance of natural and sexual selection in driving the observed
patterns. Selection will be measured in populations that differ for water
availability. The research provides a greater understanding of the role of
ecology and environment in shaping the evolution of plants. The training brings
a broader perspective on the field of evolutionary ecology and career
development opportunities to a young scientist early in her career.