* 0409119
* Surface Engineered Titanium Implants
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Martine LaBerge, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2007
* USD 156,000.00

The principal investigator and his colleagues with complementary backgrounds
will study surface engineering of metallic implants. The focus of the work is to
coat surfaces of these implants with calcium-deficient hydroxyapatite (CDHA).
This is the biological counterpart of the mineral hydroxyapatite (HA). CDHA
occurs in mammalian teeth or bone and helps in direct bonding of bone to the
implant. The process uses simulated body fluids (SBFs) as the coating medium.
Both as-prepared and as-coated surfaces are characterized using many different
techniques. The in vitro response of bovine osteoblasts on the coated surfaces
is determined. Correlation between processing parameters, surface
characteristics, and osteoblast response is being determined. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project has vital societal roles to play. Over the next several
decades, the vast majority of the "Baby Boomer" population will use some kind of
implant in hips, knees, teeth, maxillofacial reconstruction, and other
applications. This research utilizes the newly developed concepts of "Materials
and Manufacturing" and "Biotechnology" to fabricate improved implants with
greater reliability and less risk of infection. Another mission is to train and
mentor students at various levels in the area of "Biomaterials". Students of
several levels (K-12, 2-year colleges) should benefit from this project via
formal and informal teaching paths. From that viewpoint, the team is working
with local HBCU, two-year technical colleges, middle and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;