* 0409625
* Development of Smart Nanotribological Surfaces using Multifunctionalized Mesoporous Nanosphere Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Victor Lin, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2007
* USD 156,000.00

Development of Smart Nanotribological Surfaces using Multifunctionalized
Mesoporous&lt;br/&gt;Nanosphere Films&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the current
development of technology, a stricter requirement for controlling tribological
phenomena (friction, wear and lubrication) at desired levels is arising in
various engineering practices, especially in micro/nanoscale systems.
Traditional tribological systems exhibit two weaknesses - the inability to adapt
to changes in operating conditions to provide uniform tribological response and
the durability of the tribological interface. Designing 'smart' films that
exhibit self-adapting behavior to changes in operating conditions 'self-
repairing' or 'self-healing' behavior would be extremely beneficial. Mesoporous
Nanosphere Materials (MNMs) are a novel class of materials that exhibit a high
degree of molecular design control of its internal pores and external surfaces,
which can be taken advantage of to realize tribological films that are adaptive
and self-healing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this proposal
are to design novel tribological coatings/film systems utilizing mesoporous
silica/alumina nanosphere materials that (i) can provide superior tribological
performance for&lt;br/&gt;micro/nanoscale applications; (ii) are self-adapting
('smart') to changes in operating conditions and (iii) are self-healing to
provide enhanced durability and longevity in tribological performance. Each
phase involves chemical synthesis, deposition and chemical, structural,
mechanical and tribological evaluation of each material system. The first phase
of the proposed research program involves the synthesis and deposition of a
closely packed monolayer of MNMs that are rigidly linked to the substrate. The
second phase involves designing self-adaptive films using (a) MNMs that are
internally functionalized using grafted monolayers incorporating a
thermosensitive polymer (Poly-(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAAm)) which will
cause a change in the frictional response of the surface below and above the
lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of the polymer; (b) a self-
lubricating hybrid self-assembled monolayer-nanoparticle surface utilizing MoS2
and graphitized carbon nanoparticles. The nanoparticles, being self-lubricating
in nature at low and high humidity respectively, will aid in maintaining a
uniform friction response of the surface. The third phase involves the design of
a 'self-healing' tribological surface incorporating self-assembled monolayers
(SAMs) and MNMs - a SAM covered surface with pockets of MNMs will be fabricated
using photolithography and SAM chemistry. The MNMs will be externally
functionalized with a polymer layer with tribological characteristics similar to
that of the surface SAMs while internal pores will house free SAM molecules in
solution. Wear or surface fracture initiated release of SAM molecules will allow
active adsorption of molecules onto worn sites thus performing a 'self-healing'
action. Micro/nanoscale tribological characterization will be performed using
atomic force microscopy and microtribometry techniques developed at the PI's
laboratory while synthesis of MNM films will be performed via techniques
established by the co-PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the
interdisciplinary research efforts include the development of novel and
innovative design strategies to produce 'smart' tribological surfaces and
obtaining a better understanding of chemical and physical phenomena associated
with molecular design of materials and tribological behavior. The realization of
such 'smart' systems would be extremely rewarding for tribological pairs
subjected to multiple and repeated environmental changes and which require very
high durability, which can occur in consumer, defense, aerospace and medical
applications. In addition, the research demonstrates molecular design strategies
that provide ways to obtain a high degree of control in tailoring the structure
and behavior of the final system. Two Ph.D. students will work on the project.
They will be exposed to cross-disciplinary research and benefit from the
learning experience. In order to enhance the participation of women and minority
students in graduate education and research, students from these
underrepresented groups will be targeted for work on the project. Research
results will be disseminated into several undergraduate and graduate courses
being taught by the PIs in Mechanical Engineering and Chemistry that will
enhance the education of about 200 students every year. The broad impacts of the
proposed activities are (i) the research activities promote interdisciplinary
research efforts in system design that can lead to novel engineering strategies
for superior tribological interfaces in a wide range of applications (ii) they
promote increased participation of women and/or minority students through
targeted recruitment efforts and (iii) the research activities enhance the
education of undergraduate and graduate students of two departments at Iowa
State University by emphasizing the importance of interdisciplinary research and
nanoscale design strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;