* 0409913
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating Physical Processes in Upper Crustal Magma Systems - Evidence from Miocene Intrusive and Extrusive Sequences in Southern Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* James Faulds, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2009
* USD 85,036.00

Physical transport processes determine the ways in which magmas traverse the
upper crust, how they are modified, where they are deposited, whether and how
they erupt, and what their final products will be. This project will investigate
the physical mechanisms that transport and distribute magmatic materials using a
superb natural laboratory: the Colorado River region south of Las Vegas, where
relatively young (~15 million years old) magmatic systems are spectacularly
exposed through a combination of steep tilting during rift-related faulting,
high relief, and sparse vegetation. Numerous plutons, extensive dike swarms, and
thick volcanic sequences document a relatively brief but highly productive
episode of magma influx. &lt;br/&gt;A key part of the project will be devoted to
understanding the plutons (large bodies of intrusive rock, solidified beneath
the surface) and what they say about the nature and history of magma chambers
(temporary melt-rich zones at depth that solidify to form plutons and may expel
magma to erupt at the surface). Plutons, the magma chambers that formed them,
dikes that fed the chambers, and dikes that fed volcanic eruptions at the
surface all must have dynamic histories, but the physical processes that move
crystals, melts, and fragments of solid or near-solid rocks within these systems
are not well understood. General distributions of volcanic and intrusive rocks
in the study area and details of their internal structure suggest fluid dynamic
models that are analogous to fluid and particle transport in surface
environments - notably sedimentation and mass wasting processes.&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address this fundamental, general issue:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How
do physical transport processes in the upper crust determine the eventual
distribution and physical and compositional characteristics of the products of a
magma system?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate this broad problem, the focus
will be on the following more specific questions:&lt;br/&gt;(1) How do
depositional processes dictate the construction and ultimate architecture of
plutons?&lt;br/&gt;(2) How do external factors (recharging, roof collapse,
eruption, tectonism) influence internal physical processes within magma
chambers?&lt;br/&gt;(3) How much, and why, do melt fraction and volume vary over
the lifetime of a pluton (~magma chamber)? &lt;br/&gt;(4) What determines
whether deep-level magmas transit the upper crust unmodified or are modified
during residence in magma chambers?; Do magma chambers serve as effective
filters, selectively inhibiting further ascent of certain magmas or magmatic
materials? &lt;br/&gt;(5) What determines whether magma pools to form plutons,
remains restricted to dikes, or erupts?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field studies of
key areas will characterize critical structures and map patterns that provide
evidence for mechanical transport and deposition processes and provide samples
for further analysis. These samples will be used for detailed radiometric dating
and microanalysis of tracer elements and isotopes in minerals. Complementary lab
experiments on liquid + particle analogs of magma will evaluate plausible fluid
dynamic processes in the magma systems. Together, the sample geochemistry and
geochronology and lab experiments will test field-based magma transport
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide ideal research training and
constitute the basis for theses for 7 Master's and 12 undergraduate students.
The students will present and publish their results and gain experience in
combining careful field observation with advanced analytical work, in
collaborative research, and in integrating their local efforts into a global
framework. This work prepares them not only for further research in petrology,
geochemistry, and tectonics, but also for a broad range of Earth science problem
solving and teaching. Based on past experience a large proportion of these
students will be female and participation by minority students is likely.
&lt;br/&gt;The study will stimulate exchange of ideas between the PI's and their
students and several informal collaborators who will add their own perspectives
and expertise and in some cases analytical methodologies. These collaborations,
formal and informal field trips, and presentations to specialist and general
audiences as well as published work will disseminate developing ideas, foster
discussion in a variety of forums, and showcase this spectacular example of
magmatic processes. Much of the research will take place in Lake Mead National
Recreation area, which will provide an excellent venue for presentation of new
ideas to the public. The project will also contribute to a new cooperative
program at Vanderbilt involving geology and environmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Although principally a basic science project, the results
of this work will contribute to understanding of eruptive processes and thus
will bear upon volcanic hazards.&lt;br/&gt;