* 0409666
* Novel Eco-friendly Nano-reinforced Cellular Biobased Composites for Load-bearing Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Manjusri Misra, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 04/30/2008
* USD 301,321.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a sustainable
alternative to fiberglass load-bearing multi-purpose panels with novel cellular
nano-biocomposites. Cellular nano-biocomposites. The cellular nano-biocomposite
will be used to develop advanced panel components for multiple-use (i.e.,
housing floors, walls, roofs, bridge decks, RV panels) with tailorable
integrated multi-functions (i.e., stiffness, strength, toughness, thermal
insulation, fire protection, and user friendliness). &lt;br/&gt;The research
objectives will be achieved through a fundamental study guided by four general
tasks:&lt;br/&gt;I. Biobased Polyester Resin. Suitable biobased resin from a
blend of petroleum-based polyester and functionalized soybean oil (~ 30 wt.%) is
proposed to address both engineering and environmental requirements.
&lt;br/&gt;II. Clay/Biobased Polyester Nanocomposite. The properties of biobased
resin will be enhanced with nanoclay reinforcement dispersed via exfoliation.
&lt;br/&gt;III. Nano-reinforced Polyester Biocomposite. The polymer
nanocomposite will be additionally reinforced with "engineered" natural fibers.
&lt;br/&gt;IV. Cellular Structural Material and Panel Systems. The specific
properties of the nano-reinforced biocomposite will be further enhanced through
the topological design of the material in cellular arrangements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a multidisciplinary effort among the
Departments of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Chemical Engineering and
Materials Science, and Agriculture Economics. The research approach integrates
the technical components of analysis, design and manufacturing with broad
societal impact elements such as environment, economy, life-cycle analysis,
energy, industrial collaboration, education integration, and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;The project will allow education and research training of
two graduate and two undergraduatestudents. Research and education will be
integrated in advanced composite materials courses across departments and
through multidisciplinary student activities. A determined attempt will be made
to recruit underrepresented students using university programs. We expect to
create a break-through concept for a new generation of high-performance load-
bearing components through fundamental research. The research will add
considerable knowledge in the engineering of naturally reinforced
nanocomposites, innovative structural design, and will create consciousness in
designing value-added, eco-friendly and affordable materials and components for
the 21-st century.&lt;br/&gt;