* 0409861
* Atomic Force Microscopy Studies of Tribochemical Phenomena
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* J. Thomas Dickinson, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Clark Cooper
* 06/30/2007
* USD 167,000.00

We request support for a three-year project to examine the consequences of
simultaneous application of chemical agents and mechanical stress to a solid
surface. We explore the resulting nanometer-scale changes in surface topography
due to application of combined highly localized mechanical stress (due to
contact with the tip of an atomic force microscope) and exposure to appropriate
solutions and solvents. These basic studies impact several technologies in that
they provide underlying understanding for areas such as chemical mechanical
planarization (CMP), tribochemical wear, tribo-induced redeposition, tribology
in biological systems (where biological fluids serve as the active media), and
nanotechnology. Any relative motion of surfaces, no matter how small, will
involve dissipative forces that need to be understood and controlled in
nanometer-scale devices. As device sizes shrink, the need for clean, atomically
flat surfaces will become more and more pressing. Our overall goal is to develop
descriptive and predictive models for asperity and substrate modification due to
combined chemical, thermal, and mechanical processes. Intellectual Merit -
Tribochemical phenomena are complex and poorly understood. Our approach is to
simplify the system to a single asperity (the AFM tip), which we can
characterize topographically and in some cases chemically, and use simple
chemical systems (e.g., water). Our role in the science of stress enhanced
processes is to identify the underlying mechanisms. Although we work on a
nanometer scale, we are not doing nanotechnology - we support others who are
doing nanotechnology. Through careful, quantitative measurements, we clarify the
details of both asperity and substrate wear, and the connection between asperity
wear and changes in friction with a given substrate. More subtle is a new area
we have discovered, namely tip-controlled deposition of materials from saturated
solution. Scanning at low contact forces in supersaturated solutions can be
exploited to locally deposit crystalline material. For relatively flat surfaces
with occasional pits, filling in the pits can be a much more efficient method of
producing atomically flat surfaces than removing whole surface layers. We have
observed fluctuations in the lateral force during scanning of relatively
insoluble, ionic materials that correlate strongly with the degree of
supersaturation. We propose to explore this tool as a possible probe of
transient surface deposits that are expected in supersaturated solutions and to
further our understanding of the fundamental mechanisms for the tip induced
deposition and structuring that occurs in supersaturated solutions. An
innovative, untested idea, we propose is to combine stress+chemical stimulation
with exposure to radiation. The proposed radiation sources are electron beams
and UV and femtosecond laser beams. Laser irradiation can be applied in situ.
Following radiation exposure we seek synergisms with tribochemical stimulation.
We anticipate positive results and will explore the underlying mechanisms in
light of what we know about bond breaking, defect formation, and other chemical
modifications generated by radiation exposure. We hope to find a new way to
promote surface modification. Broader impacts. In addition to a graduate
student, this work will involve 4-6 undergraduates a year, and at least one high
school student. We expect most of our students, as in the past, to publish their
results in peer-reviewed journals. These efforts also fulfill undergraduate
department and honors college theses requirements. As undergraduate advisor for
physics and honors physics instructor, the PI often influences women and
minorities to become science/technology majors, double majors, and/or become
involved early in our research projects. The research itself, through
fundamental understanding, provides benefits to society in need of reduced wear,
longer life, and environmentally friendly processes and systems. Efforts in
nanotechnology involving moving interfaces and/or needs for atomically flat,
clean surfaces or tip/solution generated structures also benefit from our
studies.