* 0409767
* Collaborative Research: How Constant are Fault Slip Rates in Time and Space? An Analysis of the North and East Anatolian Faults, Turkey
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* James Dolan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2008
* USD 282,990.00

The research team is studying the degree to which fault loading and strain
release rates are constant (or non-constant) in time and space. Their work in
addressing this fundamentally important issue focuses on the generation of fault
slip rates at a variety of time scales a long the North and East Anatolian
faults in Turkey. These faults are particularly attractive targets for the
proposed research because of the relative structural simplicity of the Anatolia-
Eurasia-Arabia plate boundary in Turkey. Specifically, geodetic and geologic
data suggest that in central and eastern Turkey almost all plate boundary strain
is accommodated by slip on these two faults. The investigators are focusing
their efforts on what increasingly appears to be a critical time scale of
observation - the time range between the temporally irregular strain release
documented by historical and paleoearthquake data, and longer time scales over
which fault slip rates appear to be relatively constant. By using cosmogenic
nuclide dating of offset geomorphic features, a technique that yields the
duration of time that a geomorphic surface has been exposed to cosmic rays at
the earth's surface, they will determine slip rates at eight or more sites along
these two faults at a variety of time scales ranging from approximately 1.500 to
greater than 10,000 years. Their results, in combination with ongoing
paleoseismolgic analyses of these faults by U.S., Turkish, and Japanese
researchers, will allow determination of the variability of strain release in
time and space within the Anatolia-Eurasia-Arabia plate boundary. These data, in
turn, will provide basic constraints necessary for realistic geodynamic models
of fault loading mechanisms. Equally importantly, the data from the relatively
simple plate boundary in Turkey will provide an important point of comparison
with similar data from more mechanically complex plate boundaries (e. g., the
Pacific-North America plate boundary in California).