* 0409109
* 2004 Rock Deformation Gordon Research Conferences, August 8-13,2004 at Mount Holyoke College
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2005
* USD 26,500.00

The 2004 Gordon Research Conference is being held August 8-13, 2004 at Mount
Holyoke College. The theme of this conference is the role of aqueous fluids in
rock deformation, examining both the detailed physics and chemistry of
deformation when fluids are present and the consequences of water weakening in a
variety of geologic settings. Presentations and poster sessions are examining
the processes by which fluids affect crack growth, healing and sealing,
frictional sliding, pressure solution, diffusion and dislocation creep, and
deformation during metamorphism, sources of fluids and fluid flow in faults and
deforming rock masses, thin fluid films and hydration at mineral surfaces, and
the character and mobility of water-related defects in crystalline interiors.
Participants include specialists in rock mechanics, geochemistry, tectonics,
petrology and mineral physics reflecting the mutlidisciplinary nature of the
conference theme. The program includes significant time for participation by all
conference participants to debate current problems and future research
directions. The principal goal of this conference is not so much to assess or
present what has already been accomplished, but rather to look towards the
future and open up new research directions. The conference format is designed to
involve established leaders, both men and women, in a range of disciplines, in
discussion with all participants, and to inspire the postdoctoral scientists and
graduate students who will carry the field forward.