* 0409452
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Daryl Wout, Wout                    Daryl          A
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2007
* USD 160,000.00

This Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences Minority Post-Doctoral Research
and Training Fellowship will empirically investigate the affective and cognitive
processes that can distinguish stereotype threat test performance effects from
ideomotor test performance effects. It is hypothesized that stereotype threat
effects will be mediated by affective concerns as well as cognitive memory
deficits, while it is hypothesized that ideomotor effects will not be mediated
by either affective or cognitive factors. The aim of studies 1 and 2 are to
investigate the affective concerns can distinguish these two effects. Study 3 is
designed to investigate the cognitive processes that can distinguish these
effects. Finally, the aim of study 4 is to investigate the mediational order of
stereotype threat effects. Specifically, the goal of study 4 is to determine if
affective concerns can mediate cognitive memory deficits. Taken together, these
studies would provide initial evidence that stereotype threat and ideomotor
effects are truly distinct and that they have differing processes. The present
studies represent the first attempt to integrate stereotype threat research and
ideomotor research. The methodology and design that will be used in these
studies borrows from both areas of research, thus enabling the results of the
proposed studies to be linked back to research in each area. The researcher has
conducted a number of studies investigating stereotype threat and believe that
he has a clear understanding of the issues surrounding both theories. In
addition, Dr. Steele, his mentor at Stanford University, is the preeminent
scholar on stereotype threat and is keenly aware of the issues that are relevant
to stereotype threat and ideomotor theories. Therefore the researchers are well
suited to conduct this research. Investigating the differing processes of
stereotype threat and ideomotor effects is of intellectual importance because
there has been much debate and confusion regarding which of these processes is
contributing to the undermining of minority students. academic pursuits. By
determining how these processes are distinct, researchers can more clearly test
when and how stereotypes impact the academic performance of minority students.
In addition, the results of these studies will provide clarity to the general
stereotyping literature, as the stereotype threat theory and ideomotor theory
literature specifically.

