* 0409591
* Collaborative Research: Controls on hyporheic nitrate retention - discriminating among transport, reaction-rate, and substrate limitation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Gooseff, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2008
* USD 191,792.00

0409591&lt;br/&gt;Gooseff&lt;br/&gt;The transport and fate of nitrogen in stream
networks is critical to understanding watershed exports&lt;br/&gt;of nitrogen.
Nitrate (NO3 - ) retention, and denitrification in particular, is known to be
dependent upon&lt;br/&gt;a variety of factors: geochemical conditions (chiefly
RedOx potential), substrate (largely availability&lt;br/&gt;of NO3 - and
dissolved organic carbon (DOC)), and transport of nitrate and DOC to
favorable&lt;br/&gt;locations for denitrification. We will examine the controls
of nitrate retention in the hyporheic zones&lt;br/&gt;of streams in Oregon and
Wyoming: 4 forested stream reaches, 4 agricultural streams, and 4
urban&lt;br/&gt;streams. Each reach will be the subject of 15 NO3 - injections
in partnership with the Lotic Interbiome&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen eXperiment II (LINX
II) project which is using nitrogen-15 ( 15 N) techniques to
study&lt;br/&gt;uptake and retention. Collaborating with LINX II allows
synergistic and cost-effective examination&lt;br/&gt;of stream and hyporheic
nitrogen cycling. The objectives of our research are to examine the
factors&lt;br/&gt;controlling nitrate retention and denitrification in hyporheic
zones of small streams and to quantify&lt;br/&gt;the fraction of nitrate
retention in these streams due to hyporheic exchange. We will test
the&lt;br/&gt;following hypotheses: (1) hyporheic denitrification in headwater,
forested streams will be low&lt;br/&gt;because of substrate and rate
limitations, yet biotic assimilation will be high, relative to
agricultural&lt;br/&gt;and urban streams, because of inorganic N-limitation; (2)
hyporheic denitrification will be greatest&lt;br/&gt;in mid-network locations
where surrounding land use is predominantly agricultural, however,
total&lt;br/&gt;loss of NO3 - will be transport-limited and biotic assimilation
will be reduced because nitrogen is less&lt;br/&gt;limiting; and (3) potential
rate of denitrification in the hyporheic zone will be high in the
urban&lt;br/&gt;stream reaches, but total nitrate retention in the hyporheic
zone will be low because both&lt;br/&gt;denitrification and biotic assimilation
will be severely transport-limited.&lt;br/&gt;Elevation surveys of the
longitudinal profiles of the stream reaches will be used to quantify
channel&lt;br/&gt;morphology and provide a base for groundwater flow and
reactive transport simulations. We have&lt;br/&gt;successfully used this
technique to model groundwater flow and calculate hyporheic residence
time&lt;br/&gt;distributions [e.g., Kasahara and Wondzell, 2003; Wondzell et
al., 2003]. We will use tracer tests&lt;br/&gt;based on new understanding of
their use for measuring residence time distributions in the
hyporheic&lt;br/&gt;zone [Gooseff et al., 2003; Haggerty et al., 2000; Haggerty
et al., 2002].&lt;br/&gt;We will couple our work to the LINX II NSF project by
installing a sampling well and&lt;br/&gt;piezometer network in the hyporheic
zone of 12 LINX II experimental reaches in Oregon and&lt;br/&gt;Wyoming. The
sampling wells will provide access to hyporheic water, from which we will
obtain&lt;br/&gt;samples for measurement of 15 NO3 - , 15 N2(g), and 15 N2O(g)
as well as DO, DOC and other physical and&lt;br/&gt;geochemical parameters,
which will be used to quantify biotic assimilation, denitrification,
and&lt;br/&gt;groundwater flow in the hyporheic zone. We will have access to
LINX II stream data on these and&lt;br/&gt;other (e.g., 15 NH4 + ) N-species.
The work will build upon, and enhance the current LINX II project.&lt;br/&gt;The
LINX II project will benefit from quantification of nitrogen cycling in the
hyporheic zone of 12&lt;br/&gt;of its sites and will gain a method to refine
models of nitrogen dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Three of the experimental reaches are on
OSU campus, which allows us to use Oak Creek as a hands-&lt;br/&gt;on, active-
learning laboratory in 3 courses with a combined annual enrollment of more than
300&lt;br/&gt;students. Through these courses, undergraduate and graduate
research projects, and the participation&lt;br/&gt;of undergraduates in our
field work, a large number of students will gain field experience
in&lt;br/&gt;hydrology at experience-appropriate levels. The USU research team
will continue to interact with&lt;br/&gt;middle school and high school students
through the Teton Science School, demonstrating field&lt;br/&gt;activities and
facilitating hands-on field experience for these students. Together, the OSU and
USU&lt;br/&gt;research teams will develop a web site with our data and project-
related science activities and&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of results for K-12
students and teachers, and will promote learning about surface&lt;br/&gt;water
hydrology and water quality in local schools through the NSF-sponsored GLOBE
program.