* 0409769
* Wet Electrostatics and Biomolecular Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Gerard Wong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 06/30/2008
* USD 310,686.00

In recent years, much progress has been made in understanding the behavior of
charged polymers with a single sign of charge (such as DNA), which exhibit
counterintuitive behavior such as like-charge attraction. The present project
aims to extend this understanding to polymers with both positive and negative
charges, which comprise a general class of charged polymers that includes most
proteins. Inelastic synchrotron x-ray scattering will be employed to study the
mobile ions that mediate interactions between these polymers. Experiments will
also concentrate on archetypal interactions between simple geometric objects,
such as like-charged rods and sheets (ex. DNA and membranes), or oppositely
charged rods and spheres (ex. proteins of different shapes) in the presence of
salts with different valences. In particular, molecular biology techniques will
be used to engineer protein mutants with charges and sizes that can be
independently varied for these studies. This work may lead to new therapeutic
strategies for cystic fibrosis, where negatively charged polymers such as
F-actin and DNA bind to and inactivate net positively charged antibiotic
proteins. An understanding of these effects may also lead to improved methods of
water purification processes. The multi-disciplinary nature of the proposed work
provides ample educational opportunities for the new kind of hybrid scientists
necessary in this emerging multidisciplinary field.

In recent years, much progress has been made in understanding the behavior of
charged polymers with a single sign of charge, which exhibit counterintuitive
behavior such as like-charge attraction. The present project aims to extend this
understanding to polymers with large numbers of both positive and negative
charges, which comprise a general class of charged polymers that includes most
proteins. Experiments will concentrate on archetypal examples of interactions
between simple geometric objects, such as like-charged rods and sheets (ex. DNA
and membranes), or oppositely-charged rods and spheres (ex. proteins of
different shapes) in the presence of salts. In particular, state-of-the-art
molecular biology techniques will be used to engineer protein mutants with well-
defined charges and sizes for these studies. This work may lead to new
therapeutic strategies for cystic fibrosis, where negatively charged polymers
such as F-actin and DNA bind to and inactivate net positively charged antibiotic
proteins, and thereby contribute to long-term infections. An understanding of
these electrostatic effects will also potentially lead to improved methods of
water purification processes. The multi-disciplinary nature of the proposed work
will provide ample educational opportunities for the new kind of hybrid
scientists necessary in this emerging multidisciplinary field.