* 0409939
* Collaborative Research: Deep Structure of the Northeast Tibetan Collision Zone- INDEPTH IV
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2007,01/31/2013
* Simon Klemperer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 525,674.00

This project (INDEPTH IV) is a continuation of previously funded projects
(INDEPTH I, II, III). The overarching goal of the INDEPTH studies is to
understand the basic processes that take place in a continent-continent
collision. INDEPTH I, II, and III were joint Sino-U.S. studies to understand the
formation of the Tibetan Plateau and Himalayan mountains, which together
comprise Earth's type example of an active continent-continent collision zone.
Results from these studies have profoundly influenced prevalent theories of
mountain building in such tectonic settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
INDEPTH IV is the northeastern boundary of the Tibetan Plateau. This boundary
plays a central role in a contemporary debate concerning continental plateau
formation as an intracontinental response to collisional orogeny. Recent
geological studies and limited geophysical measurements in this region have been
cited to argue that a) uplift is due to internal imbricate "stacking" of Asian
crust while b) Asian continental lithosphere is being detached and "subducted"
into the Tibetan mantle. Such models contrast with a competing paradigm, derived
primarily from observations in the southern and eastern portions of the Plateau,
that attribute plateau formation to ductile flow in the deep crust. Critical to
any model of surface tectonics is the mantle dynamics beneath the plateau and
adjacent regions. Upper mantle geophysical properties beneath the northern
plateau have been variously attributed to delamination triggered by instability
of a thickened lithosphere, mantle lid detachment and/or asthenospheric
counterflow associated with subduction of Indian continental lithosphere.
INDEPTH IV will test key elements in these hypotheses with an integrated,
focused program of geophysical surveys across three key segments of the NE
Plateau boundary zone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geophysical surveys will consist of
integrated seismic reflection, refraction and densely spaced passive seismic
profiles, a detailed magnetotelluric survey, and a regional broadband seismic
array. Specific features to be investigated by the surveys include: a) the
existence and nature of proposed Moho offsets; b) the deep geometry of major
thrust faults at the plateau boundary; c) the relationship between major thrusts
and strike slip faults; d) constraints on lower crustal flow from structural
continuity of crustal markers; e) the existence and nature of subducting Asian
lithosphere; and f) the mode of lithospheric thickening beneath the plateau
foreland.