* 0409594
* Cognitive-Based Data Fusion for Integrated Direct Push Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Pradeep Kurup, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Daniel
* 06/30/2009
* USD 185,001.00

This project will develop a novel multi-sensor cone penetrometer instrumented
with load cells to measure cone tip resistance and sleeve friction, pressure
transducer to measure pore water pressure, conductivity sensor to measure soil
electrical conductivity, vapor sampling module, and a new down-hole miniature
electronic nose to sniff and detect soil contaminants. Cognitive-based multi-
sensor data fusion models will be developed for fusing and interpreting data
from the multiple sensors in order to screen subsurface contaminants, and to
estimate a various soil and in-situ state properties. Controlled calibration
chamber studies will be performed in the laboratory to test the probe and train
the data fusion models. The system will also be tested in the field in
collaboration with the EPA New England Regional Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;A novel
site characterization technology that is based on human cognition (data fusion)
and biological sensing (olfaction) mechanisms is proposed. This research will
advance knowledge and understanding in site characterization. It is expected
that this project will lead to a better understanding of sensor integration,
pattern recognition, and data fusion techniques. The proposed technology is
expected to significantly reduce costly and time-consuming laboratory analysis
during initial site investigations, limit potential personnel exposure to
contaminated media, and reduce the amount of investigation-derived waste
normally generated during conventional drill and sample activities. Thus the
outcome of this project will significantly contribute to the health, safety, and
economy of the society. Most of the existing methods for interpreting in situ
test data are based on empirical or semi-empirical equations that do not
consider all the measured parameters simultaneously. The new approach proposed
in this research will reduce the uncertainty associated with subsurface
interpretation from the data gathered by individual technologies and provide
information in such a way as to offset the respective limitations of individual
sensing technologies. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are
enhanced through the integration of underrepresented graduate and undergraduate
students in research. The educational component combines academics, research
skills, technical skills, and collaborative skills, through a real-world, real-
learning, approach. Proposed activities include, addition of new modules in an
existing course, K-12 outreach, making presentations in institutions that serve
underrepresented groups, training student mentors, participation in conferences,
interaction with researchers, industry professionals and public officials. The
novel sensing technologies that will be developed in this project will add to
the existing infrastructure for research and education. Partnerships with
federal agencies, research laboratories (EPA), and industry (Geoprobe Systems
Inc.) will provide access to unique facilities and sites, and provide broad
expertise for research, education and technology transfer. The results from this
project will be broadly disseminated to benefit a large audience, enhancing
their scientific and technological understanding, and increasing their awareness
on environmental issues. Research in data fusion, and electronic nose could have
broader impacts in law enforcement, in the military and in Home Land Security
(for detecting drugs, explosives, chemical and biological weapons). The outcome
of this project is envisioned to have a global impact on the health, safety and
quality of life of the society. &lt;br/&gt;