* 0409652
* Measuring Co-seismic Deformation from Optical Images. A Proposition for Methodological Improvements.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Jean-Philippe Avouac, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2005
* USD 57,768.00

Measuring Co-seismic deformation from optical images. A proposition for
methodological improvements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; PI: Jean-Philippe
Avouac&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators: Sebastien Leprince, Remi
Michel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geometry of fault ruptures and the
distribution of coseismic displacements are key data to highlight the mechanics
of seismic rupture. It is of interest in earthquake source studies because fault
geometric complexities are known to influence rupture dynamics, hence seismic
radiation, and because the coseismic slip distribution can be used to test
dynamic rupture models. Conversely, such data are necessary to constrain the
source kinematics which can be derived from seismological records, because there
are various trade-offs between the geometric characteristics of the fault, the
distributions of slip and rupture time on the fault. Geometry of fault ruptures
and coseismic slip are generally obtained from field investigations and geodetic
measurements. It is however not straightforward to assess whether the slip
measured at the surface along the fault trace, and it's along strike
variability, relates to near-surface complications or really reflect fault slip
distribution at depth. Geodetic data are generally too sparse to constrain
tightly the slip distribution and differential inSAR generally fails in the
near-fault zone where large displacements result in poorly correlated images. We
develop an alternative approach based on sub-pixel correlation of satellite
optical images acquired before and after an earthquake. This technique suffers
from some limitations mostly due to the uncertainties of the satellite attitude
or to too approximate account for stereoscopic effects. The proposed
methodological research is meant to apply to any satellite optical system but at
this stage we focus on the analysis of SPOT images, taking advantage of the
technological advances due to SPOT5 that was launched in 2002. These advances
should indeed allow correcting the internal (mirror's orientation, thermal
deformation of the optical system, misaligned CCD) and external sources of
geometric distortion (satellite attitude and position). In addition, the
availability of high resolution Digital Elevation Models with global coverage,
in particular following the SRTM mission, make it possible to account accurately
for stereoscopic effects. We use available data for the Landers and Hector Mine
earthquakes, which are both well documented events, making it possible to test
the validity and estimate the accuracy of the ground displacements measured from
the SPOT images. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;