* 0409501
* Collaborative Research:  Small-Scale Variability of Rainfall: Experimental Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Matthias Steiner, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2007
* USD 166,730.00

0409501&lt;br/&gt;Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this study
is to improve our understanding of the small-scale variability of rainfall. This
goal is motivated by the need to develop a mechanistic understanding of the
linkage between rainfall variability and land surface processes. A related goal
is development of procedures for estimating rainfall rate from weather radar and
rain gage observations at small time and space scales, i.e. the spatial and
temporal scales for which the governing equations for land surface processes are
developed. These scales are quite different from those that have been
conventionally been employed for radar rainfall estimation. Using analytical,
computational, and observational tools, the team proposes to address the
following scientific questions: How do storm structure, storm motion, and storm
evolution determine the observed variability and scaling properties of rainfall?
What are the physical processes that control the distributional properties of
rainfall rate? What are the dominant physical processes that are responsible for
uncertainty in radar-rainfall estimates? What is the scaling structure of
rainfall at scales below 2 km (a typical spatial scale for conventional radar
rainfall estimates) and is it consistent with that observed at scales greater
than 2 km? If there are changes in rainfall scaling below 2 km, what physical
processes are responsible for breaks in the scaling? &lt;br/&gt;The group will
examine these questions through a coordinated program of field measurements,
data analysis, and statistical modeling. Lagrangian and Eulerian representations
of variability of rainfall from multicell thunderstorm systems will be utilized
for addressing the research questions. The field sites will be located in
eastern Iowa (Iowa City), northern Mississippi (Goodwin Creek experimental
watershed) and Baltimore. The investigators have developed experimental programs
at these locations that incorporate observations from dense rain gage networks,
the National Weather Service WSR-88D radars, disdrometers (for raindrop size
distributions), and research radars. These observational resources will be
enhanced through field campaigns in Iowa and Baltimore. The intellectual merit
of the proposed work centers on elucidating the structure of rainfall rate
fields at spatial and temporal scales important to land surface hydrologic
processes. The broader impacts include advancing discovery while promoting
teaching, training and learning; providing research opportunities for
underrepresented groups, enhancing the infrastructure for research and
education; and broad dissemination of experimental and analytical results. The
proposed research will provide students with an exceptional opportunity to
develop expertise in hydrologic technology, especially through participation in
field experiments. The proposed work will also provide important insights to the
measurement technology needed for hydrologic experimentation, especially as
envisioned under the CUAHSI (Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of
Hydrologic Science, Inc.) initiatives. The benefits for society will be through
improvements in remote sensing of rainfall, which will lead to better prediction
and control of water resources systems, and timely warnings against natural
hazards such as floods, landslides, and hurricanes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;