* 0409514
* Analysis, Manufacturing, and Mechanical Testing of  Stitched Sandwich Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Daniel Adams, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 06/30/2006
* USD 200,030.00

Analysis, Manufacturing, and Mechanical Testing of&lt;br/&gt;Stitched Sandwich
Composites&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team from the University
of Utah and Georgia Tech will conduct an integrated analytical, manufacturing,
and experimental investigation of the fundamental mechanical behavior of
stitched sandwich composites with through-thickness reinforcement in their foam
core. The proposed research program will enhance the knowledge and understanding
of the mechanical and damage responses including creep and other time-dependent
behavior. To that end, research is proposed in three major
areas:&lt;br/&gt;Manufacturing: Development of non-normal stitching concepts for
sandwich structures will be investigated under a variety of multi-axial
loadings, including bi-axial and pure interlaminar shear. Stitching for enhanced
compression behavior will be investigated by optimizing the characteristics of
perforated stitched sandwich structures.&lt;br/&gt;Analytical and Computational:
Multi-scale micromechanical and structural models will be developed to simulate
the mechanical behavior of stitched sandwich composites with emphasis on both
short-term and long-term time-dependent responses. Different finite-element
structural modeling approaches, using shell, continuum, and cohesive fracture
elements, will be used to simulate the material and structural responses
including time-dependent and damage growth.&lt;br/&gt;Experimental: Standard and
non-standard test procedures will be developed and performed to examine the
mechanical behavior of stitched sandwich composites and structural components
under combined mechanical and environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed inter-university collaboration between the three PIs and their graduate
and undergraduate students will ultimately promote and enhance the research and
educational infrastructure at both sides. The composite education and research
center CERC at Georgia Tech will be part of the proposed activity. Its students
and other faculty will tremendously benefit from enhancing its capability in the
area of sandwich composites. Undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented groups will be part of this new research project. The authors
are planning to host conference sessions and a summer workshop on using sandwich
composites for practicing engineers in the areas of automotive, aerospace and
civil infrastructure. The educational activity on sandwich composites, based on
this research, will be integrated in two composite courses at the undergraduate
and graduate levels. The web will be also used to produce an educational module
for design of sandwich composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;