* 0409598
* Collaborative Research:    Air-Flow Mechanisms During Insitu Air-Sparging Operations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* John Germaine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 08/31/2008
* USD 119,020.00

There are over 300 million acres of land in the United States for which
underlying groundwater contamination is labeled a serious concern. There are
many more acres for which underlying groundwater contamination, although not
considered serious, threatens local groundwater quality and environmental
health. The current cost of cleaning up contaminated groundwater using existing
approaches to remediation is greater than the annual US Gross National Product.
Thus, despite recent advances in the design of technologies for the insitu
remediation of contaminated groundwater, research is still required that enables
these technologies to become more cost effective and efficient. Insitu Air
Sparging (IAS) is one remediation technology that has documented success for the
cleanup of aquifers contaminated with Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs), such as
petroleum hydrocarbons. In fact, insitu air sparging is now thought to be the
most widely used technology in the US for the remediation of hydrocarbon
contaminated sites. Despite this, IAS design in practice remains largely
empirical and based on information obtained from pilot scale tests involving
observations surrounding a single sparge well. The research community has
developed predictive models for IAS performance. However, the use of these
models for design practice has been limited by their complexity and, more
notably, their use of soil parameters that are not typically measured in
practice. In addition, many of these models only consider a single sparge point,
whereas IAS systems are engineered with multiple sparge points specifically to
generate overlapping air-plumes.

The proposed work will develop a reliable, and practical, model to predict the
air-flow patterns generated by multiplepoint sparging to improve the current
design and optimization of IAS systems. The resulting model will be based on
combined geo-centrifuge testing and the immersion method to enable direct
visualization of air-plume development under capillary and fluid pressures that
mimicked those in the field. Previous work resulted in an axi-symmetrical model
that can predict air-flow patterns above a single sparge point in a homogeneous
medium based upon input parameters typically measured in practice. The extension
of the original model will enable predictions of three-dimensional air plume
development above multiple sparge points in a heterogeneous medium. The
researchers will validate the model using field data from pilot scale tests, and
actual IAS operations.

This work will have considerable broad impact on the future design of IAS
systems. Improvements in the effective application of remediation technologies,
including IAS, will have direct benefit on future public and environmental
health. The release of prior contaminated land for re-use also provides economic
and social benefit to the country. The results will be disseminated through
professional development seminars that we will run in Year 3 of the project. To
encourage attendance by those in practice, we will limit each seminar to one
day. The seminars will be run at cost. They will discuss the factors influencing
air-flow during IAS, IAS design considerations, pilot testing, and monitoring
requirements. They will also introduce the new model and provide guidance on its
use in practice.

