* 0409266
* Collaborative Research:  Integrated Investigation of the Geodynamics of the Taiwan Orogeny (TAIGER)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2010
* David Okaya, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 02/28/2010
* USD 428,519.00

0409266&lt;br/&gt;Okaya&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taiwan is the result of the most
active arc-continent collision in the world (uplift of 3cm/yr and convergence of
up to 8 cm/yr). The Eurasian plate and the South China Sea have been moving to
the SE wrt the Philippine Sea plate, with oceanic lithosphere of the southeast
China continental margin subducting beneath the Luzon arc, which sits atop the
Philippine Sea plate. Around 4 Ma ago, the margin of Eurasia entered the
subduction zone, resulting in collisional orogeny that formed Taiwan. Taiwan
consists of parallel belts representing 7 different tectonostratigraphic
provinces. The collision is occurring at an oblique angle, with the northern
margin colliding first, so that mountains are forming in the North and
propagating south. This oblique collision allows spatial changes to be viewed as
temporal evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arc accretion is arguably the most
important mode of continent formation throughout the post-Archean Earth (perhaps
even before). Taiwan offers the possibility of studying these processes in the
world's most active arc collision zone with a temporal view of how such
collisions progress, due to the oblique nature of the collision as mentioned
above. The PIs put forward two end member hypotheses to be tested concerning
what is happening to continental lithosphere during the collision: 1) It is
subducted, with crust-mantle detachment causing crust to accrete while deeper
lithosphere is subducted; 2) It doesn't subduct, but jams up in the subduction
zone, leading to continuous deformation resulting in thickening of the
lithosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two end-member scenarios for what is
happening to continental lithosphere during the collision provide special
opportunities to investigate some of the most fundamental questions of mountain
building:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Does continental subduction play a controlling
role in arc-continent collision? Is the Eurasian continental lithosphere
subducting beneath Taiwan?&lt;br/&gt;- One of the fundamental issues in orogeny
is mass balance. How do factors such as erosion, crustal thickening, mantle
flux, etc. interact quantitatively?&lt;br/&gt;- How did the orogen evolve
through time?&lt;br/&gt;- How does surface kinematics relate to deep
structure?&lt;br/&gt;- How does anisotropy vary in space, laterally and
vertically? Do the S-splitting directions change with depth? Is the deformation
of the orogen vertically coherent from surface to upper
mantle?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions the PIs will carry out an
integrated geophysical imaging, earthquake recording and geodynamic research
program to study the Taiwan orogeny. By combining detailed 2-D studies along
transects and 3-D images for the whole region, the orogen and its evolution can
be characterized. The data acquisition program includes broadband regional
seismic and teleseismic recording, onshore-offshore and land refraction-
reflection seismic transects, magnetotelluric sounding, petrophysics and gravity
modeling. The geometry of the plate interactions, the mode of crustal
deformation, and the material properties will provide a new quantitative basis
for geodynamic modeling. The various datasets will be integrated into a
geodynamic model which can be used to test conceptual models for mountain
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve collaboration from six
US institutions as well as collaboration and support from Taiwanese and Japanese
groups. There is also the distinct possibility of the participation of
scientists from mainland China. The educational impact of this project will be
large, with more than 25 students from the participating institutions, US and
foreign. In addition, the "Texas Teacher in the Field" program would involve one
high school teacher in recording earthquakes offshore Taiwan, developing related
teaching modules for Texas high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;