* 0409650
* Novel Brush Plating for In Situ Fabrication of Metallic Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Quanfang Chen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 04/30/2007
* USD 156,000.00

The effectiveness of the reinforcement of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in most
composites so far developed has been disappointing. This is mainly attributed to
poor interfacial bonding and poor alignment as well as CNTs' waviness in the
composite. Metallic matrix composites can be successfully developed to meet
strength and anti wear applications where strength to mass ratio is not strict
as in the space applications related. PI plans to study the novel brush plating
for the fabrication of CNTs reinforced metallic composite coatings. The
electrolyte ("ink") consisting CNTs and the metallic ions will be developed for
brush plating process. A brush applicator will be developed to realize the CNTs
reinforced metallic coatings simultaneously. Efforts will be made on brush
plating to achieve the desired CNTs alignment and straightness, etc. A through
characterization study will be conducted, in terms of coating's hardness,
friction and wear, tensile strength, and microstructure. The objectives of this
work are: 1) Develop a novel cost effective brush plating method of CNTs
reinforced metallic coating fabrication for surface engineering applications; 2)
Provide a fundamental understating of how brush plating electrolytes and plating
parameters can be used to control the CNTs reinforced metallic composite
coating's quality; 3) Understanding CNTs' alignment and waviness stretching
mechanism with mechanical work and electrical field during brush plating; 4)
Performing various characterization study of the CNT reinforced coatings made by
brush plating, including hardness, tensile strength, friction and wear, and
microstructure analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research
will be the first of such effort to develop an in situ fabrication method of
CNTs reinforced metallic composite coatings with brush plating co-deposition
method. The novel brush plating co-deposition is expected to overcome
underachievement identified in CNTs reinforced polymer composites where
interfacial bonding and CNT alignment as well as CNTs' waviness are issues
responsible for the underachievement in reinforcement. The success of this work
will result in super robust CNTs reinforced metallic nanocomposite coatings for
surface engineering applications to meet friction and wear requirements.
Theoretical breakthrough is expected on the reinforcement mechanism of carbon
nanotubes reinforced metallic composites.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed research has vast potential applications in surface engineering and
broad impacts on science and engineering and huge benefits to society as a
whole. The composite coatings will also find broad applications in the thermal
management of power electronics because it can be used as ultra high thermal
conductors or heat exchangers/spreaders. The composite coatings can be widely
used to develop excellent electrical conductors. The brush plating fabricated
CNTs reinforced metallic coatings can be used to fabricate MEMS/NEMS devices or
components, as brush plated composite filed in predefined micro/nano molds can
be released later by removing the molds and separated from the substrate.
Graduate students and undergraduate students will involve in the proposed
research. The research results will be introduced timely on the web page of PI's
Laboratory, Efforts will be made to publish as mush as possible the research
results in various professional journals and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;