* 0409883
* Characterization of Hydrogen Diffusion in Volcanic Feldspars
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Elizabeth Johnson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Essentially all anhydrous minerals, including feldspars, contain minor to trace
amounts of hydrogen incorporated into their structures. It is crucial to
understand the mechanisms for incorporation and retention of hydrogen in
nominally anhydrous minerals if hydrous species in these minerals are to be used
to understand geochemical and geological processes in nature. This work
constrains the mechanisms for incorporation and retention of hydrogen in
feldspars through two lines of research. The first project characterizes the
rate and mechanism of diffusion of hydrogen in OH-bearing feldspars at magmatic
temperatures (800-1000 degrees C) through modeling of experimental diffusion
data obtained under dry conditions and at a fixed oxygen fugacity. The diffusion
rate of hydrogen at magmatic temperatures determines the amount of OH preserved
in a feldspar phenocryst during a typical eruptive event, and the extent to
which zoning of OH in feldspar phenocrysts with complex magmatic histories
should be preserved. Models of integrated loss and diffusion profiles across
heated slabs of feldspar will determine if diffusion is dependent on the
concentration of hydrous species. The second project is to determine hydrogen
(OH and H2O) concentrations in plagioclase phenocrysts and their melt inclusions
from the 1980-1982 eruption sequence of Mount St. Helens. The eruption
temperature, oxygen fugacity, and bulk chemical composition were all fairly
constant through this time period while the water content of successive
eruptions decreased by several weight percent. Plagioclase feldspar is the most
abundant phenocryst in these rocks. Assuming a preliminary determination of a
diffusion coefficient of hydrogen in volcanic feldspar, the plagioclase from wet
eruption should contain higher OH concentrations than the plagioclase from the
dryer eruptions. The partition coefficient of hydrogen between the plagioclase
and their melt inclusions can be evaluated by measuring the water content of the
feldspar and its melt inclusions. Phenocrysts with longer crystallization
histories should preserve OH zoning on characteristic length scales which may
aid our understanding of eruptions induced by increased magmatic volatile
content due to progressive crystallization in the magma reservoir. The results
from this work should be applicable to the many high-temperature geologic
systems in which water plays an important role.