* 0409995
* 2004 Polymer Physics Gordon Conference, August 1-6, 2004, Connecticut College, New London, CT
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Mark Ediger, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2005
* USD 3,000.00

Project Summary - Graduate Student Support for 2004 Polymer Physics Gordon
Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The 2004 Polymer Physics Gordon Conference will
be held at Connecticut College from August 1-6, 2004. The meeting has, for many
years, been at the center of polymer physics activities worldwide. The 2004
meeting will have talks from an international group at the cutting edge of
polymer physics activities. Among the topics to be discussed are biopolymer
dynamics, glass transition dynamics, polyelectrolytes, polymer mixtures, polymer
surfaces, advanced theology, and electronic materials based on polymers. A major
goal in organizing the meeting has been to invite speakers who have not
previously spoken at the meeting, in order to give the polymer physics community
an opportunity to hear of some of the most important new initiatives in the
field. Of those speaking in 2004, 3/4 have not previously spoken at a Polymer
Physics Gordon Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Polymer Physics Gordon
Conference has a strong tradition of developing human resources by including
graduate students and postdocs. One important way in which this has happened has
been the poster sessions (which drew approzimately 100 participants in 2002).
The posters allow young scientists to share their results with all the meeting
participants and to get important feedback. The 2004 Gordon Conference will
build on this tradition by adding four short talks by graduate students to the
main program. This new addition will further substantiate the contribution which
younger scientist make to this meeting and the important role which this meeting
can play in their development. This proposal requests $4000 to cover the
conference fees of 6 additional graduate students, thereby allowing them to
attend the meeting.