* 0409487
* Collaborative Research: GPS Measurements and Deformation Modeling of Oblique Subduction and Strain Partitioning in the Northeastern Caribbean
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Eric Calais, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2009
* USD 286,291.00

Major strike-slip faults, commonly found on the margin of overriding plates in
obliquely convergent subduction zones, greatly influence the tectonics of these
margins and represent sources of seismic hazard of historic proportions. The
strike-slip faults, which are the locus of the arc parallel component of oblique
convergence, are generally assumed to occur only if shear stresses in the
overriding plate are large enough to activate strike-slip faulting. The
magnitude of shear stress in the overriding plate is controlled in part by the
plate convergence obliquity, but also by the degree of coupling of the two
converging plates along the plate interface and the strength of the overriding
lithosphere, as well as other factors, such as basal tractions and the slab-pull
force. The role of these factors is not well understood, nor is the threshold of
stress that must be achieved before partitioning will be initiated.
Understanding the mechanics of strain partitioning has important implications
for seismic hazard as it is often thought to be associated with increased
frictional coupling between the converging plates, and therefore large
earthquakes at the plate interface. Strain partitioning also leads to large
earthquakes on strike-slip faults in the overriding plate, that often have large
neighboring populations. This project is addressing the causes and consequences
of strain partitioning at oblique subduction margins by combining Global
Positioning System (GPS) measurements in the northeastern Caribbean with
deformation models. The northeastern Caribbean is well suited to such a study.
The region consists of neighboring zones of frontal subduction (Lesser
Antilles), oblique subduction with no strain partitioning (Puerto Rico), and
oblique subduction with strain partitioning (Hispaniola). The investigators are
acquiring new GPS data in the Dominican Republic and Haiti and the generating a
geodetically consistent velocity field for the entire northeastern Caribbean.
The GPS velocities provide constraints for kinematic and dynamic deformation
models aimed at understanding (1) how stress is imparted on an overriding plate
in an oblique subduction setting and how lateral variations along the margin can
trigger strain partitioning and forearc deformation, and (2) how strike-slip
fault earthquakes in the forearc interact with the plate interface earthquakes
through co- and postseismic stress transfer. This study is relevant to other
areas sharing tectonic similarities with the northeastern Caribbean, such as the
Mediterranean (e.g., southern Italy, western Greece), the western Pacific (e.g.,
Philippines, Indonesia, New Guinea), and the south Atlantic (Scotia arc).
Historical records from the Dominica Republic reveal several magnitude 7 or
greater earthquakes in the past 500 years. This project is providing basic
geophysical information needed for seismic hazard analysis in the northeastern
Caribbean.