* 0409174
* Colloid-Filtration Theory for Vadose-Zone Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* James Saiers, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2008
* USD 208,046.00

0409174&lt;br/&gt;Saiers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of processes that govern
the transport of colloid-sized particles through the&lt;br/&gt;vadose zone is
required to predict the movement of sorbing contaminants within soils, to
assess&lt;br/&gt;the risks associated with the entry of pathogenic microbes into
drinking-water aquifers, and to&lt;br/&gt;estimate the time scales for soil
illuviation and soil-profile development. Colloid deposition at&lt;br/&gt;air-
water and solid-water interfaces plays an important role in controlling the
transport rates and&lt;br/&gt;porewater concentrations of colloids in the vadose
zone. Despite the importance of colloids in&lt;br/&gt;vadose-zone processes, a
theory suitable for predicting colloid deposition in unsaturated
porous&lt;br/&gt;media does not exist.&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposed
research is to take steps towards filling this gap in knowledge&lt;br/&gt;by
defining, in a quantitative way, the fundamental relationships between colloid-
deposition&lt;br/&gt;kinetics at air-water and solid-water interfaces and the
physical properties of the soil-water-colloid&lt;br/&gt;system. These
relationships will be derived through analysis of a suite of pore-
scale&lt;br/&gt;simulations of water flow and advective-diffusive colloid
transport through partially saturated&lt;br/&gt;void spaces. Modern models for
air-water configuration in variably saturated porous media will&lt;br/&gt;be
used to specify the geometry of the porewater domains for which the pore-scale
simulations&lt;br/&gt;of colloid transport will be conducted. Regression
analysis of the results of the flow-and-transport&lt;br/&gt;simulations is
expected to yield power-law equations that express the rate of
colloid&lt;br/&gt;collisions with air-water and solid-water interfaces as
functions of fluid-flow velocity, colloid&lt;br/&gt;size and density, porous-
medium texture, and capillary pressure (which controls
water&lt;br/&gt;saturation). Except for the need to account for the presence of
the air phase, the proposed&lt;br/&gt;approach for deriving the power-law
equations for colloid-interface collision rates is&lt;br/&gt;conceptually
similar to published approaches used to formulate the colloid-filtration
equations&lt;br/&gt;for water-saturated porous media.&lt;br/&gt;Predictions of
colloid-deposition kinetics made with the power-law equations will
be&lt;br/&gt;compared with measurements of colloid deposition made in laboratory
column experiments. In&lt;br/&gt;these experiments, the sensitivity of colloid-
deposition rates to variations in colloid diameter,&lt;br/&gt;grain-size, grain-
size distribution, porewater velocity, and capillary pressure will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;Comparison of measured and predicted deposition rates will
reveal deficiencies in the new&lt;br/&gt;theory and help direct its
refinement.&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this study will advance current knowledge of
mass-transport processes in&lt;br/&gt;partially saturated geologic materials and
substantially improve our understanding of key mass-transfer&lt;br/&gt;reactions
that affect porewater concentrations of colloids within the vadose zone.
This&lt;br/&gt;proposed research represents a first attempt at deriving and
testing a colloid-filtration theory for&lt;br/&gt;unsaturated porous media that
is needed to make quantitative inferences regarding colloid&lt;br/&gt;mobility
in the vadose zone. Such a theory should make an important contribution
towards&lt;br/&gt;addressing critical water-quality issues of national concern
that are related to the movement of&lt;br/&gt;microbial pathogens and colloid-
associated contaminants through near-surface environments.