* 0409571
* Reaction Mechanisms for the Formation of C-S-H Gel During the Early Hydration of Cement
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Jeffrey Thomas, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 07/31/2008
* USD 309,874.00

Reaction Mechanisms for the Formation of C-S-H Gel During the Early Hydration of
Cement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;When cement and water are mixed
the resulting paste typically stays fluid for several hours before it sets and
hardens. This period of time, the induction period, is technically extremely
important because it allows enough time for the concrete to be mixed,
transported, and poured into place. The induction period ends abruptly and is
followed by a period of accelerating reaction that leads to setting and
hardening. The versatility and widespread use of Portland cement concrete
results, to a large extent, from the ability to control these hydration
processes by the use of chemical admixtures, for example to either to extend the
period of workability or shorten the time to set. Despite the fundamental
importance of the concrete hardening process to the construction industry, and
the fact that these chemical admixtures are of significant industrial
importance, the fundamental chemical mechanisms underlying the cement hydration
process are not well understood. This problem has been debated in the literature
for more than 100 years without resolution. In recent years, modern analytical
techniques have provided new information about the reaction products formed by
the hydration of cement. These new findings led to the development of a
quantitative nanometer-level model of cement paste by one of the present
proposers, which is receiving increasing acceptance. Also, recently under NSF
support new information about the structure and solubility of the main reaction
product in cement has been obtained. This knowledge has provided new insight
about the mechanisms that control the rate that cement paste and concrete
hardens, and the promise of a much deeper understanding of the reactions between
cement and water. It also opens the door not only to controlling the rate of
hydration of cement paste, but also to controlling the microstructure and thus
the properties of the final concrete. This will have a significant impact on the
industry that supplies chemical admixtures for concrete, and on understanding
the overall effects of adding a wide variety of materials to
concrete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;