* 0409890
* Earthquake Probabilities Derived from Earthquake Interactions and Tectonic Stresses
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Yan Kagan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2008
* USD 323,886.00



Abstract

We are building numerical models to calculate the history of resolved stress at
any point on any fault and the earthquake potential resulting from the stress
history. The stress model would include co-seismic static and dynamic stress
changes, tectonic stress accumulation (from individual faults where their
geometry and slip rate are known) and anelastic relaxation. We are deriving
earthquake probabilities from the stress history using extended Epidemic Type
Aftershock Sequence (ETAS) models. Also, we will use a more physically-based
model, the rate-and-state seismicity model, which provides a relation between
stress history and seismic activity.

We are using this stress model and high-quality earthquake data to address
several questions about earthquake triggering. These include whether static or
dynamic stress is more influential, whether small (more frequent) earthquakes
dominate triggering, whether rate-and-state friction explains earthquake rates
in detail, and whether detailed stress calculations significantly improve on
simpler ETAS models. We are using the Harvard CMT catalog for earthquakes with
magnitudes over 5.5 and regional catalogs in the western USA, Japan, China, New
Zealand, Taiwan, and Greece, among other areas.

Based on the answers we find, we will construct an earthquake forecast model
which combines the advantages of ETAS type clustering models and explicit stress
calculations. We will then use the model to make testable forecasts first for
magnitude 5.5 and larger quakes around the plate boundaries, then for smaller
events in specific regions.