* 0409319
* Development of Acoustic Energy Concepts to Characterize and Control Acoustic Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Timothy Leishman, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 05/31/2008
* USD 278,359.00

DEVELOPMENT OF ACOUSTIC ENERGY CONCEPTS TO CHARACTERIZE AND CONTROL ACOUSTIC
FIELDS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sommerfeldt, Leishman, and
Blotter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the
past twenty years, acoustic intensity techniques have led to significant
improvements in the understanding and characterization of acoustic fields.
However, several fundamental questions associated with acoustic energy
quantities, and their significance in characterizing and controlling sound
fields still exist. This project will focus on investigating several energy
quantities in enclosed sound fields to more fully understand their spatial
dependence and how energy-based sensing and actuation can be used advantageously
in a number of important applications. The specific objectives are: (1) Energy
quantities including acoustic energy density, Lagrangian density, and their
spatial derivatives will be analyzed in depth, as they apply to enclosed sound
fields; (2) measurement techniques will be developed for measuring sound power,
both in ideal (anechoic and diffuse) acoustic fields, as well as more general
acoustic environments; (3) advanced active noise control concepts will be
developed that further use energy-based measurements to improve the global
control of acoustic fields; and (4) sound field equalization techniques will be
developed using energy-based measurements and adaptive signal processing. This
research will couple analytical, numerical, and experimental investigations.
First, an understanding of the spatial dependence of these energy quantities and
their spatial derivatives will be investigated analytically to identify the best
energy quantities to measure for the different applications. Numerical work will
extend these concepts to non-ideal conditions, and will be used to investigate
how these energy-based concepts could be used in the target applications, and
how they would be expected to perform. Finally, experimental verification of the
concepts developed will be performed. This project will advance scientific
knowledge through the discovery of new energy-based relationships and
measurement techniques. This research has potential for significant societal
benefits by enhancing noise control techniques in applications ranging from room
acoustics to an aircraft fuselage. Through this research, future professionals
will be trained with strong research skills and broad backgrounds in acoustics
and structural dynamics. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved on
teams, and will learn to effectively interact with one another. These teams will
be supported and encouraged to publish and present their research at technical
meetings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;