* 0409388
* Enhancing Controllability and Observability in Under-Actuated/Under-Sensed Systems through Switching: Application to Vibration Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Ranjan Mukherjee, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 07/31/2009
* USD 197,008.00

Enhancing Controllability and Observability in Under-Actuated/Under-Sensed
Systems through Switching: Application to Vibration
Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many dynamical
systems employ transducers that can function both as actuators and sensors and
the objective of this research is to investigate under actuation and under-
sensing in such systems for reduction in control system hardware. As compared to
the traditional approach, where transducers are used as dedicated actuators and
sensors, we propose to continuously switch the functionality of the transducer
elements between actuator and sensor modes such that each element effectively
serves both as an actuator and sensor. This provides the scope for significant
reduction in the number of transducers and associated hardware without any loss
in controllability or observability. We propose to develop switching, control,
and sensing algorithms for optimal system performance, but since these
algorithms will depend on the transducer type we will focus on the specific
problem of vibration suppression using capacitive piezoelectric transducers. In
particular, we will (a) determine the optimal number and location of transducers
in a given structure, wherein each transducer is used both as an actuator and
sensor, but not simultaneously, (b) determine the "best" fixed partition of the
transducers into actuators and sensors, knowing that their roles will reverse
with every switching, (c) design a rule for partitioning the transducers into
actuators and sensors at every switching based on feedback, rather than using a
fixed partition, (d) determine optimal switching intervals, optimal controller
and observer gains, and optimal number of switchings, (e) investigate the
possibility of fast switching with the objective of deriving the benefits of
collocation without sacrificing stability, and (f) conduct experiments to
ascertain enhancement of controllability and observability, investigate the
merit of introducing under-actuation and under-sensing, address the challenges
of implementing switching algorithms, and validate the theoretical results. The
concept of switching transducers between actuator and sensor modes, although
simple, is novel and has not been explored earlier. This research will provide
the scope for significant reduction in control system hardware and although it
is being proposed here for piezoelectric transducers, it can be extended to
other transducer types and profitably applied to many other dynamical systems,
such as active magnetic bearings, MEMS resonators, and thermoelectric cooling
devices.&lt;br/&gt;