* 0409839
* U.S.-Russian Workshop:  Cities and Rivers: Interdisciplinary and International Perspectives
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Robert Frodeman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 10/31/2005
* USD 55,990.00

This is a US-Russian workshop on interdisciplinary and international
perspectives of cities and rivers. The workshop will be held in St. Petersburg,
Russia and will focus on the intellectual and practical challenges faced in the
Neva Basin. The organizers of the workshop are Dr. Robert Frodeman from the
University of Colorado at Boulder and Dr. Nikolai Rolley from St. Petersburg
State Technical University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will focus on
four themes that will allow for dialogue between different disciplines and
international partners about how multiple perspectives can be brought to bear on
the problems posed by urban rivers. The four themes are 1) geographies of common
interest: shared commitments uniting disciplinary perspectives; 2) controlling
the river: hydrology, politics, engineering, and architecture; 3) the river as
"Nature in the City": the link between ecology and aesthetics; and 4) reclaiming
the river: uniting perspectives for ecological restoration.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary workshop in environmental biology and social
sciences fulfills the program objectives of bringing together leading experts in
the U.S. and Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and
capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of
equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.