* 0409057
* International Conference on Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations; September 17-19, 2004; Chicago, IL
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Gustavo Ponce, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2005
* USD 22,000.00

DMS 0409057&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International Conference on Harmonic
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;And Partial Differential Equations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David
dos Santos, Jill Pipher, &lt;br/&gt;Gustavo Ponce, Tatiana
Toro&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
bstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal covers partial funding for
an International Conference on Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential
Equations to be held at the University of Chicago, on September 17-19,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the meeting is threefold. First the
organizers intend to bring together leading researchers in the field of harmonic
analysis and its applications to partial differential equations. Second they
expect to survey some of the remarkable and exciting new developments in the
interaction between these two fields. Third, the conference will honor Professor
Carlos E. Kenig on the occasion of his 50th birthday, noting his contributions
to these areas of mathematics both from a scientific and a human standpoint. In
addition to his influence being felt in the many themes of the conference, the
conference will recognize his active role in mentoring women and minorities in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide array of mathematicians at different
levels of their careers is&lt;br/&gt;expected to attend. There is additional
support from the Clay Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;