* 0409443
* Collaborative Research: Stratigraphic, Geomorphic, and Paleoseismologic Record of Coseismic Fold Growth in Western Argentina
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Andrew Meigs, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2007
* USD 156,037.00

Thrust faults are a major seismic hazard worldwide. Seismic hazard assessment
for thrust faults depends on understanding the timing, frequency, and size of
past earthquakes. Thrust fault earthquakes are often accompanied by folding in
the shallow subsurface. Folds are the cumulative product of repeated
earthquakes. Thus, knowledge of how much, with what frequency, and with what
geometry folds grow in individual earthquakes is essential for determining how
fold growth relates to earthquake size on thrust faults. In two areas in western
Argentina, growth strata and geomorphic surfaces contain information about
folding and represent two repositories of the earthquake history of the
associated thrust faults. Structural, geomorphic, and paleoseismologic study of
the two areas is revealing a detailed record of coseismic and long-term
deformation and providing new insight into the geomorphic and stratigraphic
signature of folding on earthquake timescales. A field-calibrated model of the
production of geomorphic surfaces or growth strata in an individual thrust
earthquake is being developed based on the surface effects of a large and
damaging earthquake in 1944. Moreover, the new data are contributing directly to
the Argentinean national seismic hazard assessment program. The cities of
Mendoza and San Juan have a combined population of more than 1.5 million people
and are located near active earthquake faults with little constraints on their
past activity or future potential for earthquakes. This study is providing a
template for the recognition of paleoearthquakes from folds and a new method of
thrust earthquake hazard recognition. This project is being supported by the
Geosciences Directorate and the Office of International Science and Engineering.