* 0409972
* Wave Propagation Methods for Astrophysical Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,06/30/2006
* James Rossmanith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2006
* USD 93,633.00

This research is focused on developing accurate and efficient
numerical&lt;br/&gt;methods for the simulation of astrophysical flows. This
project will build&lt;br/&gt;on a class of high-resolution shock-capturing
methods that have in the&lt;br/&gt;last few years gained popularity in
astrophysics. Several numerical&lt;br/&gt;challenges will be investigated
including computing high Lorentz factor&lt;br/&gt;flows; maintaining divergence-
free magnetic fields as dictated by Maxwell's&lt;br/&gt;equations; incorporating
space-time curvature for general relativistic&lt;br/&gt;flows; including
radiative cooling physics; and accurately simulating&lt;br/&gt;multi-component
flows. Adaptive mesh refinement techniques will be&lt;br/&gt;incorporated into
the simulations in order to resolve regions of the&lt;br/&gt;flow where the
solution is rapidly varying, and conversely, to use&lt;br/&gt;less resolution in
regions where the solution remains nearly constant.&lt;br/&gt;Special attention
will be given to two application problems: the special&lt;br/&gt;relativistic
problem of the interaction of pulsar wind nebulae with&lt;br/&gt;supernovae
remnants and the general relativistic problem of accretion&lt;br/&gt;onto a
rotating black hole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astrophysics, much like
weather prediction and climatology, is a field of&lt;br/&gt;science in which
observations are possible, but direct experimentation is&lt;br/&gt;not.
Therefore, direct experiments are replaced by computer simulations.
In&lt;br/&gt;order to carry out these simulations, sophisticated tools from
computational&lt;br/&gt;mathematics are required to approximately solve the
nonlinear system of&lt;br/&gt;equations that model astrophysical flows. Examples
of such flows include the&lt;br/&gt;formation of pulsar wind nebulae and the
accretion of matter into a black hole.&lt;br/&gt;A feature of these flows, and
consequently the equations that model them, is&lt;br/&gt;that they can lead to
complicated solutions with sharp discontinuities. Over&lt;br/&gt;the past few
decades, an important class of computer methods has been&lt;br/&gt;developed to
accurately and efficiently approximate such solutions. More&lt;br/&gt;recently
these methods have been applied to astrophysical fluid dynamics.
This&lt;br/&gt;research will focus on developing and implementing
generalizations of these&lt;br/&gt;methods and also on the application of these
methods to specific astrophysical&lt;br/&gt;problems. The P.I. is actively
involved in collaborations between researchers&lt;br/&gt;in both the Mathematics
and Astronomy Departments at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;