* 0409382
* EHS:    Energy-Aware CPU and I/O Scheduling for Embedded, Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Stephen Goddard, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

CNS 0409382 Stephen M. Goddard University of Nebraska-
Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Energy-Aware CPU and I/O Scheduling for
Embedded, Real-Time Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embedded real-time systems
often have severe power constraints that require aggressive energy conservation
techniques in both the processor and the Input/Output (I/O) devices. This
project is investigating energy-aware processor and I/O scheduling for embedded,
hard real-time systems with flexible task models. The results will provide the
opportunity for increased energy savings in reactive, embedded, real-time
systems that execute in unpredictable environments, such as mobile robots. The
project focuses on two central problems: processor energy conservation for
sporadic tasks, and energy conservation for I/O devices with periodic
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processor Energy Conservation: Processor energy
conservation for the periodic task model has been extensively researched in the
context of dynamic power consumption for embedded, real-time systems. However,
energy conservation with more flexible real-time task models, such as the
sporadic task model, remains an open problem. The project is investigating
processor energy conservation for sporadic tasks that have deadlines not equal
to their respective periods, non-preemptive earliest-deadline-first (EDF)
scheduling, shared resources under EDF scheduling, and generalized versions of
the sporadic task model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy Conservation in I/O
Devices with Periodic Tasks: This research is investigating methods that
dynamically re-order job executions to conserve energy in I/O devices under the
periodic task model. Though the focus of this aspect of the project is energy
conservation in I/O devices, the method minimizes processor dynamic power
dissipation when only frequency scaling is supported (and not voltage scaling).
It also reduces leakage power consumption by grouping short idle periods into
longer intervals of time in which the processor can be made idle without
jeopardizing temporal correctness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;