* 0409762
* Agriculture, Paleoenvironment, and Human Occupation in the Pacific Coastal Lowlands of Southern Mesoamerica
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2002,12/31/2004
* Hector Neff, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 43,143.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Hector Neff and his collaborators
will complete the analysis of five sediment cores from Pacific coastal Guatemala
that are known to span the time periods when people first began modifying the
landscape for agriculture and other subsistence purposes. Preliminary results
from one location suggest that people brought maize or a direct ancestor of
maize to the region before 5000 B.C. and that dramatic agricultural
intensification took place beginning around 3500 B.C.

The signal of human modification and other landscape changes can be detected in
sediment cores via the changing frequencies of plant microfossils (phytoliths
and pollen) and charcoal together with variation in sedimentation rates. When
people cut or burn down the tropical forest for agriculture, weeds and charcoal
become more common in the record as trees and other forest species decline.
Sedimentation rates also tend to increase as forest cover is removed. Maize and
other agricultural crops can be identified both from pollen and phytoliths, the
combined evidence providing the most secure identification (phytoliths are
microscopic silica bodies that accumulate growing plants). These changes are
placed in a chronological context by AMS radiocarbon dating of organic matter
from selected levels in the cores.

The period between 3500 B.C. and 800 B.C. in Pacific coastal Guatemala is of
particular interest because it was during this period that many of the
distinctive characteristics of Mesoamerican complex societies coalesced. By the
end of the period, people in most locations depended heavily on maize
agriculture, large sites with monumental architecture and elaborate stone
sculpture were being constructed, and social stratification had appeared. The
fundamental shifts in subsistence, the increased tethering of people to specific
locations, and the beginning of major investment in architectural infrastructure
constituted the emergence of Mesoamerican civilization. Unfortunately this
Pacific region has been relatively understudied and details of the sequence are
poorly known compared, for example, to the Olmec heartland on the Gulf Coast of
Mexico. The work of Dr. Neff and his colleagues will both establish an
environmental context for this cultural progression and provide insight into the
process itself.

