* 0409155
* Impurities, Stoichiometry, Heterogeneity: Influences on Pyrite Crystal Properties, Oxidation Mechanisms, and Kinetics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Kaye Savage, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2008
* USD 189,350.00

Pyrite is the most abundant sulfide mineral in the earth's crust, and its
electrical properties are central to its importance in a variety of geological
and materials science contexts. Trace element content and stoichiometric
imbalances control pyrite's semiconducting behavior, but published pyrite
oxidation models have not included explicit expressions of the role of trace
elements in governing electron transfer. This research will contribute to basic
understanding of how Co, Ni and As, through their effects on pyrite's electronic
properties, influence its oxidation kinetics and reaction mechanisms. This will
be accomplished through a systematic study using natural pyrite and synthetic
pyrite of controlled composition in mixed flow reactor, batch reactor, and
atmospheric oxidation studies. High temperature synthesis produces homogeneous,
euhedral crystals suitable to carry out electrical measurements (conductivity,
semiconducting character and carrier concentration), spatially resolved chemical
characterization (electron probe microanalysis, laser ablation-ICP-MS), and
structural analysis (lattice parameters, position of trace elements in the
crystal structure), as well as oxidation experiments. The oxidation rates
generated from crystals of different dopant concentrations (including undoped
pyrite) will be analyzed as a function of pyrite conductivity, trace element
concentration, and Hall mobility to assess these potential sources of reaction
rate dependencies and order of dependence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linking solid-
state chemistry with mechanisms of pyrite oxidation and associated trace element
release will fundamentally improve our understanding of geochemical pathways at
the solid-solution interface. Understanding how trace elements contribute to
pyrite reactivity could have important implications for its industrial use, such
as photovoltaic applications. Arsenic and other trace elements released during
pyrite oxidation can be significant toxins in surface and ground waters; new
pyrite oxidation models developed from this research will explicitly distinguish
the role of trace elements in facilitating electron transfer, enabling better
prediction of release rates in these environments. Cross-disciplinary research
will be promoted as facilities in chemistry, physics, and engineering
departments are engaged. A doctoral student in a new interdisciplinary
Environmental Science program will be supported; undergraduates will also
participate. Students will gain experience in experimental and analytical
techniques, as well as in writing and formally presenting research results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;