* 0409052
* Volcanic Time Scales, Eruption Rates, and Compositional Diversity at a Continental Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Chris Hall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 288,015.00

This project, jointly supported by the Petrology and Geochemistry (EAR) and the
Americas Programs (INT, is to perform an intensive 40Ar/39Ar dating study,
coupled with quantitative estimates of erupted volumes, to fully characterize
the volcanic history of three large central volcanoes in western Mexico and
their surrounding peripheral vents. This proposed study would extend coverage of
the total volcanic output (= 1 Ma) along a continuous 200 km arc segment, which
is crucial in addressing global questions regarding the role of different
subduction parameters on the eruptive output at arcs. In addition, new data on
the eruptive history at individual volcanic fields significantly enhances
geochemical and petrological data sets and allows more robust tests of the
mechanisms and timescales for magma differentiation. The results of our proposed
40Ar/39Ar dating program will assist in the creation of volcanic hazards maps
(independently, by Mexican scientists) in the proposed study area, which is the
site of at least six, highly-explosive eruptions in the last 1 Myr, all from
vents within = 40 km of Tepic, the capital of the state of Nayarit. Our
collaboration with Dr. Hugo Delgado-Granados, from the Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM), has led to an extensive exchange of expertise and
facilities between the University of Michigan and UNAM, as well as a series of
student field trips that alternate between the U.S. and Mexico every other year.
This project will provide training to two Ph.D. students (one female/one male),
who will become skilled in Ar chronology, volcanic petrology, field mapping, and
GIS (Geographic Information System) software tools.