* 0409512
* Multifunctional Ferromagnetic Shape Memory Alloy Transducers with Novel Drive Mechanism
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Marcelo Dapino, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/2008
* USD 253,998.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;0409512&lt;br/&gt;Marcelo Dapino&lt;br/&gt;Ohio State
Univ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the poor frequency bandwidth and low energy
density of current nickel manganese gallium (Ni-Mn-Ga) devices, these materials
have not made a successful transition from the laboratory to the commercial
arena. These limitations are addressed in this proposal by means of a paradigm
shift in material preparation and transducer design, which consists of driving
the material with the stress and magnetic field aligned collinearly along the
[100] direction, as opposed to the existing perpendicular configuration. The
collinear configuration will enable a new class of broadband, multifunctional,
compact and energy efficient Ni-Mn-Ga actuators and sensors. Applications will
include vibration control, adaptive optics, health monitoring and underwater
communications, among others. While the existence of magnetoelastic responses in
this configuration is not supported by the existing theories for martensitic
variant reorientation, recent measurements conducted by the PI demonstrate such
responses and lay the groundwork for this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the research are to determine the exact origin of these unexpected
measurements and to identify, quantify and develop design and material
processing criteria to enable a new class of ferromagnetic shape memory
actuators and sensors in which the magnetic field and stress are aligned
collinearly. To that end, the research comprises three primary tasks: (1) to
develop innovative material and device models for Ni-Mn-Ga driven with a
collinear magnetic field and stress; (2) to conduct experimental tests at scales
ranging from microscopic to macroscopic aimed at determining the microstructure
and macroscopic behaviors of these alloys; and (3) to construct Ni-Mn-Ga
actuators which can change their compliance while providing force and
displacement control, and Ni-Mn-Ga multifunctional
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;