* 0409981
* "Workshop: Cereal Genomics, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, September 12-19, 2005
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2007
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2007
* USD 36,030.00

The Cereal Genomics Workshop at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory will give plant
biologists the skills necessary to navigate the increasingly complex genomics
information landscape, and to identify and encourage young researchers who might
choose plant genomics as a career by exposing them to the field's practice and
practitioners. A major aim will therefore be to enable students and post docs to
take advantage of emerging genomics data in the cereals. Specific problems and
unique challenges exist in cereal genomics. Many of the genomes (for example,
maize, wheat, barley) are large and complex, and it is unlikely that we will
have completely mapped and sequenced genomes for these species in the
foreseeable future. The cereals also provide the primary source of nourishment
to the world's human and domesticated animal populations. In the USA, maize has
been one of the leading model systems in plant biology, and has received
considerable research support from both the public and private sectors. The
large size and complexity of the maize genome precluded genome sequencing
efforts until relatively recently. However an NSF supported program has now
generated extensive genome survey sequence, and there exists a near complete
sequence for the rice genome. The conservation of synteny between the cereals
makes the rice genome an excellent model for maize and other grasses, as long as
scientists are trained to exploit this resource and can access the necessary
data.

The broader impacts of this workshop will be in exposing young students to the
excitement of cereal genomics, as well as enabling more senior researchers to
develop cutting edge research and curricular activities. It will also foster
development of collaborations and cooperation among the participants.