* 0409133
* Process-Based Characterization of Near-Surface Hydrologic Response and Hydrologically Driven Slope Stability
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Keith Loague, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2008
* USD 249,681.00

0409133&lt;br/&gt;Loague&lt;br/&gt;Shallow landsliding repeatedly causes loss of
life, physical damage to public and private&lt;br/&gt;property, and extreme
habitat degradation in mountainous regions. As an example of
the&lt;br/&gt;timeliness of this problem, the Oregon Forest Practices Act was
modified (in response to five&lt;br/&gt;deaths, resulting from two 1996 debris
flows) to adopt and enforce forest practice rules that will&lt;br/&gt;reduce the
occurrence, timing, and effects of rapidly moving landslides.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will focus on a physics-based characterization of near-
surface&lt;br/&gt;hydrologic response and slope stability initiation processes
for steep hillslopes at the catchment&lt;br/&gt;scale. This characterization
will be based upon sophisticated numerical simulations for the
Coos&lt;br/&gt;Bay experimental catchment (CB1). The 860m 2 CB1 is located in
the Oregon Coast Range. CB1&lt;br/&gt;is an unchanneled valley, with a north-
facing aspect, that has an average slope of 43. In the area&lt;br/&gt;of CB1,
the Coast Range exhibits steep, finely dissected hillslopes where debris flows
are the&lt;br/&gt;dominant geomorphic process. The instrumentation at CB1, used
to characterize the spatial and&lt;br/&gt;temporal variability in near-surface
hydrologic response for three sprinkler/tracer experiments (in&lt;br/&gt;1990
and 1992), includes an exhaustive grid of rain gages, piezometers, tensiometers,
TDR&lt;br/&gt;wave-guide pairs, lysimeters, meteorological sensors, and weirs.
Continuous measurements of&lt;br/&gt;rainfall, discharge, and total head are
available for CB1 from 1990 through 1996.&lt;br/&gt;Rigorous simulation of near-
surface hydrologic response will be conducted with the&lt;br/&gt;Integrated
Hydrology Model (InHM). The comprehensive InHM quantitatively simulates, with
a&lt;br/&gt;first-order coupled approach, 3D variably-saturated flow and solute
transport in porous media&lt;br/&gt;and macropores and 2D flow and solute
transport over the surface and in open channels. There is&lt;br/&gt;no a priori
assumption of a specific hydrologic-response mechanism with InHM. The two
slope&lt;br/&gt;stability models to be employed in the proposed study are the
infinite slope model and a 2D&lt;br/&gt;finite-element solution to the linear
elastic deformation equations.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research would be
conducted in three phases. In phase I, event-based InHM&lt;br/&gt;simulations of
fluid flow and solute transport will be conducted for the three CB1
sprinkler/tracer&lt;br/&gt;experiments to characterize hydrologic-response and
pore water pressure distributions. In phase&lt;br/&gt;II, long-term InHM
simulations of hydrologic response (for the seven year CB1 record) will
be&lt;br/&gt;conducted to generate continuous pore water pressure distributions.
In phase III, slope stability&lt;br/&gt;simulations (driven by hydrologic-
response simulations in phases I and II), with the two slope&lt;br/&gt;stability
models, will be conducted to assess slope failure initiation for CB1. The CB1
data sets&lt;br/&gt;(discharge, pressure head, soil-water content, and solute
concentration) will be used in a rigorous&lt;br/&gt;assessment of model
performance. The coupled simulation of hydrologic response and
slope&lt;br/&gt;stability will be used to evaluate slope failure at times of
known stability and times of known&lt;br/&gt;instability (i.e., the November
1996 CB1 failure).&lt;br/&gt;Related to intellectual merit, the proposed
simulation effort will effectively demonstrate the&lt;br/&gt;utility and/or
limits of hydrologic-response models less comprehensive than InHM for
field&lt;br/&gt;conditions similar to CB1 and beyond. It will also be possible
guide the structure of new models&lt;br/&gt;(simpler than InHM) for use in the
decision-management arena based upon dominant response&lt;br/&gt;generalizations
of InHM results for what if scenarios. Related to broader impact, results from
the&lt;br/&gt;proposed study will be useful for the optimization of data
collection networks for both future&lt;br/&gt;studies of hydrologic
response/landslide initiation and real-time hazard warning systems.
A&lt;br/&gt;major contribution of the proposed work is the training of a PhD
student.