* 0409984
* BE/CNH: Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Engineered Crop Genes: Natural and Human Constraints and Consequences
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Norman Ellstrand, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,545,268.00

Gene flow is the successful movement of genes from one population to another.
Crop gene flow is the result of both natural processes like wind dispersal of
pollen and human processes like the planting of seeds in fields. Theoretical and
empirical studies have focused on gene flow at the local and landscape scale,
but they generally have neglected gene flow on the global scale. The controversy
surrounding the unintended movement of engineered genes (transgenes) has raised
awareness that new alleles can move rapidly and over great distances. No models
have emerged to evaluate the spread of crop transgenes through both natural and
human processes over time and space, nor have human impacts on gene flow been
explored yet. This interdisciplinary research project will focus on the
development of an integrated model to describe the dynamics of dispersal of a
new crop transgene in space and time. A benefit of focusing on transgene flow is
that it affords examples of alleles whose age and origins are known. The model
will evolve with iterative interactions between three research teams. The
initial model will use corn (Zea mays, maize) in the U.S. and Mexico as a model
system, but the model eventually will be adapted for other crop systems, such as
canola. Furthermore, the project will move beyond the initial two-nation focus
to explore transgene spread at the global scale. One research team will have the
construction of the model as its primary assignment. The model will start with a
structure of simple natural dispersal processes. The other two teams will make
conceptual contributions for refining the model, such as (1) natural processes
that affect dispersal patterns like wind directionality, timing of plant
flowering, and the spatial distribution of cross-compatible wild relatives, and
(2) human processes that affect dispersal patterns like farmer management and
choice of seeds for replanting or transport of seed through local and
international trade. Those teams will also contribute novel data and pre-
existing data from the literature for modifying and testing the model. The teams
then will evaluate the refined model for (1) natural impacts, such as the
evolution of weediness or the loss of biodiversity in wild relatives, and (2)
human impacts, such as evolution of trade policy in response to unintended
transgenes in the food supply or changes in traditionally based agricultural
systems precipitated by the presence of transgenes in local varieties. New gene-
flow influences resulting from these consequences will then be incorporated into
the model. Examples include (1) the spatial spread of the transgene into
expanding weed populations and (2) international trade barriers or changing
labor migration patterns. The evolutionary results from the model will be
compared with real spatial and temporal changes in corn transgene frequencies in
Mexico. Regular meetings of the research teams will serve to improve the
integrative model while providing new opportunities to scrutinize the
constraints and consequences of dispersal. The final product will be a global
model that can be generalized to describe for the spread of any plant allele as
constrained by human and natural processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will have significant implications for predicting plant gene dispersal under
natural and human dispersal. It will thus have implications for the spread of
invasive organisms as well as for its focus of transgene flow. The topic of
transgene flow is a part of the greater public discussion of genetic
engineering. The results of the project will have direct relevance to addressing
critical issues like the unintended spread of engineered genes that have been
reported occurring adventitiously in non-engineered crop varieties, in Mexican
corn despite a multiyear moratorium against planting transgenic corn in that
country, and in natural populations. The results of this study therefore will
provide that scientific input to inform both lay audiences and policy makers at
both the national and international levels. The project is supported by an award
resulting from the FY 2004 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;