* 0409305
* Collaborative Research: The Effect of Atmospheric Humidity on the Susceptibility of Dry Soils to Wind Erosion
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Paolo D'Odorico, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2007
* USD 140,672.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Wind erosion is a widespread process in arid and semi-arid
regions, and contributes to loss of soil fertility, alteration of atmospheric
radiation, and air pollution, with important impacts on global and regional
climates, agriculture, and human health. Erosion occurs when wind speed exceeds
a certain threshold, the value of which depends on a number of factors,
including surface soil moisture. It is argued that in arid regions, under air-
dry conditions, variations in surface soil moisture can be significantly
affected by changes in atmospheric humidity, with an important effect on wind
erosion potential, and that this effect is not currently well understood or
quantified.&lt;br/&gt;It is argued that in fact the effect of soil moisture on
susceptibility to wind erosion is opposite in the air-dry range of soil
moistures to its effect in the capillary range, i.e., that the drier an air-dry
soil is, the less susceptible it is to wind erosion. The proposed research will
test this hypothesis and quantify the effect by analysis of several important
agricultural soils of the United States, which are strongly subject to wind
erosion, as well as well-sorted, clean sands, which will function as "reference"
soils. In particular, the project will (1) investigate the dependence of surface
soil moisture (i.e., in a few grain layer) on air humidity and temperature; (2)
determine the relationship between threshold wind velocity, and near surface air
humidity and temperature by means of a number of wind tunnel tests, and (3)
interpret the results in terms of a theoretical framework that will account for
the dependence of interparticle forces on absorbed layer bonding on
interparticle forces and soil matric potential. This approach will provide a
theoretical equation expressing threshold wind velocity as a function of air
humidity for air-dry soils. The parameters of this equation will be determined
through the results of the wind tunnel experiments. The assessment of the type
of dependence existing between soil erosion potential and surface moisture
content is crucially important to the understanding and modeling of wind erosion
and dust emission from dryland landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit.&lt;br/&gt;Most of the existing studies on the effect of surface moisture
on the threshold wind velocity have concentrated on relatively wet soils, in
which capillarity dominated interparticle bonding forces. This proposal
recognizes the importance air-dry soils as sources of atmospheric dust and wind
erosion in dryland landscapes. In these soils, water content contributes to
interparticle bonding mostly as adsorbed-layer bonding. The proposal recognizes
the different dependence of liquid-bridge bonding (capillarity) and adsorbed-
layer bonding on soil water content, and investigates how it affects the
relationship between soil erodibility and surface moisture. Moreover, because
surface soil moisture measurements are seldom available, the dependence of
surface soil moisture on air humidity will be investigated and used to predict
the state of soil erodibility. To our knowledge, this is one of the very few
studies concentrating on the erodibility of air-dry soils and the first one
showing an increased erodibility associated with increasing moisture contents.
The use air humidity as a surrogate for surface soil moisture conditions is also
a unique and novel approach to the study of the hydrologic controls on soil
erosion potential.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve
the training of a Ph.D. student, and two high school science teachers in the
methods of research and of presentation of research results. It will support
education by integration into a course being developed by the PIs, and provide a
basis for collaboration between different groups working on similar questions.
Members of underrepresented groups will be sought for inclusion in the research
team. The results of the proposed research will be disseminated through
publications in scholarly journals and conference presentations. Society will
benefit from the improved understanding of the causes of and the ability to
predict wind erosion and dust generation.&lt;br/&gt;