* 0409683
* Electro-Mechanical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Ian Robertson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/2007
* USD 162,000.00

Electro-Mechanical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes&lt;br/&gt;by &lt;br/&gt;K.
Jimmy Hsia, Yonggang Y. Huang, Ivan G. Petrov, and Ian M.
Robertson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project is to assemble a multidisciplinary team with complementary
expertise to study a class of very important material systems for
nanotechnologies - carbon nanotubes and nanotube composites. The focus of the
investigation is the strong coupling between mechanical deformation and
electrical response in carbon nanotubes. An integrated modeling and experimental
approach is taken to study the electro-mechanical coupling in composites
embedded with aligned nanotubes. First-principle simulation tools and atomistic-
based nanoscale continuum theory are used to pursue fundamental understanding of
mechanical-electrical coupling effects. Experimental techniques using HRTEM/STEM
in combination with EELS and FIB are used to characterize interface structures
between nanotubes and matrix, and the microstructures of composites. The
electro-mechanical coupling of nanotubes is measured by straining the nanotube
composite specimens. The interpretation of the measurement results is
accomplished by the modeling effort with an understanding of the interfacial
structures and transport mechanisms between the nanotubes and the matrix. The
success of this project strongly depends on the integration of the modeling and
experimental efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong coupling between
mechanical deformation and electrical response in carbon nanotubes provides a
unique opportunity for many potential applications such as nanoscale sensors and
actuators, nano-electro-mechanical systems (NEMS), and nano-electronic devices.
Understanding the coupling phenomenon in nanotubes enables possible production
of smart materials and devices with sensing and actuating functions at the nano-
scale. The results of the research project include basic measurement data of the
electro-mechanical coupling of nanotubes, enhanced knowledge of the interface
structures between nanotubes and matrix in a composite, and atomistic-based
nanoscale continuum models for analyzing mechanical responses and electro-
mechanical coupling of carbon nanotubes and nanotube composites. Applications of
these research results significantly improve U.S. industry's future
competitiveness in nanotechnology. Furthermore, graduate and undergraduate
students trained in the project are expected to become the next generation of
leaders in nano-science and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;