* 0409075
* Mechanisms of Climate Variability and Change
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2010
* Dennis Hartmann, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2010
* USD 1,346,962.00

Low-frequency variability of the troposphere in the form of near-annular
variability will be studied in a non-zonally averaged context. Using reanalysis
data products and models, where appropriate, the role of zonal asymmetries of
the time-mean state on the maintenance of these anomalies and their transitions
will be investigated. The role of large-scale convective heating in driving the
zonal wind structure and tropopause temperature in the equatorial region will be
investigated using global models. The effect of seasonality, equatorial symmetry
and zonal asymmetry on the equatorial zonal wind and tropopause temperature will
be investigated in a series of controlled experiments, which will be compared to
observations. In addition, the role of the radiative cooling of tropical and
subtropical stratiform cloud decks in driving shallow circulations, and their
interaction with deep convection will be investigated in a simple modeling
context and within the context of climate models that predict convective
heating. The interaction of the stratosphere and the troposphere and
particularly the role of stratospheric warmings in forcing tropospheric climate
will be investigated. This will include modeling studies using the Whole
Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM1b) and the Community Climate System
Model's current atmospheric component (known as CAM), as well as available
observations. The connections to the tropics through stratospheric and
tropospheric pathways will be investigated and
compared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Three graduate
students will be supported under this grant. One of them will be from an
underrepresented group within the sciences. The work will contribute to the
validation and testing of the community climate models supported by NSF, the CAM
and the WACCM models. The PI will test the utilization of these models on
inexpensive cluster computers and provide guidance to others on how to build and
maintain this climate modeling infrastructure in a small group setting. The work
has potentially important implications for seasonal forecasting and climate
change projections.