* 0409567
* Collaborative Research: Determining Mantle Rheology from Field and Microstructural Observations of Naturally-deformed Peridotites
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Julie Newman, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2009
* USD 89,146.00

A crucial and unsolved question in global earth science is the relative strength
of the different lithospheric layers that make up the tectonic plates. Rheology,
the term used to describe material behavior, quantifies the relation between the
observed deformation (strain) and the applied forces (stress). The principal
investigators of this grant combine quantitative, field-based geologic studies
with data from experimental rock deformation studies to constrain the rheology
of naturally-deformed mantle rocks. The fieldwork provides analysis of
deformation at geologic strain-rates, spatial scales, and levels of
compositional heterogeneity, while laboratory studies provide data from
controlled deformation experiments at known stresses and strain-rates for
monophase materials. The lithospheric (uppermost) mantle is the focus of this
study for three reasons. First, mantle rocks have a relatively simple mineralogy
(typically only three minerals, volumetrically dominated by the mineral
olivine). Second, a large amount of experimental data has been conducted on
olivine, allowing calibration of the field studies. Third, because of the high
strength of olivine in experimental studies, many current models assume that the
lithospheric mantle dominates the material behavior of the tectonic plates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two extremely well-exposed sections of upper mantle rocks,
the Dun Mountain ophiolite body (Red Hills section) in New Zealand and the Twin
Sisters dunite in Washington State, USA are investigated in this study. The two
field areas provide different, but complimentary, constraints on mantle
rheology. The Twin Sisters dunite is an ideal field locality to: 1) Quantify
deformation in a mantle section, by using geological markers known as dikes; 2)
Observe spatial variations in mantle deformation; and 3) Determine the effect of
the 2nd mineral phase (orthopyroxene) on the bulk rheology of natural
peridotites. The Red Hills section of the Dun Mountain ophiolite, New Zealand,
allows the PIs to investigate two additional aspects of mantle deformation: 1)
The rheological implications of large-scale structures (e.g., folds) present in
naturally deformed mantle bodies; and 2) Why localization, as inferred from
ductilely sheared markers, takes place in the mantle. From these data sets, the
bulk rheology of lithospheric mantle will be constrained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant supports a graduate student and multiple
undergraduate students at two universities. The funding forms the basis for
international cooperation with a New Zealand university, allowing students to
visit both universities. &lt;br/&gt;