* 0409719
* Chemistry and Structure of Grain and Phase Boundaries: Importance for Trace Element Storage and Transport in the Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Takehiko Hiraga, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 434,199.00

This work seeks to answer the questions, "What is the storage capacity of grain
and phase boundaries for incompatible elements in mantle rocks?" and "How does
segregation to grain-grain interfaces affect intergranular diffusion in the
mantle?" It was recently discovered that boundaries between grains of Mg-Fe
olivine are enriched in elements such as Ca, Al, Cr, K and Ti. The
concentrations vary systematically with the concentrations in the grain
interiors, in some cases following classic thermodynamic models for elemental
partitioning. This study involves systematic analytical and experimental
investigation of these processes and the resultant effects on diffusive
transport in Earth's mantle. The results will provide constraints on the
geochemical evolution and behavior of Earth's deep interior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of this proposal emerge from
education of undergraduates, professional development of a graduate student and
a postdoctoral associate, and establishment of new experimental techniques. (1)
The Department of Geology and Geophysics is an NSF-funded REU site for studies
of Fluids in the Earth from Surface to Core. As such, undergraduates gain hands-
on experience each summer carrying out experiments that are direct outgrowths of
and intimately related to the research proposed in this document. (2) The
research outlined in this proposal is a continuation of a project that was
initiated as part of a recent doctoral fellowship project and will now be
carried forward by a first-year graduate student and a young postdoctoral
scientist, thus contributing to the professional development of both. (3) As
part of the proposed research, new experimental techniques will be developed,
which play an important part in building the research infrastructure in the
solid-earth sciences.&lt;br/&gt;