* 0409321
* Renewal-Experimental Studies of Elasticity, Rheology, and Phonon Dynamics of Materials at Pressure-Temperature Conditions of Earth's Mantle and Core
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2010
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2010
* USD 625,000.00

Plate tectonics, one of the most important scientific discoveries in the last
century, is the surface manifestation of the dynamic processes of its much
deeper roots. Recent tomographic and geodynamic studies provided detailed three-
dimensional descriptions of the solid Earth. Interpretations of these results
require additional knowledge on the real materials that constitute the deep
Earth and whose properties are drastically altered by its extreme P-T
conditions. Key properties include:&lt;br/&gt; Density, r (or molar volume,
V)&lt;br/&gt; Crystal unit-cell parameters (a, b, c, a, b, g)&lt;br/&gt; Bulk
modulus (K), shear modulus (G), and single-crystal elasticity (cij or
sij)&lt;br/&gt; Compressional (VP) and shear wave velocity (VS) as a function of
crystallographic orientation&lt;br/&gt; Phonon density of state (DOS) and phonon
dispersion&lt;br/&gt; Preferred orientation under stress&lt;br/&gt; Shear
Strength, creep law, and deformation mechanism&lt;br/&gt;Comprehensive
understanding of the static and dynamic Earth depends upon our knowledge of
these parameters as functions of pressure and temperature. For a long time, only
r and K measurements were possible beyond transition-zone pressures (&gt;25 GPa)
and most measurements were regarded as reconnaissance in nature. Consequently,
Earth models are often tenuous and controversial. Resulted from the previous
grant support, a series of breakthroughs in high-pressure technology has finally
made it possible to propose a study of all these properties. Using the new
technology, the present grant supports a comprehensive and integrated series of
experimental studies of the elastic, rheological, and phonon properties of deep
mantle and core materials at high pressures and temperatures. The results will
be used to resolve major problems associated with the composition, structure,
dynamics, and evolution of the Earth's deep
interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;