* 0409303
* Complex Episodic Explosive Volcanism: Eruption Dynamics of the 1959 Kilauea Iki Eruption, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Julia Hammer, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2009
* USD 240,000.00

The 1959 eruption of Kilauea Iki was one of the best-documented basaltic
explosive eruptions ever recorded. The highest lava fountains yet recorded for
that volcano were observed during this eruption and 16 phases of explosive
activity took place over 37 days. However, these fire-fountaining episodes were
of irregular length and spacing and accompanied by drainage of lava from and
into a newly formed lava lake in the adjacent Kilauea Iki crater. A new logical
step in understanding this classical eruption is to move inside the eruption to
treat individual eruptive phases or episodes as discrete entities. The primary
goal of this project is to complete the documentation of the pyroclastic
products of this complex fire-fountaining eruption identifying underlying causes
of the episodic nature of the eruption, and the contrasting abundance and
dispersal of reticulite-pumice and scoria-spatter in the eruption products. The
investigators plan to first refine the database of observations of the rates and
nature of cone growth to match to the record of fountain height with time.
Secondly, they will map individual beds in the widespread scoria-pumice blanket
and assign them to individual eruptive episodes and constrain their dispersal.
Finally they will quantify size distributions of bubble and microlite
populations in the erupted clasts to constrain contrasting histories of ascent,
eruption, and cooling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, a
clearer understanding of the triggering mechanisms of Hawaiian basaltic
eruptions is of fundamental importance in order to assess hazards of future
explosive events at basaltic volcanoes, and to improve understanding of the
range of behaviors of these volcanoes. More specifically, the Kilauea Iki 1959
deposits are visited by almost all of the 2.3 million visitors to Hawaii
Volcanoes National Park (HVNP) in 2002. It is planned to form a partnership with
HVNP using independent funding to develop a range of products and interpretative
activities to make this eruption a showcase for visitors. The eruption has
already formed the basis for four field workshops for graduate students and
features in the annual courses run by the Center for the Study of Active
Volcanoes. The results will be widely disseminated via the Internet using linked
web sites hosted by Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, Hawaiian Volcano Observatory
and University of Hawaii. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;