* 0409184
* Probabilistic robust coordinated control of quorum systems of mobile autonomous agents
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Qian Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 07/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Coordinated control of multiple robotic platforms, multi-
vehicles, or groups of mobile agents is a&lt;br/&gt;rich and fascinating
research field and has great commercial and military impact. This
project&lt;br/&gt;seeks to achieve coordinated, goal oriented task level control
with robustness, failure-tolerance,&lt;br/&gt;and distributed implementation.
The PI proposes 1) a probabilistic approach to address the&lt;br/&gt;robustness
issue of the coordinated control subject to parametric uncertainty,
dynamically&lt;br/&gt;changing operating conditions, and the change of
neighboring interaction between mobile agents,&lt;br/&gt;and 2) a quorum-system
based architecture that defines the neighboring interaction,
information&lt;br/&gt;flow and communication configuration of a group of mobile
agents.&lt;br/&gt;The probabilistic approach has a better modeling of the real
world with less conservativeness; it&lt;br/&gt;provides reduced control
complexity and enhanced performance and efficient use of
control&lt;br/&gt;effort. The proposed feedback control is built on a new
architecture that targets distributed&lt;br/&gt;implementation and failure-
tolerance under the constraints of limited communication
bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed paradigm for coordinated control of groups of
mobile autonomous agents will&lt;br/&gt;provide a high degree of autonomy for
distributed execution of elemental, high bandwidth tasks,&lt;br/&gt;allowing the
operator to interact with the system of platforms at a high level. The
intellectual&lt;br/&gt;merit lies in the interdisciplinary nature of this
project, which will hopefully foster new&lt;br/&gt;paradigms for coordinated
control of groups of mobile agents, and spawn new topics for
further&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt;The educational plan includes a
strengthening and integration of interdisciplinary research topics&lt;br/&gt;of
robust control and distributed algorithms in a graduate level control course. To
assess the&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness of the proposed educational activities, the
PI plans to collaborate with colleagues at&lt;br/&gt;the Penn State's Leonard
Center for the Enhancement of Engineering Education. The PI herself&lt;br/&gt;is
a female member of the faculty; she will continue to work with the Women in
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Program (WEP) and Society of Women Engineers (SWE) at Penn
State to recruit women and&lt;br/&gt;minorities for graduate study, and to
encourage them to pursue academic careers after&lt;br/&gt;graduation.