* 0409604
* Reinvention Center Conference Proposal:  Infusing Research into Undergraduate Education:    The Value Added; November 18-19, 2004
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Wendy Katkin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Richard D. Foust
* 12/31/2005
* USD 124,000.00

This award will support a conference organized by the Reinvention Center on
"Infusing Research into Undergraduate Education: The Value Added". The
Conference will be held on November 18-19, 2004, and will bring together
university faculty, senior administrators, and graduate students to: 1) Distill
and articulate the distinct characteristics of the undergraduate education that
research universities can offer and to demonstrate the "value added" of such an
education; 2) Examine specific strategies and techniques that can be put into
practice to achieve genuine transformation; 3) Advance the efforts of research
universities to foster a frame of mind that drives their research activities to
their undergraduate education in ways that impact their large and diverse
populations; 4) Make faculty and graduate students aware of the substantial
literature on learning that now exists and its potential applications in order
to strengthen connections between research on learning and instruction; and 5)
Provoke widespread discussion and action to address the implications the
changing state of knowledge and the demography of the undergraduate population
have for future education at research universities. Deliverables will include
publication of the conference proceedings; a Web-based inventory of successful
integrative courses and programs; and a Web-based compilation of "Resources" on
effective application of principles of learning in a range of educational
contexts and disciplines. The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Mathematics and Physical Sciences Directorate funds this award with cofunding
support from the five MPS divisions: Chemistry, Mathematical Sciences, Materials
Research, Physics and Astronomical Sciences.