* 0409665
* Novel Designs for Interfacial Mechanical Property Enhancement and Characterization  of Dissimilar Materials and Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Luoyu Xu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2008
* USD 154,772.00

Novel Designs for Interfacial Mechanical Property Enhancement&lt;br/&gt;and
Characterization of Dissimilar Materials and
Structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
engineering systems are increasingly made of materials that combine two or more
materials for improved performance. Generally, failure occurs at the material
interfaces or joints due to material property mismatch. Therefore, accurate
measurement of interfacial strength at the interface between dissimilar
materials is critical for material development and engineering applications of
such new materials, ranging from nano-scale to macro-scale. However, current
methods for interfacial mechanical measurement lead to invalid data because of a
special "stress singularity problem" at the bi-material interface. In order to
accurately measure the intrinsic interfacial mechanical properties of dissimilar
materials, this project presents novel specimen designs through an integrated
analytical, numerical and experimental investigation. A preliminary design,
inspired by the shape and mechanics of trees, was developed to obtain the least
stress singularities at bi-material corners for most engineering material
combinations. The new design not only &lt;br/&gt;improves the load transfer
capacity of dissimilar material joints, but also yields more reasonable
interfacial strength evaluation. For convex polycarbonate-aluminum and PMMA-
aluminum joints, the static ultimate tensile load increased up to 81% while the
total material volume reduced by at least 15% over that of traditional butt-
joint specimens with severe free-edge stress singularities. Hence, the principal
investigator and his research group members plan to develop a broader research
program for interfacial mechanical property enhancement and evaluation. In
particular, the objectives are to: 1) measure the improvement of load transfer
capability of the novel interfacial joint subjected to dynamic loading 2)
conduct axisymmetric specimen designs for static interfacial tensile
measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
activity consists in presenting a new solution to a long-term problem in
mechanics of materials. The mechanics principles underlying tree shapes are used
to design novel joint specimens. The project will provide a successful example
of biologically inspired design to enhance scientific and technological
understanding, i.e., nature may provide efficient solutions for certain
difficult technological problems. The impact of the proposed research will be
very broad since dissimilar material interfaces/joints and failure are widely
employed in aerospace, automobile, biomedical, civil, defense, electronic,
material and mechanical engineering fields. Therefore, the research results from
this project will be very beneficial to information technology, nano technology,
materials and manufacturing and civil infrastructure. Other broader impacts
include providing support for a female doctoral student and developing research
partnership with national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;