* 0409538
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Melt Depletion on Mantle Density and Velocity
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Kenneth Dueker, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2009
* USD 95,219.00

To understand flow in the upper mantle, the density variations that drive this
flow must be quantified. Processes that create density variations are changes in
temperature, the amount of melting, and the composition of the mantle. A primary
cause of compositional variations is melt depletion, which occurs when mantle
rock (peridotite) is partially melted. In this case, some elements, such as Fe,
preferentially partition into the melt, leaving the unmelted rock (the residuum)
depleted in these elements. Melt depletion is of fundamental importance in
tectosphere formation, melt focusing at mid-ocean ridges, plume-plate
interaction, and melt-driven convection. Melt depletion may also modify seismic
velocities, allowing depleted mantle to be imaged. Furthermore, the density
effects of melt depletion are increasingly being used in geophysical studies to
infer the composition of the mantle. The aim of this project is to quantify the
compositional, density, and velocity effects of melt depletion, and resolve the
differences between theoretical models and xenolith studies. To do so, the
investigators will measure the compositional effects of melt removal on
peridotite at pressures between 1-5 GPa, and convert these compositional
variations to density and anharmonic velocity variations. This study will
enhance discovery and understanding by providing research experience to a new
scientist; by encouraging cooperation between the University of Wyoming and the
University of California, Davis; and by promoting interdisciplinary research in
mantle petrology, mineral physics, and seismology. To encourage broad
dissemination of this work, results will be posted on a web site hosted by the
University of Wyoming, which will include parameterizations of density and
velocity for geodynamical modelers (initial results already are being
incorporated into convection models at UCLA), and freely available Matlab
scripts for calculating mantle density and velocities as function of
composition, temperature, and pressure. Research will also be presented at
scientific meetings and departmental seminars.&lt;br/&gt;