* 0409891
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Corina Kellner, Kellner                 Corina         M
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/29/2008
* USD 160,000.00

This Social, Behavioral, and Economic Minority Post-Doctoral Research and
Training Fellowship examines the use of food in the codification of power
differentials between individuals within the prehistoric Nasca (A.D. 1-750) on
the south coast of Peru. In current Andean cultures, food is a powerful metaphor
for social relationships and archaeological evidence suggests the same in
prehistory. Differential distribution of food is assumed to be present in
stratified state societies and absent in more egalitarian ones. Chiefdom level
societies exhibit greater variation in this aspect; yet, none of the previous
studies focus on a single society during its transformation from egalitarian to
complex. The well-preserved and well-provenanced Julio C. Tello Nasca skeletal
collection housed at the Museo Nacional de Antropologia, Arqueologia, e Historia
del Peru in Lima, Peru provides such an opportunity. The collection includes
skeletons from the inception of the Nasca culture as a series of relatively
autonomous villages to that of a complex chiefdom to its subsequent
incorporation into the highland Wari empire. This project will use stable
isotope analysis of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen in human bones and teeth to
reconstruct aspects of each individual's diet. d13C values distinguish between
maize- and potato-based diets, d15N indicates the amount of protein in diet,
.13C indicates the source of protein (maize vs llama or guinea pig) and d18O
indicates the region in which the individual lived. These stable isotope
analyses of other prehistoric populations show intra-population variation in
diets associated with gender and status. Higher status individuals and males
usually have greater access to meat than do lower status individuals and
females. Imperial hegemony also dramatically affects diets of indigenous peoples
as evidenced by the imposition of the Inca on the Sausa of Peru, and the Spanish
on the US southwest pueblos and southeast chiefdoms. Some complex societies,
such as state level Teotihuacan, Mexico, and the Dakleh Oasis in western Egypt,
include foreigners in their cemeteries suggesting enhanced trade, regional
integration and imperial control when compared with earlier time periods.
Increasing social complexity should associate with increased differentiation
between the sexes and between higher and lower status individuals if traditional
assumptions are correct. Increasing population aggregation and the construction
of filtration galleries for crop irrigation in later periods is also expected to
associate with greater consumption of maize. The advent of Wari imperial
conquest of the region is expected to aggravate indigenous Nasca social
differentiation. If the relationship was coercive, d18O values should identify
the presence of Wari emissaries in the Nasca region; alternatively an absence of
foreigners would support previous hypotheses of a special, non-coercive
relationship with the empire. The collagen and carbonate extracts from 272
individuals will be prepared from both bone and tooth samples. The proposed
research will include at least a two-month stay in Peru to collect samples and
examine the newly published Tello fieldnotes regarding the status of the
individuals buried in these Nasca cemeteries. Preparation and analysis of these
samples will be done at the stable isotope laboratory at UC, San Diego. After
the analyses are completed, presentation and publication of the results will be
done in the US and in Peru. The proposed research will bolster research skills
and solidify collaborations with colleagues in Peru, in preparation for an
anticipated position within a research university. This project, under the
supervision Dr. Margaret J. Schoeninger at UCSD, would continue the applicant's
training in the only stable isotope laboratory supported within an Anthropology
department in the western US. While the archaeological record of the Andes
region is strong, few physical anthropological or stable isotope studies have
been initiated thus far. The proposed research would broaden the picture of past
lives in ancient Andean societies by providing a complementary data set. These
data will add to the growing literature on the Nasca themselves, augment the
cases for stable isotope comparison in the Andean region, elucidate the
relationship between an imperial power and a conquered people, and enlarge our
knowledge about the use of food as a vehicle for the codification of social
differences in a complex chiefdom.

