* 0409964
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Global Warnings: The Effect of Scientific Elite Conflict on Public Opinion
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Nicholas Valentino, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,000.00

Conveying scientific information to the public accurately and comprehensively is
one of the media's most important, yet difficult, responsibilities. Public
support for, or opposition to, policies with a relatively large scientific
component (e.g. environmental policies) may hinge upon the way problems and
solutions are presented in the news. This doctoral research investigates the
influence that scientists, via the media, may have in shaping public attitudes
for the test issue of global climate change. Using both quantitative analyses of
media coverage and experiments, this research explores how the framing of
scientific consensus or disagreement in the news affects lay citizens' opinions.
In particular, it examines how varying the depicted level of scientific
agreement, presence of political cues, and strength of scientific evidence in
media coverage affects cognitive message
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous studies have documented that the news
media routinely pair opposing expert opinions, even when overwhelming agreement
about a problem exists in the scientific community. How citizens react to this
conflicting information is relatively unexamined and thus poorly understood.
This research will investigate how citizens make sense of scientific
disagreement in the news, while also expanding the literature on elite influence
to more fully include scientists. The central prediction is that scientific
disagreement may actually discourage citizens from thinking carefully about
scientific evidence, leading them to use content cues as shortcuts to determine
their opinions about issues.