* 0409498
* Collaborative Research: Deformation and stress modeling of the 2001 Kokoxili earthquake, western China
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Yuehua Zeng, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2005
* USD 42,469.00

This is a collaborative project between US and Chinese scientists to study the
deformation process of the November 14, 2001 MW 7.8 Kokoxili earthquake in
western China. Large earthquakes provide a unique opportunity to learn about the
rheology of fault zones and the crust and mantle. The stress changes that result
from large earthquakes trigger a variety of processes in the fault zone and
surrounding material that in turn relax the stress over time. The time
dependence of these processes is related directly to the stress evolution in the
fault zone and the material properties. Previous studies have debated which
mechanism dominates the postseismic deformation: afterslip on the fault plane,
particularly in the transition depth between the brittle and ductile layers, or
visco-elastic relaxation in the lower crust and upper mantle. GPS data have been
collected before and after the earthquake. The initial postseismic result shows
rather unique deformation features, such as strong asymmetry across the Kunlun
fault, fast temporal and slow spatial decaying rate, which can be directly
modeled to differentiate the two deformation mechanisms mentioned above.
Preliminary model result shows that it requires a combination of the two
mechanisms to explain the data. Detailed studies require a multi-disciplinary
approach to solve for the coseismic rupture that drives the postseismic
deformation. They also require advanced modeling methods and programs to
properly model the stress evolution and deformation in the crust and upper
mantle with complex rheology. In this project a boundary element code is
developed as the inversion tool. GPS, InSAR, geological, and seismological data
are analyzed and inverted for both the source and structure, to better
understand the rheology of the fault zone and the crust and mantle in north
Tibet. A comparative study is performed between the Kokoxili earthquake and the
November 3, 2002 MW 7.9 Denali fault earthquake in Alaska. Similarities in the
earthquake sizes and faulting mechanisms and differences in the Earth structures
shed light on the seismogenic processes for both earthquakes, and the rheologies
of Tibet and Alaska. This study also helps solve a decades long debate about
secular deformation of the Tibetan plateau: Is the deformation from the
collision with India broadly distributed or block-like. Much of the debate has
been focused on the fault slip rates along major strike slip faults and the
rheology of the fault and surrounding crust and mantle. Comparison between the
pre-quake and post-quake slip rates helps better understand the stress/strain
evolution and fault slip rate change over an earthquake cycle. Knowledge of
fault zone rheology also helps, because a weak fault zone surrounded by strong
ambient crust usually deforms in a block-like manner, while a highly ductile
lower crust tends to result in broadly distributed deformation.

