* 0409279
* Predicting Physical Properties of Fluid-Containing Rocks from Percolation Model Results
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Herbert Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2007
* USD 50,000.00

0409279 Wang The physics of displacement of water by an invading liquid or gas
is an important geologic and engineering process. Examples include the migration
of oil or gas into brine-saturated rock or remediation of contaminated aquifers
by injection of air. The distribution of the invading fluid can include
intricate fingering due to the inherent randomness of the pore structure and its
influence on capillary forces. A successful method to simulate the invading air
is through a pore-scale, modified invasion percolation model in which the rock's
void space is represented by a statistical distribution of pore and throat
sizes. Each pore is connected to several throats. The throat on the air-water
interface that is invaded is the one at which the driving potential summing
gravity, capillary, and viscous forces is greatest. The scientific goal of this
project is to connect the distribution of the fluid phases obtained from the
percolation model to predict the elastic and electrical properties of the bulk
rock formation. The innovation proposed is to use a process-based quantification
of fluid saturation at the pore scale as the basis for predicting physical
properties that are extremely sensitive to the fluid distribution. These
predictions are important for inferring the fluid saturations from geophysical
measurements. The working hypothesis is that the size distribution of the
defending water clusters is critical to the bulk elastic behavior. Small,
isolated water clusters behave in an elastically soft manner because the water
is able to flow into nearby air-filled voids. New laboratory measurements of
elastic wave velocities during evaporative drying are proposed. They and recent
electrical resistivity measurements during evaporative drying conducted at
Louisiana State University will be used to calibrate and test the modeling
process. Broader Impacts This research is expected have applications in
exploring hydrocarbon reservoirs and in monitoring remediation of contaminated
aquifers. This research will provide key rock laboratory measurements and
modeling tools to simulate the displacement of water by air or gas and then
predict the changes in geophysical properties. New data collected on changes of
elastic wave velocities during evaporative drying will be useful to other
researchers testing their models. The research results will be disseminated
through publications and oral presentations. The computer codes that will be
developed as part of the research will be useful to researchers in industry and
will be made available on the internet.