* 0409194
* Paleoanthropological Investigation of the Pestera cu Oase, Romania
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Erik Trinkaus, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 51,635.00

Recent anthropological research has documented that modern humans emerged in
sub-Saharan Africa prior to 100,000 years ago, and then after 50,000 years ago
spread into Eurasia and the remainder of Africa. They spread across Europe
between 37,000 and 30,000 years ago, during which time they encountered and
variably absorbed populations of European Neandertals. However, the human fossil
evidence for those earliest modern Europeans has been scarce and postdates
32,000 years ago. In the context of this, the 2002 and 2003 discoveries of early
modern human fossils in the Pestera cu Oase in southwestern Romania, directly
dated to about 35,000 years ago, provide novel evidence for understanding the
biology and behavior of these earliest modern Europeans. The research at the
Pestera cu Oase will consist of the detailed geological, paleontological,
chronological and archeological documentation of the contents of the cave, which
served primarily as a hibernation cave for Pleistocene cave bear and contains
the fossil remains of cave bear, humans, and a variety of other mammals. From
this, in addition to the recovery of additional human fossils, the research will
answer questions about how the humans came to be in the cave, what their
relationships were with the hibernating bears, and the extent to which they used
the cave as a ritual and mortuary locality. It will document the biology of
these earliest modern Europeans, who, on the basis of the material found so far,
differ significantly from living humans. Moreover, ongoing study of these
fossils relates directly to questions regarding the biological nature of the
earliest modern humans and why, after two million years of successful
adaptations, archaic humans (like the Neandertals) were replaced by modern
humans in a relatively short period of time.

Romania is in the process of emerging scientifically and economically to
participate in the larger European and global community. The international
collaborative research at the Pestera cu Oase will promote this in several ways.
It will foster scientific exchanges between Romanian, American and other
European scholars. It will involve field and laboratory training of Romanian
doctoral students, who do not have the resources to otherwise train outside of
Romania. It will enhance the scientific infrastructure of laboratories of the
Romanian Academy and Universitatea Babes-Bolyai in Cluj-Napoca, through
collaboration and providing needed equipment and supplies. It will help to
conserve the valuable, and irreplaceable, cave environments of the abundant cave
systems in Romania, most of which are currently threatened by commercial
exploitation, uncontrolled tourism and pollution. It will facilitate the proper
curation and subsequent analysis of the valuable paleontological treasures of
Romania. Moveover, the initial announcement in 2003 of the Pestera cu Oase
fossils received global (and Romanian) media attention, and as such it is
helping to increase awareness in Romania and elsewhere of their natural
resources. This can only help with the process of conserving those resources and
making them appropriately available to the public. The field research at the
Pestera cu Oase will enhance all of these aspects of international
collaboration.