* 0409950
* Collaborative Research: Seismic and Geodetic Imaging of Subducting Terranes Under North America
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Douglas Christensen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2010
* USD 531,840.00

&lt;br/&gt;The collision of thickened crust with subduction zones significantly
modifies subduction. These accretion events lead to net growth of continents and
drive much of the subduction-related tectonism. Terrane collision may also have
a profound effect on the size, coupling, and rupture characteristics of large
intraplate earthquakes. The present accretion of exotic terranes with the Alaska
subduction system represents one of the few examples of this process currently
active. In this region, the collision of a region of thickened crust, the
Yakutat terrane, occurs at the largest rupture asperity known, part of the 1964
Mw9.2 Alaska earthquake. The collision produces mountains along the Alaska coast
and perhaps far inland, and may drive westward extrusion of distal parts of
Alaska. Recently, an unusual layer, perhaps thickened crust, has been imaged at
the top of the subducting plate beneath central Alaska from 70 to 150 km depth,
using receiver functions from the BEAAR PASSCAL experiment. If continuous with
the shallow structure, this would represent the largest deeply-subducted
fragment of thickened crust yet observed. Subduction of such thick crust may
help explain the size of the 1964 asperity. However, the lack of continuity
between deep and shallow structures makes it difficult to tell; have these
signals imaged the largest piece of thick subducted crust on the planet, or
something else? In any case, what is the effect of subducting terranes on
mechanics of the thrust zone?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project images the
subducted plate, upper plate, and intervening deformation in the region between
the Alaska coastline and BEAAR. Here subduction passes through and past the 1964
rupture zone. Broadband seismographs image the top of the downgoing plate
through and below the thrust zone. Integration with previous studies providse
the longest continuous transect of a subduction zone yet available, over 700 km
across strike, following a slab from the trench to coast to where last seen at
150 km depth. In parallel, a combination of geodesy and seismicity is used to
image deformation currently associated with the plate interface, where it
ruptured in the planet's second largest known earthquake. Modeling of
deformation, when integrated with the imaging, elucidates the nature of the
locked zone, the origin of the largest asperity, and the structural controls on
interplate thrust processes. These results are used to test ideas for the
origins of intermediate-depth earthquakes, by sampling at high resolution the
transition at the down-dip end of the thrust zone in seismicity, strain, and
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiment consists of a deployment of 30
broadband seismographs at dense spacing, supplemented by short-period
seismographs in places where higher-resolution seismicity would provide most
information, and GPS measurements of surface deformation across this zone.
Sparse permanent seismic and geodetic (PBO) stations provide regional control.
Many of the seismicity and GPS sites are collocated, so there are cost savings
to simultaneously conducting geodetic and seismic field work. These data, when
integrated, will provide a thorough picture of terrane accretion and its impact
on the generation of great earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;