* 0409747
* High Temperature Effects on Concrete Materials:  A Multiscale Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Yunping Xi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 06/30/2008
* USD 321,992.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on high temperature effects
related to fire safety. The project includes (a) high temperature experiments on
concrete specimens with different w/c ratio ranging from normal to high
performance (low permeability) concretes, and (b) computational simulations of
interacting mechanical and environmental degradation processes at the macro- and
meso-scales of observation. The multi-scale methodology will employ micro-
mechanics of multi-phase materials at the level of the hardened cement paste and
local-global finite element strategies to model and upscale the heterogeneous
meso-structure of concrete where aggregate particles are interacting with a
contiguous cement paste through cohesive interface elements of zero-
thickness.&lt;br/&gt;Applications will include studies of the fire resistance of
concrete specimens, which are subjected to high temperature fire scenarios and
simultaneous mechanical loading.&lt;br/&gt;A number of fundamental questions
will be addressed, starting from transitional thermal creep effects under
variable temperatures, to pore pressure- vs humidity-driven thermal shrinkage,
as well as micro-mechanical processes of composite damage considering coupling
between thermal and mechanical degradation. The numerical simulator will provide
a tool to design and optimize the constituents of concrete and to assess
vulnerability of the nation's concrete infrastructure against fire
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;The numerical simulation platform will be used as an
educational tool in a new undergraduate materials course that will be offered in
the Civil Engineering Program at the University of Colorado. The PC-based
concrete simulator will also serve as a demonstration tool for public outreach,
especially to high school teachers and K-12 students, on material awareness
taking advantage of the new Integrated Teaching and Learning Laboratory at the
University of Colorado which has received national attention because of its
novel approach to learning through discovery. The numerical concrete simulator
will be disseminated through a web site which will document the progress and
outcome of model-based material simulation software for concrete and particulate
composites in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;