* 0409658
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2004
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Lorraine Cavanaugh, Cavanaugh               Lorraine       F
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2007
* USD 170,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2004.
The goal of the fellowship is to increase the participation of minority
scientists at the postdoctoral level and to prepare them for positions of
scientific leadership in academia and industry. To attain this goal, the
fellowship provides opportunities for postdoctoral training and research of the
highest quality to recent doctoral recipients. It is expected that Fellows
supported through these fellowships will play important roles in training of the
future workforce.

The research and training plan is entitled "An NMR system to study
conformational communication in SecA, the enzymatic motor subunit of a complex
protein translocation machine." Bacteria use the Sec translocation machinery to
move proteins into and across the cell membrane. Nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy is a technique that allows one to visualize how different parts of
molecules move relative to one another. The goal is to use NMR spectroscopy to
examine how motor (SecA) movements result in protein movement through membranes.

The training goals are to broaden skills in structural biology, learn
enzymology, and improve interpersonal and project management skills; all are
essential for achieving the professional goal to establish a research and
teaching program at an academic institution that serves minorities.