* 0409367
* Patterns of lemur reproductive and behavioral development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Christine Drea, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean E. Turnquist
* 06/30/2008
* USD 337,709.00

Traditionally, androgens have been linked with male development and estrogens
with female development; yet, both classes of steroids are functionally
significant in both sexes, with dramatic implications for sexual
differentiation, reproductive development, and social behavior. In contrast to
studies on the role of estrogens in males, the role of androgens in vertebrate
females generally has been overlooked. A notable exception involves a series of
studies examining androgen function in the female spotted hyena (Crocuta
crocuta) - research that has challenged our assumptions of traditional sex roles
and revealed a set of previously unknown mechanisms of hormonal regulation in
females. Using the hyena as a predictive model, the specific aim here will be to
address basic mechanisms of biobehavioral development in the ringtailed lemur
(Lemur catta), an endangered prosimian primate endemic to Madagascar. The
selection of L. catta as the subject of this proposal is based on the existence
of a set of male-like characteristics in the female, including exaggerated or
'masculinized' external genitalia, size monomorphism with the male, and
aggressively mediated social dominance over males. The proposed research will
compare females against males to (1) fully characterize the suite of male-like
traits in the female, (2) examine the hormonal correlates and developmental
processes of those traits, and (3) explore the social factors influencing the
behavioral expression of sex differences, particularly during aggression, play,
and scent marking. As a nontraditional animal model, the ringtailed lemur
presents an invaluable opportunity to examine current theories of sexual
differentiation, to explore the role of androgens in mediating female aggressive
behavior, and to elucidate the biological mechanism associated with the
evolution of a female-driven social system in primates. The results of this
research are likely to raise provocative questions about the traditional focus
on male-driven mechanisms at the expense of considering female social and
reproductive control. The findings may also suggest a broader role for androgens
in female mammals and may ultimately contribute to reformulating the theory of
sexual differentiation to better reflect active processes in feminine
development.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project will be attained
primarily through a strong commitment to undergraduate and graduate training.
Through hands-on research participation that fosters new collaborations and
interdepartmental partnerships, this project will provide a venue for
encouraging under-represented groups, particularly women, to pursue careers in
science. By sharing information with the Duke University Primate Center's on-
site educational program, that targets universities, primary schools, and the
general public, this project will contribute to the mission of enhancing
education and raising public awareness about lemurs. Moreover, any knowledge
gained on lemur reproduction could ultimately benefit species conservation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;