* 0409001
* Integration of Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry into the Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* George Bailey, Saint Ambrose University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 31,068.00

Chemistry (12) Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) is becoming the
definitive tool in the research and commercial analytical laboratory. To better
prepare its students for graduate school and professional employment, St.
Ambrose University is incorporating the use of GC-MS throughout the chemistry
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The project is adapting
experiments from the educational literature, primarily from the Journal of
Chemical Education, and is integrating those experiments into general chemistry
and organic chemistry, and into advanced courses such as instrumental analysis
and biochemistry. Through the use of GC-MS, students are learning to separate
complex mixtures and identify their components. They are learning sampling
techniques, use of external/internal standards, and single ion monitoring for
rapid and reliable analysis. They are challenged to apply GC-MS to solve a
variety of chemical problems, some investigating and reinforcing basic chemical
principles, and others that provide very practical applications. This project
also offers opportunity for the chemistry faculty to adapt experiments from the
research literature in order to develop new GC-MS experiments in areas such as
forensics, organic chemistry and physical chemistry. Results of these activities
will be disseminated widely. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This project
impacts underrepresented groups since the majority of our students are women,
and we rank in the upper quarter among Iowa four-year colleges and universities
in our percentage of minority students. GC-MS experience is especially enhancing
the training of majors in environmental science and in criminalistics who will
assume positions as laboratory chemists after graduation. The work of such
chemists is often of critical importance to society, and it is essential that
their conclusions be accurate. Careful training early in students' professional
education with instrumentation they will routinely use is essential to assuring
their competency. &lt;br/&gt;