* 0409084
* Thermomechanical Instabilities in M-Lattices with Application to Shape Memory Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Nicolas Triantafyllidis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Glaucio H. Paulino
* 12/31/2008
* USD 349,998.00

THERMOMECHANICAL INSTABILITIES IN M-LATTICES&lt;br/&gt;WITH APPLICATIONS TO
SHAPE MEMORY ALLOYS&lt;br/&gt;Nicolas Triantafyllidis and John A.
Shaw&lt;br/&gt;Department of Aerospace Engineering&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;1. Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys (SMAs) are
technologically important materials, because of two&lt;br/&gt;useful features:
the shape memory effect and the pseudoelastic effect. Their interesting
thermomechanical&lt;br/&gt;response makes them attractive as low frequency
robust actuators and passive devices&lt;br/&gt;for a variety of novel
applications. The thermo-mechanical behavior of SMAs is due to
displacive,&lt;br/&gt;first-order phase transformations (or martensitic
transformations), which produce complex, finescale&lt;br/&gt;microstructures.
This feature is at the heart of modeling difficulties encountered in
the&lt;br/&gt;continuum descriptions of these materials. Existing work on
continuum modeling of SMAs is&lt;br/&gt;based on finite thermoelasticity theory
and requires the use of phenomenological strain energy&lt;br/&gt;density
functions. Solutions of boundary value problems based on these functions are
successful in&lt;br/&gt;predicting many features of the experimentally observed
fine scale microstructures. This approach,&lt;br/&gt;however, leaves a host of
other problems unanswered, such as the lattice-level origin of
the&lt;br/&gt;instabilities, the number of coexisting phases and the
characteristic wavelengths of the
observed&lt;br/&gt;microstructures.&lt;br/&gt;The novel feature of the proposed
investigation is the use of atomic lattice simulations of&lt;br/&gt;SMAs, and in
particular for NiTi, the most technologically promising material in its class.
Our goal&lt;br/&gt;is to generate realistic energy densities and to simulate and
understand the stability phenomena at&lt;br/&gt;the nanometer scale.
Specifically, we intend to find all equilibrium phases for temperature and
stress&lt;br/&gt;and their corresponding microstructures (twinning and crystal
interfaces) and study their stability&lt;br/&gt;with the ultimate objective to
bridge the scales between the nano-(lattice) phenomena and
micro-&lt;br/&gt;(single crystal) behavior. Besides advancing a fundamental
understanding of SMAs at the nanoscale,&lt;br/&gt;the work has the potential to
help answer why certain intermetallic alloys exhibit shape&lt;br/&gt;memory
phenomena and other do not, and this work could eventually be used to guide the
search&lt;br/&gt;for new SMAs.&lt;br/&gt;The research team consists of two
investigators, Professors Nicolas Triantafyllidis and John&lt;br/&gt;Shaw, who
bring complementary expertise to the project. The requested funds will fund
one&lt;br/&gt;doctoral student over a period of three years plus a one year
post-doctoral appointment for Mr.&lt;br/&gt;Ryan Elliott, who is working with
the PI's on this area. Collaboration with the Theoretical
Physics&lt;br/&gt;group of Los Alamos National Labs is underway through hosting
of the graduate students during&lt;br/&gt;the summers. Results of this research
will be used in a new graduate level, cross-disciplinary course&lt;br/&gt;on
atomistic modeling in solid mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the proposed
work: This work fits well within the current nanomechanics&lt;br/&gt;initiative
at NSF, since it pertains to the study of underlying lattice stability
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;of m-crystals from atomistic considerations. Understanding
these phenomena will eventually be&lt;br/&gt;useful in the conception of novel
materials with shape memory effects. The proposed work not
only&lt;br/&gt;addresses a fundamental problem in mechanics, but it also
requires input from other disciplines, i.e.&lt;br/&gt;condensed matter physics
and applied mathematics. The existing collaboration with Los
Alamos&lt;br/&gt;National Labs provides a natural framework for the interaction
with these disciplines and for the&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of the knowledge to
be created.