* 0409364
* Diffusional Constraints Affecting Microbial Distribution and Activity in Unsaturated Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Thomas Torgersen, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2009
* USD 329,575.00

0409364&lt;br/&gt;OR&lt;br/&gt;Despite remarkable progress in modeling of
physical processes in unsaturated porous media, the role of microbial processes
affecting media properties and regulating fluxes of biogenic and anthropogenic
contaminants has largely been ignored by hydrologists. Advances in pore-scale
characterization of fluid behavior in unsaturated porous media, and concurrent
advances in experimental methods to study microbial behavior at individual cell
resolution in situ, offer new opportunities for mechanistic studies of microbial
abundance and activity in natural environments. Variations in liquid
organization during desaturation of porous media result in confinement and
fragmentation of aquatic habitats and alter substrate and gaseous diffusion
pathways. These abiotic changes trigger an array of biological responses
including enhanced production of extracellular polymeric substances postulated
to serve as a protective matrix for embedded bacterial cells. A reduction in
contiguous aquatic pathways limits microbial mobility, reduces substrate
diffusion, enhances gaseous exchange with atmosphere, and contributes to the
high degree of soil microbial diversity observed in unsaturated soils. It has
been estimated that globally, the soil contains approximately 2.6 1029
prokaryotic cells (compared to 1.2 1029 in all oceans) concentrated in a
relatively small volume on the earth skin making the vadose zone the richest
compartment of prokaryal life on earth [Whitman et al., 1998]. Observations in
natural habitats have established that bacteria exist primarily attached to
solid surfaces as part of colonies or biofilm structures and are not planktonic.
In contrast to the wealth of structural, physiological, and genetic details on
microbial biofilms in saturated aquatic systems, very little is known on spatial
structure and properties of biofilms in unsaturated soils, primarily due to the
absence of well-authenticated model systems and of suitable observational
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;We propose a conceptual framework supported by
experiments for quantifying the impact of wetting-drying cycles on microbial
activity in unsaturated porous media. An experimental 2-D porous surface model
(PSM) containing prescribed geometrical features will serve as observable and
tractable analogue of natural 3-D pore spaces. The PSM builds on recent modeling
and experimental results regarding liquid behavior in angular pores and on rough
surfaces. We plan a series of experiments to manipulate diffusional conditions
within the PSM and apply modern microbiological methods to observe, analyze and
quantify microbial response. Pseudomonas putida strains KT2440 and PaW85,
expressing genes encoding fluorescent proteins under control of constitutive
promoters will serve as model bacteria. Microscale estimates of microbial
distribution, activity, and structural features will be revealed and quantified
via confocal scanning laser microscopy. The proposed porous surface model
enables testing of the roles of rough vs. smooth surfaces as microhabitats under
variable wetting-drying conditions. It further allows control of the geometry
and rate of nutrient supply ranging from point, to line, and planar sources; and
provides direct observability of biological activity on well-defined porous
surfaces. The proposed research will contribute to (1) elucidation of pore-scale
interactions between diffusion processes and microbial activity, distribution,
and coexistence; (2) development of new experimental methods to study biological
processes in the vadose zone; (3) improved understanding of microbial response
to environmental cycles; and (4) provide new insights into the origins of the
unparalleled biodiversity found in soils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Refinements
in Response to Key 5ers Suggestions:&lt;br/&gt;Since the submission of the
proposal we have improved our understanding of some of the factors discussed in
the proposal, yielding a considerably improved modeling framework and more
"mature" experimental setups. &lt;br/&gt;1. Assess potential problems with the
use of glass plates - the proposed unsaturated "Petri dish"&lt;br/&gt;is
designed around porous ceramics such as Kaolinite, hence closely resembling the
makeup of soil mineral surfaces. Issues of microbial adhesion and potential for
stripping of microbial colonies from glass plates will be addressed by
implementing rigorous experimental protocols for surface pre-treatment and
retrieval procedures. The examination of different mineral surfaces is beyond
the scope of the proposed research. Moreover, we believe that EPS plays a key
role in modifying most primary surfaces for microbial adhesion and function. In
other words, the role of EPS as a sticky anchoring and shielding substrate
limits direct contact between microbes and mineral surfaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Treatment the bacterial cells and colonies as
additional roughness and extend the coverage - We plan to explicitly consider
the role of EPS in modifying micro-hydrology and micro-habitats, because
bacteria must have an inevitable reliance on biopolymers to extend hydrated
states beyond those supported by pore sizes and roughness. This inclusion will
require a special effort towards hydraulic characterization of EPS properties
and extension of the conceptual model to consider EPS role on soil and rock pore
space.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3. Give more attention to the role of pore space
patterns on microbial growth - the role of pore space patterns on microbial
growth and shaping of diffusion pathways will be expanded and tested numerically
as well as experimentally. We believe the intricate geometry plays a critical
role in supporting coexistence of microbial species that would not coexist under
homogeneous conditions (Dens, E. J., and Van Impe, J. F., 2000. On the
importance of taking space into account when modeling microbial competition in
structured food products. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 53,
443-448).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Pursue insights into physical properties
affecting microbial diversity in natural environments - we plan to pursue this
point as stated in items #3 above. We have conducted preliminary numerical
experiments that demonstrate that heterogeneity of diffusional pathways shields
less competitive microbial species and may, in part, explain the unparalleled
microbial diversity found in soils. Curtis et al.(2002) estimate prokaryotic
diversity at different scales by using the total number of individuals in the
community as well as the abundance of the most thriving member. They estimate
between 6000 and 38000 different coexisting species in a gram of soil. In the
proposed research we will attempt to develop estimates of the numbers of
different micro-niches carved out by spatial limitations to diffusion and
mobility, heterogeneity and distribution of substrates, and temporal variations
in external conditions (water content, temperature). These are likely to provide
lower bounds on diversity estimates because they will not consider synergistic
microbial associations and manipulation and local modifications of micro-
environments through targeted EPS production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Plan
ahead to face the many difficulties in excluding unwanted bacteria - Although
the PSM models will be subject to repeated microscopic inspections, external
contamination will be minimized by setting up the entire assembly (PSM, pumps,
liquids, and microscope) in a laminar flow bench (which will provide positive
displacement of HEPA-filtered air and minimize ambient air intrusion). Further,
external contamination can be checked by staining the PSM with a generic
cytological stain (e.g., SYTO-9, DAPI) to detect unwanted bacteria. Finally,
both test strains (KT2440 and PaW85 carry antibiotic resistances as part of
their chromosomal biomarker modules, enabling us to supplement feed media to
further prevent external contamination of the PSMs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;