* 0409326
* Realt-Time Spatial Information Acquisition and Use for Infrastructure Construction and Maintenance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Carlos Caldas, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2008
* USD 364,682.00

CMS-0409326: Real-Time Spatial Information Acquisition and Use for
Infrastructure Construction and Maintenance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods for spatial
information acquisition and modeling rely on expensive laser range scanners that
produce dense point clouds which require hours or days of post-processing to
arrive at a finished model. While these methods produce very detailed 3D models
of the scanned scene, the associated computational time burden precludes these
methods from being used onsite for real-time decision-making. A rapid modeling
approach for modeling local scenes for construction equipment operations,
developed by the investigators with previous NSF support, presents significant
advantages over full range scanning that require computationally intensive image
processing. This approach provided a foundation for the development of the
proposed novel methods of acquiring, integrating, modeling, and analyzing
project site spatial data, including dynamic site information (motion of
personnel and equipment), that allow scalability and robustness for real-time
field deployment. These methods will enable complete local area modeling in the
order of seconds, and with sufficient accuracy for applications such as real-
time safety monitoring and advanced equipment control. The development of a
real-time obstacle avoidance system using rapidly generated site models is also
proposed, as well as an experimental plan with real infrastructure operation
sites and equipment, to validate the proposed site data acquisition and obstacle
avoidance methods. It is expected that the proposed approach will result in
significant equipment safety improvements while at the same time lessening the
need for skilled workers to operate heavy equipment in a wide range of site
working conditions. Initial experimental work has demonstrated the feasibility
of this approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The construction industry accounts for a
large percentage of workforce fatalities in the United States. An Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) study of on-the-job fatalities in the
construction industry in the U.S. has shown that over 50% of the accidents
stemmed largely from operation of heavy equipment. One of the major causes of
these accidents is the lack of safety features installed on heavy equipment that
is currently in use. Great potential exists in making heavy equipment safer and
more efficient by developing a system that would integrate effective acquisition
and handling of externally sensed site spatial information in real-time. With
the internal sensors and computing power available commercially now to retrofit
equipment, such systems are technically and economically feasible. The aim of
the proposed research is therefore to develop methods and technologies that
would allow an operator to operate equipment more safely and at higher speeds in
cluttered environments, even in situations where visibility is poor as in
underground work. The technologies proposed by the research team would assist in
minimizing the impact of key types of human error and will have the potential to
radically improve safety and efficiency of infrastructure operations that
involve heavy equipment.&lt;br/&gt;