* 0409756
* Krypton Isotope Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Neil Sturchio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 06/30/2007
* USD 197,399.00

0409756&lt;br/&gt;Sturchio&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The age of groundwater is one of
the most elusive geologic parameters to quantify, despite its&lt;br/&gt;crucial
significance for water resources, waste management, subsurface reactive
transport, and&lt;br/&gt;paleoclimate studies. It has long been recognized that
81 Kr is a nearly ideal tracer for&lt;br/&gt;determining residence times of old
groundwater in the 5 10 4 10 6 year range, yet because of its&lt;br/&gt;low
abundance ( 81 Kr/Kr 10 -12 ) it has been nearly impossible to measure. However,
a new&lt;br/&gt;technique for measurement of 81 Kr/Kr ratios in small quantities
of Kr (as little as 50 micromoles)&lt;br/&gt;was recently reported (Atom-Trap
Trace Analysis, or ATTA; Chen et al., 1999; Du et al., 2003),&lt;br/&gt;and its
application to old groundwater was demonstrated successfully by the PI and
colleagues in&lt;br/&gt;their NSF-funded study of the Nubian Aquifer, Egypt
(Sturchio et al., 2003). That study&lt;br/&gt;established the feasibility of
using the ATTA technique for routine 81 Kr/Kr measurement
in&lt;br/&gt;hydrologic investigations of systems having long groundwater
residence times. The ATTA&lt;br/&gt;technique, which can also be used for
measuring 85 Kr/Kr, is thus an ideal tool with which to&lt;br/&gt;address a
range of fundamental questions in hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests
support for a graduate student to work with the PI and colleagues&lt;br/&gt;(Z.
T. Lu's group at Argonne National Laboratory) in developing further applications
of the trace&lt;br/&gt;Kr isotopes ( 81 Kr and 85 Kr) in hydrologic
investigations. The intellectal merit of this research is&lt;br/&gt;that it will
lead to an enhanced understanding of the water cycle within the Earth's
crust.&lt;br/&gt;Specific investigations that we propose are: (1) to determine
the residence time of saline&lt;br/&gt;groundwaters in the central U.S.A., which
on the basis of stable isotope data are believed to have&lt;br/&gt;traveled more
than 1,000 km from a recharge area in the Rocky Mountains (Musgrove
and&lt;br/&gt;Banner, 1993), and which should therefore have a residence time on
the order of 10 6 years; (2) to&lt;br/&gt;constrain the residence time of
hydrothermal waters at Yellowstone National Park, for which&lt;br/&gt;little
information is available (Pearson and Truesdell, 1978); (3) to determine the
residence time&lt;br/&gt;of groundwater in the Milk River aquifer of southern
Alberta, which was the subject of an earlier&lt;br/&gt;multi-tracer study
sponsored by the IAEA that was focused on dating very old
groundwater&lt;br/&gt;(Ivanovich, Frohlich, and Hendry, 1991); and to
investigate residence times of young (&lt;50 yr)&lt;br/&gt;groundwaters where
other tracers such as tritium-helium and CFC's do not provide
coherent&lt;br/&gt;results. These investigations are representative of the broad
range of potential applications of&lt;br/&gt;trace Kr isotopes in groundwater
hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed research is that it will
provide opportunities for&lt;br/&gt;research, training, and education at the
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), which has the&lt;br/&gt;nation's fifth
most diverse student population; it will establish enhanced local Chicago-
area&lt;br/&gt;partnership for routine application of trace Kr isotopes in
hydrology, because the Kr separations&lt;br/&gt;will henceforth be performed in
a laboratory at UIC (rather than in Switzerland as in the
previous&lt;br/&gt;NSF-funded study) with ATTA measurements performed nearby at
Argonne National&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory; it will help establish the new
subdiscipline of Kr isotope hydrology, which may have&lt;br/&gt;significant
impact on hydrologic investigations and water resources management worldwide.