* 0409117
* Collaborative Research: Dendrochronological, Volcanological, and Archeological Study of Cinder Cone Eruptions of Paricutin and Sunset Crater
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Michael Ort, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2007
* USD 59,530.00

Understanding the full range of interactions between human groups and volcanic
eruptions is of great importance for predicting volcanic hazards, but also for
insights into human behavior and the ways in which populations adapt to
catastrophic events. Most accounts of human/volcano interaction are confined to
the past few hundred years, limiting the number of cases and the formulation of
predictive models. In this multidisciplinary study, dendrochronological and
geochemical analysis of tree-rings will be used to date prehistoric and
unrecorded historic period eruptions with a high degree of both accuracy and
precision. Dates derived from these methods can then be combined with the
archaeological record or historic documentation to investigate and model the
ways in which human groups interact with volcano eruptions.
&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary geochemical data from trees affected by the 1943-1952 CE
eruption of Paricutin, Michoacan, Mexico, show changes in phosphorus, calcium,
and strontium concentrations during the eruption. Some of these same signatures
show up in the wood from prehistoric structures in the vicinity of Sunset Crater
Volcano (~1050-1100 CE) in northern Arizona. This project will increase the
sample size and verify the results before applying them in other volcanological
settings and to re-interpret prehistoric adaptations to the Sunset Crater
eruption. &lt;br/&gt;This project involves collaborators from three different
scientific disciplines and institutions to accomplish multidisciplinary research
that will improve understanding of forest ecosystems and human responses to
eruptions. An increased understanding of human-volcano interactions may
eventually allow for better management of populations affected by eruptions,
potentially saving lives and property. The research will also be used in
curriculum for a statewide academic competition for high school students,
undergraduate and graduate level courses at the University of Arizona and
Northern Arizona University, and a UA program, "Students Across Borders," which
helps minority students participate in geosciences research. Scientific
presentations and articles will occur in geosciences and archaeology. Results
from this research will also be incorporated into new exhibits at the Sunset
Crater and Wupatki National Monuments. &lt;br/&gt;