* 0409832
* GOALI:     Software Enabled Variable Displacment Hydraulic Pumps
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Perry Li, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 08/31/2008
* USD 343,816.00

Software Enabled Variable Displacement Pumps&lt;br/&gt;Perry Y. Li and Tom
Chase&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydraulics that
plays an important role in many industry sectors. The distinct advantage of
hydraulics is its ability to deliver high forces, higher power in small
packages. As the industry matures, new ways to exploit these advantages must be
developed to remain competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a
mechatronics approach is proposed to redesign variable displacement pumps.
Current variable displacement pumps are relatively large and their dynamic
responses are low. Compact and high performance variable displacement pumps can
significantly improve energy efficiency and address new applications. By
combining a compact fixed displacement pump with a high speed pulse width
modulated (PWM) on/off valve, a highly controllable, compact variable
displacement pump capable of achieving many new software enabled feature will be
possible. These features can be used to improve many aspects of system
efficiency and performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, two key
obstacles will be addressed. 1) A high speed on/off PWM valve will be developed;
2) A modeling and control design framework for PWM controlled systems will be
developed. In addition, various software enabled features will be demonstrated
experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve the power and
force density of hydraulic pumps, and the energy efficiency of the use of
hydraulics in general. By making available hydraulic power supplies that are
compact, it will be possible to capture new markets and to inspire new
applications, such as hydraulic personal robots, rescue tools, hydraulic power
trains, etc. The proposed idea can be readily extended to the design of variable
displacement motors, and variable hydraulic transformers. The high flow high
speed PWM on/off valve that will be developed in this research will also be
useful for many other hydraulic control applications. A rigorous theoretical
framework will also be developed for the modeling and design of finite frequency
PWM controlled systems. Advances in this area will impact many areas of motion
control since PWM is widely used, but yet, rigorous understanding is still
lacking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will impact the
curricula of various controls and fluid power courses. The graduate students
will participate in interdisciplinary research, with close interaction with
industry through regular consultation and summer internship. Undergraduate
students will be involved in this research through participation in experiments
and design projects. Through regular meetings, this project will foster strong
relationships between the local fluid power industry and the university. In
addition, exchanges with a local power electronics research group will also be
established.&lt;br/&gt;