* 0409705
* Implementation of SCEC Research for Seismic Risk Reduction
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Thomas Jordan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 09/30/2008
* USD 821,107.00

Summary. The Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC) requests 2.6 years of
funding to support&lt;br/&gt;three tasks that will translate SCEC's basic-
research accomplishments into products for direct use in&lt;br/&gt;earthquake
risk reduction. All of the tasks involve collaborations with earthquake
engineers and other&lt;br/&gt;end-user communities coordinated through SCEC's
new Implementation Interface. A SCEC Product&lt;br/&gt;Review Panel, comprising
representatives from the USGS, CGS, and end-user organizations, will be
set&lt;br/&gt;up to ensure that SCEC activities are coordinated with the USGS
and CGS hazard programs and that&lt;br/&gt;products are appropriately described,
documented, and disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;Task 1: Produce ground-motion time
histories for use in performance-based earthquake engineering&lt;br/&gt;(PBEE).
Ground-motion time histories are necessary input into testing facilities and
computer-based&lt;br/&gt;dynamic analysis of structures that engineers will use
to develop PBEE. Simulated broadband time&lt;br/&gt;histories are needed to
augment the limited set of recorded time histories close to large
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;Under this task, we will use tested codes to produce a
extensive database of simulated time histories&lt;br/&gt;parameterized by
magnitude, distance, and soil conditions. The database will facilitate
geoscience&lt;br/&gt;applications by the NEES Consortium and the three NSF
Earthquake Engineering Research Centers, and&lt;br/&gt;it will augment the
Design Ground Motion Library Project, sponsored by the California Strong
Motion&lt;br/&gt;Instrumentation Project and by the PEER-Lifelines (PEER-LL)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;Task 2: Participate in Next Generation Attenuation (NGA)
Project. The Next Generation Attenuation&lt;br/&gt;(NGA) Project, co-sponsored
by SCEC, PEER-Lifelines and the USGS, will develop a new suite
of&lt;br/&gt;ground-motion attenuation models for shallow crustal earthquakes.
SCEC is already committed to the&lt;br/&gt;current phase, NGA-E (Empirical),
which aims to update attenuation relationships derived from
recorded&lt;br/&gt;strong motion data. This proposal requests support for SCEC's
role in the next two phases, NGA-H&lt;br/&gt;(Hybrid), which will incorporate
both simulated and recorded ground motions, and NGA-F, which
will&lt;br/&gt;develop a tectonic-displacement model. NGA products will fulfill
a clearly stated need of Caltrans, the&lt;br/&gt;California Energy Commission,
and PG&amp;E, and of earthquake engineering practice at large.&lt;br/&gt;Task 3:
Produce Ground-Motion and Structural Simulations for Scenario Earthquakes in Los
Angeles.&lt;br/&gt;Recent SCEC research has quantified major potential
earthquakes on the Puente Hills blind thrust system.&lt;br/&gt;Task 3 will
utilize this information to construct realistic scenarios for broadband ground
motions from the&lt;br/&gt;PHT and other hazardous sources in the LA region, and
it will engage earthquake engineers in assessing&lt;br/&gt;the implications. A
pilot study employing J. Hall's nonlinear structural simulation code will
be&lt;br/&gt;undertaken to quantify the effects of a Puente Hills earthquake on
buildings in downtown Los Angeles&lt;br/&gt;and use the results to evaluate
current code provisions.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Reducing earthquake risk
is a prime example of a system-level problem requiring&lt;br/&gt;broad
interdisciplinary collaboration and attention to emergent phenomena. The
proposed program will&lt;br/&gt;address the issues of earthquake risk reduction
from this system-level perspective, and it will advance
the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental understanding of the relationship between earthquake
source physics and resulting ground&lt;br/&gt;motions -- a major goal of the
SCEC research program.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed program will
apply SCEC basic research to guide the development of&lt;br/&gt;the new ground-
motion prediction models and ground-motion time histories used by researchers
and&lt;br/&gt;practitioners of earthquake engineering and risk assessment.
Through the close coordination with NSFsponsored&lt;br/&gt;earthquake
engineering activities (see attached letters), this project can be expected to
have a&lt;br/&gt;nationwide impact on how basic geoscience is utilized to reduce
seismic risk.