* 0409955
* Seismic Study of Deep Eclogitic-Granulitic Crust and Moho in the Bergen Arcs, Norway
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Scott Smithson, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 191,318.00

This study involves seismic imaging of eclogite at one of the world's classic
localities. Eclogite is a unique rock type because of its physical properties
such as high density, which is a response to abnormally high pressure. Eclogite
is related to processes of mountain building and associated subduction. Yet we
know little about the subsurface distribution of eclogites. The classic eclogite
localities that we study are in the Bergen Arcs of western Norway where
eclogitization is related to fluid flow along fault zones and regionally in the
associated gneisses. The eclogites are formed at such high pressures that they
correspond to a depth of up to 100 km. Another presumed role of eclogites is as
a trigger for recycling of crustal material back down into the mantle because of
their high density. What is the nature of continental crust and crust-mantle
boundary beneath an eclogite terrane, where do the eclogites come from and how
do they get there? What was the role of deep fluids in eclogite formation? These
are the problems that we propose to clarify. With an NSF Small Grant for
Exploratory Research, the investigators were able to utilize the University of
Bergen research vessel for a combined land-marine seismic recording experiment
to image the deep structure of the eclogite terrane. Seismic energy from marine
airguns was recorded on 16 ocean bottom seismometers and 15 seismic recorders on
land using new IRIS land seismic recorders to yield 250 km long profiles.
Because of their unique seismic characteristics, the researchers expect to image
eclogite bodies throughout the crust, deep fluid passageways that promoted
eclogitization, and faults that brought eclogites up to the surface. Results
should provide new information on mountain building and crustal formation,
specifically how crust in mountain belts over-thickens and subsequently how
deepest crust comes back up to the surface.