* 0409805
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Intergrated Isotopic Provenance Analysis: Constraining the Dynamic Linkage between Orogenic Exhumation and Basin Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* David Kimbrough, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2008
* USD 92,812.00

Marginal basins preserve a detailed record of the spatial and temporal evolution
of orogenic systems along continental margins. This investigation focuses on the
fundamental question of how the exhumation history of orogenic systems is
preserved in the ancient stratigraphic record, and with what fidelity this
history can be extracted from derivative sedimentary successions. It integrates
complementary isotopic detrital provenance techniques to constrain source area
heterogeneity, exhumation patterns and rates, sediment dispersal
characteristics, and basin subsidence mechanisms. Specifically, the study is
testing the utility of integrating multiple isotopic techniques (detrital zircon
U-Pb geochronology, whole rock Nd analyses, and detrital K-feldspar & muscovite
40Ar/39Ar thermochronology) with traditional sedimentologic analyses
(biostratigraphic, lithostratigraphic and petrologic studies) to assess the
dynamic linkage between orogenesis, basin subsidence and resultant sediment
dispersal and accumulation in continental margin arc systems. A key aspect of
this investigation is development and application of new analytical and modeling
approaches associated with 40Ar/39Ar closure age distributions of detrital
minerals. Preliminary results utilizing total fusion 40Ar/39Ar analysis of
K-feldspar from sediments derived from the northern Peninsular Ranges of
California indicate that indicate this method can provide a sensitive, high-
resolution record of deep basement exhumation. Meaningful application of the
method to batholithic source regions requires characterization of intrusion
history, necessitating detrital U-Pb zircon geochronology to provide basement
crystallization ages. Source area heterogeneity and temporal and spatial
variations in sediment dispersal and accumulation patterns are constrained using
whole rock neodymium isotopic analyses of fine-grained clastic rocks.

Two basins that share broad first-order similarities in age, provenance and
depositional setting, but have strongly constrasting syn-sedimentary crustal
exhumation records in their respective batholithic source regions are being
examined The Vizcaino basin of Baja California is exposed adjacent to the
relatively shallowly exhumed (5-10 km) Peninsular Ranges batholith where a
distinct episode of accelerated arc denudation appears to have been triggered by
large-volume batholith emplacement. The Nanaimo basin of southern British
Columbia is exposed adjacent to deeply eroded (20-30 km) magmatic arc rocks of
the Coast Plutonic Complex that were exhumed in response to a more complex
interplay of plutonism and regional deformation. Both basins have well-dated
stratigraphically coherent successions that span the exhumation events in their
respective source regions areas. This provides the necessary interpretive
framework to interpret details of basement exhumation histories recorded in the
derivative sedimentary record. Undergraduate student research collaborators are
heavily involved in all aspects of field and laboratory analyses conducted
during this investigation.

Student collaborators (n~12) are participating in stratigraphic analysis,
sedimentary petrology, geochemistry, and isotopic analysis at both the
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire and San Diego State University.