* 0409684
* RUI: Rapid Variation of the Geomagnetic Field in Reversal: Evidence from the Sheep Creek Range, North Central Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Scott Bogue, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 128,879.00

The goal of this study is to determine whether the unusual magnetism of two lava
flows in the Sheep Creek Range (north central Nevada) resulted from extremely
rapid (i.e., degrees/day) geomagnetic field change during a polarity reversal.
In both flows, rock near the flow base, magnetized relatively early as the flow
cooled, has a remanence direction similar to the lava flow directly below. Rock
from the interior of the flow, presumably the last to cool and become
magnetized, has a remanence direction much closer to the overlying flow. A
similar pattern in a lava flow from Steens Mountain (Oregon), also magnetized
during a geomagnetic polarity reversal, has been interpreted as evidence that
the field was changing as fast as several degrees per day as the flow was
cooling. Field change this rapid cannot be reconciled with commonly accepted
ideas about deep-earth properties and processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary activity of this research will be a detailed paleomagnetic and rock
magnetic study of samples to be collected on closely spaced vertical profiles
through the two flows. The goal will to be fully characterize vertical changes
in magnetization direction and inferred ancient field intensity and to determine
whether rapid field change or some remagnetization process preferentially
affecting the flow interiors can better explain the changes. The conclusion will
depend strongly on whether there exists a correlation between rock magnetic
properties and remanence direction consistent with the hypothesis of
preferential remagnetization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project are twofold. The first is to provide research opportunities to at least
5 Occidental College students over the next 3 years. Research is an integral
part of the undergraduate program at Occidental College and the centerpiece of
each student's experience as a geology major. In addition, this research will
contribute toward an understanding of what future generations might experience
in the not-to-distant future if (as some believe) the geomagnetic field is in
the early stages of a polarity reversal. Knowledge of transitional field
behavior in the geologic past can provide a rational basis for anticipating and
adapting to an environment that will be different in significant ways from the
one we live in now.