* 0409463
* Fatigue Durability and Reliability of Functionally Graded Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Sharif Rahman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2007
* USD 140,000.00

FATIGUE DURABILITY AND RELIABILITY OF FUNCTIONALLY GRADED
MATERIALS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this proposal is to develop new theoretical foundations and numerical algorithms
of physics-based stochastic methodology for predicting fatigue durability and
reliability of functionally graded materials (FGMs). The proposed effort will be
based on: (1) new level-cut Poisson random fields for stochastic modeling of
heterogeneous microstructure; (2) new, computationally efficient, level set
methods for both micro- and macro-structural fatigue durability analyses; and
(3) innovative dimension-reduction methods for second-moment and reliability
analyses of FGM subject to random loads, material properties, and geometry. From
a fundamental point of view, the project will advance a largely uncharted
research area that is concerned with physics-based, multi-scale, stochastic
methodology capturing realistic microstructural features, micro- and macro-scale
fatigue damage, and resultant cascading effects on stochastic mechanical
performance of FGM. To the best knowledge of the PI, no probabilistic models of
FGM are known to have been developed. As such, the development of the proposed
methodology constitutes a new and significant advance towards the achievement of
more realistic fatigue-durability simulation of FGMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will find many high-technology applications involving material
performance and structural integrity evaluations under super-high temperatures
and large temperature gradients. Potential applications include thermal barrier
coating in aircraft propulsion, shape memory alloys in space vehicles, high-
performance ballistic components, fast-breeder nuclear reactor pressure vessels,
microelectronic devices, bio-engineered implants, and others. Indeed, the
research proposed here will positively impact a number of areas of national
significance, such as civil and military infrastructure, advanced materials, and
information technology. The transfer and dissemination of knowledge created by
this project will take place through continued collaboration with industries,
organization of symposia on FGM reliability in ASME conferences, peer-reviewed
journal publications, presentations and publications at major conferences and
institutions, and student education. The partnership with two government and
industrial laboratories will enable sharing of important knowledge and
experimental data and implementation of the basic methods developed in this
project to resolve large-scale industrial problems. The educational goals
comprise recruitment of a Ph. D. student from underrepresented minority,
implementation of software tools from this project in upgrading courses in The
University of Iowa's principal engineering programs, and authoring a
comprehensive textbook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;