* 0409291
* Real-Time and Retrospective Analyses of Volcanic Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Clifford Thurber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2009
* USD 297,090.00

Real-Time and Retrospective Analyses of Volcanic Earthquakes

Clifford H. Thurber, University of Wisconsin-Madison EAR- 040929

This project involves a collaboration between University of Wisconsin-Madison
researchers and U.S. Geological Survey scientists at the Alaska Volcano
Observatory (AVO) and in the Volcano Disaster Assistance Program (VDAP) on
retrospective and real-time analysis of seismic data from a number of volcanoes
in Alaska and worldwide. The main scientific goals are improvement in
understanding the nature of the background and eruption-related seismicity at
these active volcanoes, the development of new or improved models of their
internal structure, and the development of an improved eruption warning and
monitoring methods. There are four main types of analysis tools that being
applied in the project: (1) waveform alignment methods, (2) event clustering and
auto-picking, (3) double-difference location and tomography, and (4) real-time
event location processing. Tools (1) and (3) are well-developed methods, whereas
the development of (2) and (4) will require additional work as part of this
project. AVO is currently responsible for the seismic monitoring of 25
volcanoes. With an eruption on average every 1 to 1.5 years and thousands of
earthquakes to analyze annually, the opportunities for valuable seismic research
are enormous. Four targets have been identified for analysis in this project:
the Katmai Group, Shishaldin, Mount Spurr, and Makushin. Each of these targets
is seismically active and has an adequate number of seismic stations to allow
detailed relocation work, and in some cases tomography as well. During the last
8 years, VDAP has been deeply involved in several major volcanic crises,
including Guagua Pichincha, Tungurahua, and Cotopaxi (Ecuador), Popocatepetl and
Colima (Mexico), Rabaul and Pago (New Guinea), Soufriere Hills (Montserrat),
Cerro Negro (Nicaragua), and Anatahan (Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas
Islands). Because VDAP operates extensively in 3rd world countries and
predominantly during crises, seismic networks must be installed or expanded
hurriedly, and generally consist of no more than four to seven 1-Hz vertical
sensors and often one 3-component station. Considerable time is generally lost
during the initial week or so trying to devise reasonable seismic velocity
models for the volcanoes owing to absence of previous work on the volcano's
structure. Events are located using P and S phase first motions picked by human
analysts. Owing to the small networks, simple first arrival picking, and
probable velocity model errors, location errors are probably several kilometers
for all axes. Automating a location scheme and integrating simple (1D) modeling
to produce a velocity model quickly would save considerable valuable time during
the critical onset of a crisis, producing locations with about an order of
magnitude greater precision in the process. Most VDAP and Alaskan volcanoes are
monitored by ~6 short period seismic stations. Earthquakes are located by
analysts' picks, and location errors are often 1-2 km. Thus VDAP and AVO share
difficulties in locating earthquakes, especially during crisis times when the
analysts cannot keep up with seismicity rates. We plan to test our system at
AVO, which uses the same Earthworm real-time processing system as VDAP, to
determine its effectiveness in a larger-scale monitoring environment. The
proposed work will build many years of experience by UW-Madison researchers on
the investigation of the seismicity and structure of active volcanoes. Accurate
earthquake locations are essential for characterizing magmatic pathways,
identifying magma migration, and for obtaining meaningful results in analyses
(such as spatial b-value studies) that rely on locations. An enhanced real-time
location system would contribute to improved eruption warning capability
directly by providing high-quality locations rapidly and indirectly by reducing
the network operator's work load, allowing for more time to evaluate the
seismicity patterns and their changes with time. Monitoring the spatio-temporal
development of earthquake families will help us understand a volcano's magma
conduit system and help identify when a volcano may shifting from a relatively
steady-state system to a more dangerous condition.