* 0409449
* Collaborative Research:     Experimental and Multi-Scale Modeling Investigation of Atomic Lattice Stick-Slip Friction
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Robert Carpick, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/2007
* USD 190,000.00

Proposal Number 0409449 &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title Collaborative Research:
Experimental and Multi-Scale Modeling Investigation of Atomic Lattice Stick-Slip
Friction &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R.W. Carpick, University of Wisconsin-
Madison&lt;br/&gt;Wing Kam Liu, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is leading to the rapid
development of materials and devices whose structure and function are controlled
at the atomic scale, and many such devices involve sliding interfaces. The
intellectual merit of this work will be to determine the fundamental causes and
effects of atomic stick-slip, which is a key feature of nanoscale sliding. We
will use atomic force microscopy with well-characterized samples and tips.
Through collaboration, experiments will be coupled to multiscale modeling that
takes into account the deformation field in the contact for the same materials
used in the experiment. We will address the key questions of commensurability,
velocity and temperature dependence, the role of the vibrational properties, and
the possibility of dramatically reducing friction by controlling stick-slip
motion. The broader educational and societal impact involves an integrated
education and outreach effort that leverages highly effective programs at each
of our institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;