* 0409071
* Nanoscale Structure and Chemistry of Minerals and Mineral Coatings
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* David Veblen, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2006
* USD 293,552.00

The proposed research applies advanced transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to
problems in mineralogy, petrology, and geochemistry. The projects encompassed by
this Accomplishment-based renewal proposal aim to understand the crystal
chemistry of minerals and their reactions at the sub nanometer scale. The grains
of many shallow sand and sandstone aquifers possess coatings that are commonly
assumed to be Fe/Al oxides and oxyhydroxides, but TEM studies show they are
predominantly amorphous and poorly crystallized silicate materials. Coatings
from a contaminated aquifer on Cape Cod will be characterized in detail;
including samples reacted with aqueous Zn solutions. Results will show which
phases are responsible for metal sorption and penetration depth into the
coating. Additional studies will assess chemical segregation on extended defects
in minerals. Analysis of c domain structures in calcian dolomite and twin
boundaries in augite will detect Ca enrichment or depletion. The sequence of
reactions during multistage replacement of actinolite by anthophyllite will be
tracked to illuminate such metamorphic reactions. &lt;br/&gt;Renewed NSF support
will continue to make important contributions to education and advanced
instrumentation infrastructure at Johns Hopkins. It will also produce new
understanding of molecular-scale processes in minerals. Society will benefit
from the research through improvements in modeling toxic metals in coated-sand
aquifers, potentially affecting the quality of water we drink and use in
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;