* 0409297
* Analysis, Algorithms and Computations for Model Problems in Physical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Qiang Du, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 148,923.00

The proposed project is concerned with the development,&lt;br/&gt;analysis and
applications of numerical simulation tools&lt;br/&gt;to a number of problems in
computational sciences,&lt;br/&gt;in particular, in computational physics and
computational&lt;br/&gt;material sciences. It is a continuation of PI's past
research &lt;br/&gt;work in this area that has contributed to the modeling,
analysis, &lt;br/&gt;and computation of various problems in
superconductivity,&lt;br/&gt;Bose-Einstein condensation, and phase transitions
in binary and &lt;br/&gt;multicomponent alloys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
proposed work, while building upon the past progress,&lt;br/&gt;the PI will take
on new initiatives in the study of some interesting &lt;br/&gt;physical problems
at various time and spatial scales&lt;br/&gt;and in the design of new algorithms
and efficient&lt;br/&gt;solvers which can then be used to understand
experimental phenomena&lt;br/&gt;and the underlying physical and material
properties.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed works are to be carried out in the following
aspects: &lt;br/&gt;to develop or refine mathematical models for the underlying
physical &lt;br/&gt;problems, so to enlarge the range of validity of such
models; to &lt;br/&gt;analyze these models in order to gain further
understanding of their &lt;br/&gt;properties and of their solutions; to develop,
analyze, and&lt;br/&gt;implement algorithms, in particular, parallel and
adaptive algorithms,&lt;br/&gt;for the numerical simulation of these models; and
to use our algorithms &lt;br/&gt;and codes, together with physicists and
material scientists, &lt;br/&gt;to study some interesting phenomena in physics
and material sciences,&lt;br/&gt;including the further studies on the quantized
vortices in &lt;br/&gt;superconductors and Bose-Einstein condensates, on the
effects of&lt;br/&gt;fluctuation and on the validity and the extension of
mezoscopic &lt;br/&gt;phenomenological models. While we will focus on developing
innovative &lt;br/&gt;mathematical theory and computational algorithms,
comparisons with the &lt;br/&gt;physical experiments will also be made whenever
possible.&lt;br/&gt;