* 0409371
* ASM Conference on Cell-Cell Communication in Bacteria, to be held in Alberta, Canada, July 2004
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Bonnie Bassler, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 03/31/2005
* USD 5,000.00

Bacteria use cell-cell signaling to regulate many physiological functions. In
most cases the process involves the production, release, and detection of
extracellular signaling molecules. While universal signaling themes exist,
variations in the design of the extracellular signals, the signal detection
apparatuses, and the biochemical mechanisms of signal relay have allowed cell-
cell signaling systems to be exquisitely adapted for their varied uses. Recent
studies show that bacterial cell-cell communication occurs both within and
between species, and furthermore, that it plays a major role in enabling
bacteria to create complex community structures. Funding is requested to provide
partial support for American scientists participating in the second conference
sponsored by the American Society for Microbiology entitled "Cell-Cell
Communication in Bacteria," to be held in Banff, Alberta, Canada from July
24-27, 2004. Topics will include i) the production and detection of signals, ii)
signaling during development, iii) signaling during pathogenesis and symbioses,
iv) inter-generic and inter-kingdom signaling, v) signaling themes from higher
organisms, and vi) theoretical approaches to modeling signaling networks.
Inviting scientists that work on higher organisms, will aquaint bacteriologists
with eukaryotic chemical signaling paradigms, and will allow them to explore
common features that exist in all chemical signaling systems. By inviting
theoretical physicists and mathematicians interested in modeling cell-cell
communication circuits, the meeting will provide a venue for much needed
interaction between experimental biologists and theoreticians.