* 0409121
* Collaborative Research: First Principles Investigation of Silicate Liquids at Mantle Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Lars Stixrude, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2007
* USD 197,967.00

The project will apply the first-principles approach based on density functional
theory (DFT) to investigate the physico-chemical properties of silicate liquids,
which are major components of the Earth's mantle. The approach has already been
proven to be an ideal complement to the experimental approach in studying a wide
range of crystalline properties of the Earth materials and here it will be
extended to simulation of material systems involving relative large number of
atoms. These large-scale simulations will result in major advances in our
knowledge of silicate liquids over the large range of pressure, temperature, and
composition that are crucial for a better understanding of planetary evolution,
as silicate liquids are primary means of heat and mass transport inside the
Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will make key contributions to
understanding of: a) Buoyancy of silicate liquids through ab initio predictions
of the equation of state including liquids of diopside, enstatite, and
forsterite compositions over the pressure-temperature regime of the mantle; b)
Structure of silicate liquids via analysis of the complete structural
information that is available in theoretical simulations including coordination
numbers, bond lengths, and bond angles. Analysis of the structure of liquids of
diopside and hydrous albite composition, and melts on the MgO-SiO2 join is
expected to yield insight into the origin of melt behavior including compression
mechanisms and mixing properties; and c) Thermodynamics of mixing in silicate
liquids through ab initio predictions of the volume and enthalpy of mixing as a
function of composition along the MgO-SiO2 and albite-water joins.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is essentially an exploitation of ideas and
techniques of computational science to challenging problems in the investigation
of Earth materials. The cross-fertilization between studies of complex
geochemical and earth materials issues on the one hand, and high-end computation
on the other should be of benefit to both fields. To take full advantage of this
aspect, the project will also initiate applications of the Access Grid - a
facility that allows group-to-group multimedia network communication, to train
students in this interdisciplinary effort.&lt;br/&gt;