* 0409785
* Density of Silicate Liquids at the Core-Mantle Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Thomas Ahrens, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 10/31/2007
* USD 318,000.00

Asimow&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0409785&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The shock compression molten
silicate project will provide support for a graduate student who will learn and
apply shock wave techniques toward understanding shock-induced melting of
silicates at high pressure as well as researching dynamic compression of molten
silicates over the pressure and temperature range existing in the Earth's
mantle. Previously, our group has trained some 30 mineral physicists and high
pressure researchers who have contributed their research, management, or
teaching skills to scientific and technical efforts in government, industry, and
academia. We propose to partially develop a new laser-based velocity projectile
measurement system that is expected to provide a precise trigger signal at the
time the projectile arrives at the target by extrapolating previous velocity
history. &lt;br/&gt; The Ultra Low Velocity Zone (ULVZ) is a variable thickness
1 to 40 km zone of partially melted material lying at the base of the mantle
underlying some low-velocity structures with horizontal dimensions of ~103 km.
In these structures the S-wave velocity may be lowered by ~ 3% corresponding to
300K or more differences in lower mantle temperature. We propose to preheat
samples to various initial temperatures (e.g. ~500 to 1500 K) so as to cross
from the solid into the partially molten field at a range of temperatures and
pressures. Thus, we will measure the longitudinal velocity to detect shock-
induced melting of mantle minerals at pressures of 90 to 135 GPa and
temperatures in the 3000 to 5000 degrees K range. Previously it has been
demonstrated that silicate and oxide melting may be readily detected by a rapid
drop in P-wave velocity upon melting. Moreover, upon encapsulating samples of
silicates in molybdenum containers, Hugoniot data for molten silicates can be
obtained. We propose to now extend previous data from the 40 GPa range upwards
to 150 GPa and extend melting data for minerals such as MgSiO3 perovskite from
25 to 30 GPa where it is known from multi-anvil experiments up to 150
GPa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;