* 0409217
* Seismic and Geodynamic Investigation of the Interaction Between the Oceanic Lithosphere and Upper Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Shijie Zhong, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 230,318.00

This is a collaborative proposal between seismologists and
&lt;br/&gt;geodynamicists to address three major questions. (1) What is the
&lt;br/&gt;temperature structure of the Pacific lithosphere and upper mantle?
&lt;br/&gt;(2) What are the dynamical causes of some of&lt;br/&gt;the more
prominent temperature variations? In particular, are the &lt;br/&gt;dynamics
controlled largely by near-surface physical processes (e.g., &lt;br/&gt;thermal
boundary layer instabilities or TBI), by processes whose &lt;br/&gt;genesis lies
deeper within the earth (hot-spot plumes, large-scale &lt;br/&gt;upwellings), or
by interactions between deep-seated and shallow &lt;br/&gt;processes (e.g.,
plumes exciting thermal boundary instabilities)? (3) &lt;br/&gt;What
complementaryinformation is available in radial and azimuthal
&lt;br/&gt;anisotropy? These questions are motivated, in part, by a preliminary
&lt;br/&gt;model of the thermal structure of the Pacific that reveals that the
&lt;br/&gt;Pacific lithosphere has experienced a punctuated cooling history,
&lt;br/&gt;cooling diffusively for its first 70 Ma and then reheating in the
&lt;br/&gt;Central Pacific between ages of 70 and 100 Ma predominantly at depths
&lt;br/&gt;between 70 and 150 km. New geodynamical simulations show that TBI
&lt;br/&gt;forms naturally as the plate cools and may play an important role in
&lt;br/&gt;the observed cooling history of the Pacific
plate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seismological research will continue to develop
data sets and &lt;br/&gt;theoretical methods to improve the seismic and
temperature&lt;br/&gt;models of the oceanic upper mantle. The geodynamic
research will aim &lt;br/&gt;to understanding the dynamic interplay between the
oceanic &lt;br/&gt;lithosphere and upper mantle. Particular emphasis will be
placed on &lt;br/&gt;how the two-stage cooling inferred for the Pacific
lithosphere may &lt;br/&gt;occur, what controls it, and why it may not occur
beneath other &lt;br/&gt;oceans. Particular interest is in how TBI initiate and
evolve, how &lt;br/&gt;plumes erode and reheat the lithosphere and on what
controls the &lt;br/&gt;efficiency of this process, and the interrelation
between TBI and &lt;br/&gt;thermal plumes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate
student and undergraduate researchers will work at the &lt;br/&gt;interface
between geodynamical and seismological modeling. In &lt;br/&gt;addition, the
research will provide a synoptic view of the oceanic &lt;br/&gt;upper mantle
that will be valuable for a number of new and on-going &lt;br/&gt;initiatives
such as Margins, Ridge2000, and Ocean Mantle Dynamics
&lt;br/&gt;(OMD).&lt;br/&gt;