* 0409509
* Teleseismic Probing of the Slave Craton: A Glimpse Into One of Earth's Oldest Continental Lithosphere
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Stephane Rondenay, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 188,455.00

The investigators propose to implement and apply a set of teleseismic imaging
techniques to better constrain the nature of physical and chemical processes in
the assembly, stabilization, and post-stabilization reworking of the Slave
craton (Northwest Territories, Canada). The seismic analyses will be performed
on data that are currently being collected by the POLARIS project augmented with
data from a sub-array to be deployed by the Geological Survey of Canada (GSC)
between 2004-2006. The lithosphere will be imaged and characterized using
established approaches such as body wave and surface wave tomography, and shear-
wave splitting analysis. In addition, the augmented POLARIS array will allow the
application of high-resolution imaging techniques based on 2D inversion of
teleseismic scattered waves. To date, these novel approaches have produced high
quality images of subduction zone complexes, but they have yet to be fully
exploited in stable continental regions. The detailed seismic images obtained
through these analyses will be integrated with recent geological, geochemical
and geophysical data in order to unravel the tectonic history of one of Earths
oldest cratons. This work should yield an improved understanding of the
accretionary history and evolution of cratons in general, thereby establishing
improved and perhaps new hypotheses to ground and inspire future investigations
of continental dynamics.