* 0409024
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Imaging of Aseismic Transients
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Fenglin Niu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2008
* USD 84,394.00

Airborne Laser Swath Mapping of the Southern San Andreas Fault&lt;br/&gt; This
project is using Airborne Laser Swath Mapping (ALSM) technology, also known as
LIDAR, to perform a very high resolution topographic survey of the San Andreas
fault (SAF) and other selected fault segments in southern California. Aerial
photography obtained during this survey will be draped over the topographic
dataset to produce a highly detailed characterization of the earth's surface in
the near field of the fault. The intent is to image the fault system in great
detail prior to the next great earthquake, i.e. the 'Big One', so that when this
event occurs it will be possible to map the near-field displacement and
deformation field with unprecedented accuracy. Post-event resurveys of the fault
system will determine slip and afterslip heterogeneity, and so help resolve
several long-standing debates in earthquake source physics. It will also be
possible to characterize near-field deformation associated with the along-strike
transition from continuously-creeping to fully-locked sections of the SAF. The
project makes extensive use of the new National Center for Airborne Laser Swath
Mapping (NCALM) facility, as well as the UNAVCO Inc. facility (to borrow Global
Positioning System (GPS) receivers to support aircraft positioning).&lt;br/&gt;
The NCALM facility will acquire the survey data using the University of
Florida's aircraft, LIDAR and digital camera. The aircraft will operate at low
altitude (~600 m) to ensure excellent horizontal resolution and vertical
accuracy. It will fly along sets of parallel tracks, roughly centered on the
fault, so as to obtain sets of overlapping swaths: this redundancy in ground
coverage will enable systematic quality control, and provide a means to avoid
shadowing problems in steep terrain. The aircraft will be positioned using a
combination of inertial guidance and GPS. Kinematic GPS positioning of the
aircraft will make use of numerous GPS base stations established every 30 km
along the flight path.&lt;br/&gt; The ALSM data will at first be analyzed by
NCALM using their standard data processing techniques. The point cloud (X,Y, Z
and intensity) observations will be provided to OSU, who will then compare them
with ground truth data so as to provide external validation. Once validated the
raw data and the initial 'bare earth' digital elevation model (DEM) will be
released to the general scientific community via the NCALM data archive in UC
Berkeley. Probably, this will take about 6 months. The data will be reanalyzed
at a more leisurely pace at OSU to see if additional improvements can be
made.&lt;br/&gt; The OSU team members are also be responsible for draping the
digital photography obtained during the ALSM survey onto the preliminary and
final DEMs. Once this registration process is complete, the combined product
will be tied to a wide range of existing imagery and topographic datasets,
including: 1) ASTER, MODIS and Landsat hyperspectral imagery data available
through NASA-USGS cooperative efforts, 2) SRTM topographic data from NASA and
JPL, 3) USGS topographic data from the National Elevation Dataset, 3) NOAA
Coastal Services Center topographic data acquired in late 2002 by EarthData
International using GeoSAR, 4) air photos, e.g., low sun-angle, high resolution
sets that were flown for the USGS as well as stock photography flown by
photogrammetry companies, 5) detailed maps by USGS showing fault zone
geomorphology and offsets (e.g., Brown, 1970; Clark, 1984; Wallace, 1990).
&lt;br/&gt;