* 0409077
* Collaborative Research: High-Resolution Deformation Rates, Spain
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Kenneth Kodama, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2009
* USD 160,817.00

In order to understand the tectonic processes, which deform the Earth, it is
important to know what long-term deformation rates are and how they vary through
time. Typically, long chronologies of deformation have only coarse time
resolution and evidence from many mountain belts suggests that deformation is
discontinuous both spatially and temporally. In this study, climate signals
driven by long-term variation in the Earth's orbit (Milankovitch cycles,
Precession cyclicity every ~20,000 years, Obliquity cyclicity every ~40,000
years), are being used to provide high-resolution dating of sedimentary layers
deposited atop a large, growing anticline, which developed in northern Spain
(Jaca Basin) 42-36 million years ago. Growth strata, layers of rock deposited
during deformation, provide a unique opportunity to unravel deformational and
depositional processes of deforming landscapes and can provide exceptional time
markers of deformation. This will be accomplished using structural,
stratigraphic, and magnetic data from growth strata associated with the Pico del
Aguila anticline, Spanish Pyrenees. Prolonged fold growth occurred in varying
water depths and environments of deposition and was recorded by changes in
growth strata thickness and orientation. As part of this study, the mesurement
of stratigraphic sections and sampling of rocks for magnetic susceptibility,
anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility, (rock magnetic proxies for orbitally
driven climate variability) and remanent magnetization are being conducted. The
climate signal is being analyzed by collaborative laboratory work and time
series analysis. The characteristic remanent magnetization is being used to
correlate the growth strata to the global magnetic polarity time scale, which
provides an absolute date at eight specific horizons and the Milankovitch
rhythms time other horizons every ~20,000 years. High-resolution Global
Positioning System data, supported by UNAVCO, Inc., is being used to map
individual beds in order to generate an equally high-resolution geometric
reconstruction of the fold. Collectively, these measurements are permitting
detailed reconstructions of deformation and providing novel insights into long-
term deformation rates.