* 0409311
* Numerical Modeling of Moderate Magnitude Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Laurie Baise, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* John Daniel
* 02/28/2009
* USD 195,100.00

Large earthquakes occur every year, devastating communities around the world. In
the past ten years, earthquakes in India, Turkey, Taiwan, Japan, and the United
States have caused billions of dollars of damage and thousands of casualties.
Producing appropriate earthquake ground motion time histories, a necessary step
for designing earthquake resistant structures, requires an understanding of the
earthquake source in addition to an understanding of the wave propagation,
crustal geology, and the soil conditions at the site. As a result, earthquake
engineering is an interdisciplinary field combining expertise in structural
engineering, geotechnical engineering, seismology, and geology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed collaborative work bridges the gap between
engineering and seismology in the numerical modeling of moderate magnitude
earthquakes. The intellectual merit of the proposed work is to take moderate-
sized earthquakes in the magnitude (M) range from 4 to 5 to understand regional
wave propagation, earthquake sources, and local site effects with the long term
goal of extrapolating these results to large earthquakes and strong ground
motions for that region. By carefully accounting for and validating the source,
path, and site effects in a moderate earthquake, we hypothesize that we can
.qualitatively. predict the characteristics of ground response for large
earthquakes. Our second hypothesis is that including detailed soil conditions in
a crustal model will result in more accurate simulated ground motions (accurate
to a higher frequency) than is currently common. Our research plan consists of
four specific tasks: 1) Determine the source mechanisms of three recent moderate
earthquakes each in the San Francisco Bay and in the Osaka Bay regions. 2)
Develop and validate a crustal model for wave propagation for each study region:
San Francisco Bay and Osaka Bay. 3) Evaluate effect of the soil layer by
assessing predicted waveforms at Vertical Arrays. 4) Validate method for large
earthquakes. The research team is multidisciplinary and consists of experts in
seismology and geology/geotechnical earthquake engineering. Baise is a
geology/geotechnical earthquake engineer, with experience studying wave
propagation and site effects. Baise will lead the project to ensure that the
result is of engineering use and importance. Dreger and Abercrombie are
earthquake seismologists and will provide guidance as well as active
participation in the areas of source characterization (Abercrombie and Dreger)
and wave propagation techniques (Dreger). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this study is three-fold. First, the proposed method can be used in
areas of low seismicity to predict regional earthquake effects for large
earthquakes. The proposed research will therefore improve ground motion
simulations and reduce seismic losses. Secondly, the effort will broadly impact
the educational environment at all three universities involved when
seismologists and engineers are brought together in research and in a classroom.
Finally, through continuing efforts of the PI both graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups will be recruited to participate in this
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;