* 0409492
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Tiffany Yip, Yip                     Tiffany
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This Social, Economic, and Behavioral Minority Post-Doctoral Research and
Training Fellowship under the mentorship of Dr. Robert Sellers in the Psychology
Department at the University of Michigan is an experimental laboratory study
investigating how racial identity shapes the everyday experiences of
AfricanAmerican college students. Specifically, two aspects of racial identity
will be examined. The first is stable feelings of racial identity centrality
which refers to the extent to which race is important to an overall identity.
The second is dynamic feelings of racial salience which refers how feelings of
racial identity fluctuates across situations in response to setting cues. The
conceptualization and measurement of centrality and salience will be based on
the Multidimensional Model of Racial identity (MMRI). The first objective is to
examine the effect of situational cues on racial salience. The second objective
is to examine the mental health consequences of racial salience. The third
objective is to examine how racial centrality might influence these
associations. From emails provided by the University, one hundred African
American females will be recruited to complete a web-based survey assessing
racial centrality. A few weeks later, participants will be asked to come to a
research laboratory to be randomly assigned to one of two experimental
conditions: low racial salience and high racial salience. This study contributes
to the literature on a previously underrepresented group by addressing several
limitations in the research on racial identity. Historically, racial identity
has been conceptualized and measured as stable. More recently, researchers have
begun to explore racial salience empirically. As such, racial salience, and its
interaction with racial centrality, remains largely understudied. By assessing
how racial identity salience changes across settings, a more comprehensive
understanding of the role of racial identity in the everyday lives of African
American students can be obtained. In addition, by examining both the stable and
changing aspects of racial identity, this study investigates how racial
centrality may serve as a lens through which the objective environment is
experienced in psychologically different ways. Furthermore, whereas racial
identity research has been dominated by correlational research, this study
employs innovative experimental methods, allowing for control of environmental
stimuli. Understanding how setting features trigger racial salience and the
subsequent impact upon psychological well-being may be particularly important
for African Americans in higher education settings.

