* 0409816
* Collaborative Research:  Wave Equation Tomography And Data Assimilation: A New Approach To Estimating P And S Speed Variations In Earth's Lower Mantle
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert van der Hilst, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 267,623.00

The Principal Investigators seek funding for collaborative research that aims to
develop a new class of tomographic model by explicit integration of
observational, theoretical, and computational aspects of seismic data analysis
and interpretation. This effort extends their previous work in tomography and
involves the measurement of new data sets and the development of wave
propagation theory and multi-grid technology that allowsjoint interpretation of
data with different sensitivities to Earth's structure. Quantitative integration
of thesecomponents is, in our view, a viable and essential step toward the
accurate mapping of spatial variations in elastic properties, temperature, and
composition. Here the PI's will focus on relative variations in VP and VS in the
bottom ~1000 km of Earth's lower mantle, which, they believe, contains critical
clues tounderstanding mantle convection and Earth's thermo-chemical evolution
over geological time.

Intellectual Merit: Over the past decades global tomography has produced
spectacular images of, for instance, mantle flow trajectories and structural
complexity near the base of the mantle. However, uneven data coverage and
heterogeneous data quality render non-unique, fuzzy images, with substantial
spatial variations in reliability. Regularization and the use of inaccurate wave
propagation theory probably produce incorrect estimates of elastic parameters
even where sampling seems adequate, and the magnitude of wavespeed variations is
usually poorly constrained. Moreover, results based on different data sets often
disagree in important aspects, and correct joint interpretation of data with
different sensitivities to Earth's structure (e.g., body- and surface waves, P
or S waves measured at different frequencies) remains a major challenge.

The approximate nature of the "red and blue" images impedes quantitative
interpretation and integration with other geophysical constraints and keeps
tomography from reaching its full potential as a quantitative probe of Earth's
deep interior. This the PI's seek to change. For better parameter estimation
they need to exploit the richness of broad-band waveforms and they need more
powerful theoretical frameworks for integration and joint interpretation of
diverse data sets. The ultimate objective of our approach toward multi-
resolution data fusion for global tomography is to produce better 3-D models of
Earth's deep interior - on a range of length scales and from a variety of
seismological data - by improving (and explicitly linking) three essential
aspects of imaging: Data quality and coverage: using automated procedures and
multi-resolution concepts (such as time frequency wavelets) they will enhance
spatial and spectral data coverage by extracting phase velocity and arrival time
information from the vast number of waveforms available through international
data centers.

Wave propagation theory: recognizing the need to account for (and benefit from)
the different sampling properties of the data considered, and inspired by recent
advances in understanding finite frequency effects, they will compute accurate
sensitivity kernels for the back-projection of the newly measured data.
Parameterization and regularization: to preserve and exploit the localization
properties of 3-D sensitivity kernels we will use adaptive multi-grid
parameterization and regularization techniques for joint inversion.

The research proposed here focuses on (i) measuring teleseismic P and S type
body-wave travel times, (ii) inversion for 3-D variations in .lnVS/.lnVP (or
related parameters) in Earth's mantle, and (iii) refining - or refuting -
existing views on compositional heterogeneity in the lowermost mantle. They can
build on experience in observational seismology and tomography (Van der Hilst,
MIT) and wave propagation and inversion theory (De Hoop, CSM), and for the
automated data processing they will collaborate with Ritsema (IPGP, France) and
involve a postdoctoral associate (for which some fund matching is sought).

Broader Impact: Along with mineral physics data, accurate estimates of elastic
parameters are needed to constrain spatial variations in compositon and
temperature and, thus, models of mantle dynamics and mineralogy. Furthermore,
the concept of and tools for data fusion developed here prepare for the handling
and interpretation of large data sets of USARRAY data. The proposed work
constitutes the first part of a PhD project at MIT, but students at MIT and CSM
will be involved in aspects of the research, either as a Undergraduate Research
OPportunity (UROP) or in fulfillment of General Exam requirements.