* 0409968
* Rational Landen Transformations, Dynamical Systems, and Hurwitz Zeta Function
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Victor Moll, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 251,000.00

Moll 0409968

Many problems in physics and engineering require the exact evaluation of
integrals in terms of parameters appearing in those integrals. These problems
come up in the study of particle physics and classical mechanics. While it is
not always possible to find analytic expressions, the investigator and his
colleagues study questions that appear in the development of an efficient and
robust symbolic software package that should give such results in closed form,
or decide whether such an expression is achievable. The investigator's goal is
to develop algorithms that expand upon the capabilities of existing software
pacakages that are widely used in industry and universities. The investigator's
efforts are concentrated in two classes: rational functions, and elementary
functions related to the Hurwitz zeta function. The study of this last class has
produced a new approach to conjectures on the so-called multiple zeta values and
the cloed-form evaluation of Tornheim-Zagier sums.

The problem of definite integration of special functions started in the eighteen
century with the work of J. Bernoulli. The knowledge developed from this problem
has been central in many parts of analysis and applied mathematics. The
development of highly sophisticated symbolic languages during the last part of
the 20th century has required further study of this old problem. The
investigator and his colleagues are developing the mathematical theory that is
needed for the symbolic evaluation of these integrals. It is a surprising fact
that this endevour has connections with many areas of mathematics. The
investigator develops new algorithms that ensure the efficiency and robustness
of the current symbolic languages available to the scientific community.