* 0409381
* Studies of Terrestrial Gravity Using Superconducting Gravimeters
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* David Crossley, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 189,999.00

This project consists of two separate studies using high precision gravity data
collected by the network of superconducting gravimeters (Global Geodynamics
Project, or GGP). The first is a comparison between the high precision monthly
gravity field that is now available from the GRACE (Gravity Recovery and Climate
Experiment) satellite mission and the 7 ground-based GGP stations in Europe. The
intellectual merit is in using for the first time both data sets, even though
they differ considerably in spatial and temporal resolution, to identify the
time variation of the hydrology over central Europe. Studies done by the author
and his colleagues have demonstrated that both data sets have a common signal
that appears to correlate well with the predicted moisture content of the
ground. This correlation will be further explored to determine where the signal
comes from and to what extent the ground stations are able to validate the
satellite-based models. This is a unique study because of the independence of
the two observational techniques. The broader impact of the GRACE experiment is
that it will provide extremely useful data for a wide variety of geophysical
problems such as the accurate assessment of continental water storage for long-
term planning of global water resources.

The second study will use all the GGP data (20 stations), over the last 7 years,
to search for several signals from the Earth's deep interior, particularly the
Slichter triplet. This triplet arises from the oscillations of the Earth's inner
core (IC) within the fluid outer core, when excited by an energetic source such
as an earthquake; the splitting into 3 modes comes primarily from Earth
rotation. The motions are extremely small - about one mm or less, but in
principle detectable using the GGP gravity array. The intellectual merit of the
study is to find the density jump between the inner and outer cores at the
boundary (ICB). This jump is crucial for assessing the energetics to the Earth's
magnetic field generation, i.e. how much energy can come from the latent heat of
freezing of the IC as it grows in time. Recent estimates of the ICB density jump
have varied between 0.3 and 0.8 Mg m-3, using methods such as differential
scattering of seismic body waves from the ICB and from the frequencies of the
normal modes of the Earth. The broader impact of this project is in graduate
education, through student support for 3 years. This new study will strengthen
considerably the graduate student program at St. Louis University.



