* 0409887
* The Robust Vehicle Routing Problem
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Maged Dessouky, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 06/30/2008
* USD 192,112.00

A growing number of industries decide daily how to route a fleet of vehicles
from a depot to service a geographically dispersed set of customers, for example
courier services, trucking companies, and demand responsive transportation
services. This is known in the academic literature as the vehicle routing
problem (VRP). The routing usually takes place in an uncertain environment in
which the travel times are variable (due to current traffic conditions) and the
demand is also uncertain (customers could "call in" during operations). Under
these uncertainties it turns out that the optimal routing solution decided a
priori can in fact be very inefficient. This research aims at obtaining a
routing solution that performs well for all possible uncertainty scenarios and,
therefore, is a better solution in practice for these industries. These robust
solutions have the potential to reduce operating costs in practice for the broad
range of industries which face routing problems daily. In addition the
techniques developed for the routing problem can in principle be applied to
other discrete choice problems important for industry, such as the problem of
deciding where to open a warehouse to meet geographically dispersed and
uncertain demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to develop a
novel approach to address the vehicle routing problem with uncertain demand and
travel times. The approach is to obtain a solution which is robust with respect
to the uncertainty, as opposed to obtaining the optimal solution for certain
fixed uncertainty scenario. The robust solution is defined as the solution which
has a worst case scenario of minimum cost. The proposed research is separated
into two main parts: (1) To formulate the problem that provides the robust
solution, known as the robust vehicle routing problem (RVRP), and to develop
exact and approximate solution methods specifically tailored for this robust
problem and (2) To evaluate whether the RVRP provides a solution that is better
in practice, through studies of how different uncertainty assumptions affect the
trade-offs between robust and optimal solutions. The proposed approach (1)
requires solving problems of the same inherent complexity as the original
routing problem, (2) assumes only that the uncertainty is bounded, and (3)
provides a solution that will be efficient for all possible uncertainty
values.&lt;br/&gt;