* 0409423
* Collaborative Research: On the Origins of Primitive Magmas in the Cascade Volcanic Arc
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2008
* USD 193,477.00

The prevailing model for convergent margin magmatism involves mantle melting in
response to additions of fluids produced by dehydration of subducting
(underthrusting) plates of oceanic lithosphere. However, because the Cascade arc
is associated with slow subduction of young oceanic lithosphere, it is one of
the warmest subduction zones known. For this extreme end member case, it is
likely that the subducting plate is extensively metamorphosed and dehydrated as
it descends to subarc depths, that the supply of slab-derived fluids beneath the
arc is low, and that temperatures may even be high enough to promote direct
melting of the slab at those depths. In this case the familiar subduction zone
'flux melting' paradigm may not strictly apply. Yet, the Cascades arc is
characterized by voluminous basaltic magmatism. To explain this enigma,
alternative mechanisms and/or magma sources are seemingly required, and the
solution to this paradox may shed new light on origins of primitive arc magmas
worldwide.

Our project focuses on basaltic magmatism because such lavas are likely to carry
relevant information concerning fundamental mantle processes underpinning
volcanic arc magmatism. A basic question that we address concerns the extent to
which slab-derived fluids contribute to magma generation in this setting. In the
southern Washington Cascades, primitive basaltic lavas lacking slab-derived
chemical signatures have erupted over the entire width of the arc. From this
observation we infer that much of the mantle wedge has received negligible slab
contributions. In contrast, in the northern California Cascades (e.g., Mt.
Shasta area), primitive lavas appear to be significantly hydrated, and
prevailing interpretations suggest that slab-derived fluids do contribute
significantly to magma formation in this area.

We propose a comparative study to investigate the nature and extent of slab
contributions beneath both areas, using sensitive geochemical tracers for slab-
derived fluids - Be and B isotopes, fluid-mobile trace elements, and radiogenic
isotopes (Sr, Pb, and Os). If slab contributions are significant in the latter
region, we can better define the origin and composition of that signature with
respect to these compositional parameters. If this is not the case, we will
investigate other scenarios (e.g., decompression melting) to explain the
characteristics and origins of primitive magmas in these settings. This study
will better define the relative contributions between competing melting
processes, and allow us to address how they are influenced by external forcing
functions related to subduction zone dynamics.

Intellectual merit: This work will provide, for the Cascades, a deeper
understanding of the causes for magmatic diversity, the relative contributions
of different melting processes, the influence of compositional diversity within
the mantle wedge, and ultimately the thermal structure and processes
underpinning this magmatism. This knowledge may be difficult to extract from
more typical, cooler subduction systems.

Broader impacts: Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this work will
gain basic scientific training and experience. Collaboration between researchers
at Rice University, University of Arizona, and Washington University at St.
Louis, and the Istituto di Geoscienze e Georisorse in Pisa, Italy, will foster
intellectual exchange and provide access to a broad range of analytical
approaches. Transfer of this knowledge through participation at national and
international meetings will contribute to the overall benefit of many scientists
studying the dynamics of convergent margins.