* 0409203
* Spatial and Temporal Changes in Arsenic, Iron, and Sulfur Speciation in a Shallow Aquifer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Peggy O'Day, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2008
* USD 270,000.00

0409203&lt;br/&gt;Peggy A. O'Day&lt;br/&gt;The chemical speciation of arsenic in
sediments and porewaters of aquifers is the critical&lt;br/&gt;factor that
determines whether dissolved arsenic accumulates to potentially toxic
levels.&lt;br/&gt;Although we have a general understanding of the biogeochemical
cycle of arsenic, there remains&lt;br/&gt;a large gap in our quantitative
understanding of the mechanisms of transformations, the role of&lt;br/&gt;iron
and sulfur, and the dynamics of natural processes that mobilize arsenic in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;We lack detailed measurements that allow us to quantify
seasonal impacts on subsurface arsenic&lt;br/&gt;speciation, and the rates at
which speciation changes in response to surface infiltration
from&lt;br/&gt;rainfall and vertical fluctuations in water table depth. Using a
combination of field, laboratory,&lt;br/&gt;and modeling efforts that employ
both molecular and macroscopic methods, we will study&lt;br/&gt;arsenic mobility
and natural attenuation at a site near San Francisco Bay as a model
system.&lt;br/&gt;These studies will address the following: (i) How do seasonal
variations and changes in water&lt;br/&gt;table as a response to storm events
influence subsurface arsenic geochemistry, and thus the&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms and
rates of arsenic uptake or release? (ii) Does the formation of metastable,
mixed&lt;br/&gt;valent iron phases, Fe(II,III) hydroxides (green rust) play an
important role in controlling&lt;br/&gt;arsenic attenuation and release? How is
the formation and stability of labile iron phases&lt;br/&gt;influenced by storm
events and tidal flooding? (iii) Through molecular and
macroscopic&lt;br/&gt;modeling based on field and laboratory observations and
data, can we predict local changes in&lt;br/&gt;dissolved arsenic and iron
concentrations in response to seasonal changes in water table and
to&lt;br/&gt;storm events? We will employ X-ray absorption spectroscopic
methods, complementary bulk&lt;br/&gt;and spatially resolved geochemical
characterizations, hydrologic observations, and molecular&lt;br/&gt;and
macroscopic modeling to address these questions at different
scales.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Our work will address the mechanisms by
which arsenic is attenuated or&lt;br/&gt;mobilized in the environment through
identification and understanding of its chemical&lt;br/&gt;speciation. This
study will also begin to address the more difficult question of the rates
of&lt;br/&gt;arsenic transformation and mobilization in the field, and link
temporal changes to mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;identified at molecular and microscopic
scales. This comprehensive approach will advance&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
understanding of arsenic speciation and mobility, particularly with respect to
little&lt;br/&gt;known seasonal fluctuations and field rates of uptake and
release.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Worldwide, elevated concentrations of
arsenic in groundwater, a known&lt;br/&gt;carcinogen and mutagen, has the
potential to adversely impact on the order of 90 million
people,&lt;br/&gt;including 13 million in the US. This study will seek
mechanistic, thermodynamic, and kinetic&lt;br/&gt;understanding of arsenic
mobility in the environment. Our approach seeks to scale results
from&lt;br/&gt;molecular to macroscopic and thus, our observations at this model
study site will be generally&lt;br/&gt;transferable to other subsurface
settings.&lt;br/&gt;The P.I. has recently moved to the University of California
at Merced, the first UC&lt;br/&gt;campus to be built in over 35 years. This
research proposal will serve to advance both graduate&lt;br/&gt;and
undergraduate education at our fledging campus, which seeks to serve
underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;groups in the agricultural San Joaquin Valley. In
addition, our collaborators for this project&lt;br/&gt;come from industry and a
national laboratory, providing opportunities for undergraduate
summer&lt;br/&gt;internship programs and collaborative work with graduate
students.