* 0409660
* Nonlinear dynamics of microcantilevers interacting with nanostructures - applications to biomolecular sensing and nanotribology
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Arvind Raman, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2007
* USD 229,900.00

0409660 - Nonlinear dynamics of microcantilevers interacting with nanostructures
- applications to biomolecular sensing and nanotribology&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores computationally, and experimentally novel dynamical phenomena
underlying the use of scanning probe microcantilevers as mechanical property
sensors at the nanoscale. The proposed research targets two applications of key
importance in nanostructural property characterization: (a) the measurement and
characterization of friction at the nanoscale, and (b) the measurement of
mechanical properties of biological macromolecules. In both cases,
investigations will be performed to predict the oscillations of microcantilevers
in these nanoscale measurement applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall the
project will (1) help develop a fundamantal understanding of the physics of
atomic scale friciton betweena sharp asperity and nanostructures of interest,
especially in sliding speeds of relevance to nanotribology, MEMS and
biomolecular systems, (2) help develop design guidelines to tune intentionally
the vibration spectrum of these microcantilevers to enhance their performance as
nanomechanical property sensors of important biomolecules such as structural
proteins and DNA. Finally, the research objectives are complemented by a solid
plan for broader impact including specific plans for broader dissemination of
research results, increasing participation of minorites and underrepresented
groups in research, involving undergraduates in research, and fostering cross
disciplinary collaborations with structural biology and condensed matter physics
communities on campus. &lt;br/&gt;