* 0409737
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2004
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Eric Shipp, Shipp                   Eric           L
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2006
* USD 110,000.00

This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2004.
The goal of the fellowship is to increase the participation of minority
scientists at the postdoctoral level and to prepare them for positions of
scientific leadership in academia and industry. To attain this goal, the
fellowship provides opportunities for postdoctoral training and research of the
highest quality to recent doctoral recipients. It is expected that Fellows
supported through these fellowships will play important roles in training of the
future workforce.

The research and training plan is entitled "The role of heparan sulfate in
mammalian brain development." Axonal guidance and neuronal migration are
processes whereby axons and neurons are biochemically directed throughout the
central nervous system in a developing organism. During this critical
developmental stage, axons must travel considerable distances in a very ordered
fashion. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSGs) are negatively charged, sulfated
polysaccharides found on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix.
Recent studies suggest that HSGs play an integral role in promoting the activity
of Slit, a family of secreted neuronal guidance proteins. Slit initiates axonal
repulsion by binding to the cell surface receptor, Roundabout (Robo). Removal of
cell surface HSGs abolishes the chemorepulsive response of Slit toward growing
axons and migrating neurons. To elucidate the precise mechanism by which HSGs
promote Slit-mediated processes, this research examines the role of HSG and the
impact of HSG structure on Slit-induced axonal guidance and cellular migration.
The fellowship supports research and training at the interface of chemistry and
neurobiology.