* 0409426
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: St. Elias Erosion/Tectonics Project (STEEP)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Roger Hansen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,082,282.00

0409426&lt;br/&gt;Hansen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-disciplinary study
to address the evolution of the highest coastal mountain range on Earth - the
St. Elias Mountains of southern Alaska and northwestern Canada. This orogen has
developed over the past few million years as the Yakutat block, a continental-
oceanic terrane, has attempted subduction beneath the eastern end of the
Aleutian arc-trench system. The ~500 km-long, 150 km-wide St. Elias mountain
range is the product of the dynamic balance between rapid uplift induced by
crustal convergence and rapid exhumation by a regional system of large, fast-
moving temperate glaciers. Most sediments are deposited either on a broad shelf
or in deepsea fans and provide a complete record of the tectonic, climatic,
erosional, and eustatic events that have accompanied the orogeny.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to develop a
comprehensive model for the St. Elias orogen that accounts for the interaction
of regional plate tectonic processes, structural development, and rapid erosion.
The focus of the study is on the partitioning of deformation within the system
from upper mantle flow to near-surface faulting and exhumation. The study will
investigate the geodynamics of oblique collision under a set of conditions that
will allow the PIs to address several important and fundamental
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Has intense Quaternary glacial erosion
redistributed mass in the orogen sufficiently to change regional deformational
patterns, and has focused erosion along deep glacial valleys been sufficient to
localize crustal strains?&lt;br/&gt;- How is deformation partitioned into
lithospheric shortening and uplift versus lateral extrusion of the detached
crust, and does intense erosion influence this partitioning?&lt;br/&gt;- Is the
orogeny driven primarily by subduction of a buoyant oceanic plateau or by
collision of a small microcontinental block attached to allochthonous ocean
crust?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing these questions has broad implications
for understanding the geodynamics of oblique collision in general, the role of
different mechanisms in development of far-field orogenic effects, and the
control of erosion on development of slip partitioning during oblique
convergence. The project also has general implications for how
subduction/accretion of small continental terranes versus oceanic plateaus
contribute to deformation of the continents, and ultimately the fate of these
fragments in construction of the crustal collage which is typical of virtually
all continents. Specifically, the P.I.s propose a multidisciplinary approach
involving seismologists (subsurface imaging and seismicity), geologists,
geodesists, glaciologists, geochronologists, and geodynamic
modelers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;