* 0409422
* Collaborative Research: Crystal Chemistry of U,Th and Other Radionuclides in Apatite: Environmental and Geochemical Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Christopher Cahill, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 46,766.00

Apatite, Ca10(PO4)6(F,OH,Cl)2, can accommodate numerous substituents, including
many radionuclides of environmental concern (90Sr, 90Y, REE, U and Th). Scores
of studies have focused on the crystal chemistry of substituents in apatite;
surprisingly, however, little is known about the mechanisms of incorporation and
the structural response of apatite to U and Th, despite the fact that the
presence of these elements in this mineral has been used in geochronologic and
petrogenetic studies for decades. This two-part study focuses on fundamental
mineralogical and geochemical aspects of U and Th incorporation in apatite and
implications for apatite as a solid nuclear-waste form and a metal sequestration
agent.&lt;br/&gt;Interest in apatite as a potential solid waste form for
radionuclides is based on: 1) its high affinity for elements of environmental
concern; 2) its thermal annealing properties; and 3) its relatively low
solubility in most surface environments. Fundamental to our understanding of
radionuclide retention and release are crystal chemical parameters such as site
preference, oxidation state, and structural distortions/symmetry-breaking
created by substituents such as U and Th; surprisingly, the crystal chemistry of
their substitution in apatite is unknown. Part I of this study is to determine
these structural parameters in a variety of natural and synthetic apatites with
substituent U and Th. This will be accomplished through complementary use of
crystal synthesis, single crystal X-ray diffraction, and X-ray absorption
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;Part II of this study focuses on the role of precursor
calcium phosphate phases on the uptake of U, Th and other metals and the fate of
these contaminants through structural transformations in these sequestered
states. Use of apatite formation in contaminated sediments (sometimes called
phosphate-induced metal stabilization, PIMS) is a new and promising method for
metal sequestration (including radionuclides) and environmental remediation.
Numerous experimental studies of apatite formation under the temperature and pH
conditions found in sediments and soils indicate the formation of precursor
phases such as OCP (octacalcium phosphate) and brushite is essential to the
process. This fundamental aspect of apatite formation under surface conditions
has not been addressed in the context of metal sequestration and fate. This has
critical bearing on the effective use of apatite for metal immobilization and
our understanding of the role of phosphate in the global geochemical cycling of
heavy metals. Part II of the study will be accomplished through a combination of
1) low-temperature synthesis in the presence of U, Th and other metals with in
situ (time-resolved synchrotron X-ray diffraction) and 2) ex situ chemical and
structural analyses including Rietveld structure analysis and X-ray absorption
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;This work has broad environmental implications (heavy-
metal and radionuclide sequestration) that are of immense importance to a
society that generates radioactive waste. The research will include the
participation and education of undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
support the ongoing research of a Postdoctoral Fellow at Miami
University.&lt;br/&gt;