* 0409343
* Collaborative Research: Taiwan  Integrated Geodynamics Research (TAIGER)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Nikolas Christensen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 255,910.00

0409343 Christensen

Taiwan is the result of the most active arc-continent collision in the world
(uplift of 3cm/yr and convergence of up to 8 cm/yr). The Eurasian plate and the
South China Sea have been moving to the SE wrt the Philippine Sea plate, with
oceanic lithosphere of the southeast China continental margin subducting beneath
the Luzon arc, which sits atop the Philippine Sea plate. Around 4 Ma ago, the
margin of Eurasia entered the subduction zone, resulting in collisional orogeny
that formed Taiwan. Taiwan consists of parallel belts representing 7 different
tectonostratigraphic provinces. The collision is occurring at an oblique angle,
with the northern margin colliding first, so that mountains are forming in the
North and propagating south. This oblique collision allows spatial changes to be
viewed as temporal evolution.

Arc accretion is arguably the most important mode of continent formation
throughout the post-Archean Earth (perhaps even before). Taiwan offers the
possibility of studying these processes in the world's most active arc collision
zone with a temporal view of how such collisions progress, due to the oblique
nature of the collision as mentioned above. The PIs put forward two end member
hypotheses to be tested concerning what is happening to continental lithosphere
during the collision: 1) It is subducted, with crust-mantle detachment causing
crust to accrete while deeper lithosphere is subducted; 2) It doesn't subduct,
but jams up in the subduction zone, leading to continuous deformation resulting
in thickening of the lithosphere.

The two end-member scenarios for what is happening to continental lithosphere
during the collision provide special opportunities to investigate some of the
most fundamental questions of mountain building:

- Does continental subduction play a controlling role in arc-continent
collision? Is the Eurasian continental lithosphere subducting beneath Taiwan? -
One of the fundamental issues in orogeny is mass balance. How do factors such as
erosion, crustal thickening, mantle flux, etc. interact quantitatively? - How
did the orogen evolve through time? - How does surface kinematics relate to deep
structure? - How does anisotropy vary in space, laterally and vertically? Do the
S-splitting directions change with depth? Is the deformation of the orogen
vertically coherent from surface to upper mantle?

To answer these questions the PIs will carry out an integrated geophysical
imaging, earthquake recording and geodynamic research program to study the
Taiwan orogeny. By combining detailed 2-D studies along transects and 3-D images
for the whole region, the orogen and its evolution can be characterized. The
data acquisition program includes broadband regional seismic and teleseismic
recording, onshore-offshore and land refraction-reflection seismic transects,
magnetotelluric sounding, petrophysics and gravity modeling. The geometry of the
plate interactions, the mode of crustal deformation, and the material properties
will provide a new quantitative basis for geodynamic modeling. The various
datasets will be integrated into a geodynamic model which can be used to test
conceptual models for mountain building.

The project will involve collaboration from six US institutions as well as
collaboration and support from Taiwanese and Japanese groups. There is also the
distinct possibility of the participation of scientists from mainland China. The
educational impact of this project will be large, with more than 25 students
from the participating institutions, US and foreign. In addition, the "Texas
Teacher in the Field" program would involve one high school teacher in recording
earthquakes offshore Taiwan, developing related teaching modules for Texas high
school teachers.

