* 0409905
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Pulse Width Control of Structurally Flexible Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Martin Berg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 08/31/2008
* USD 212,495.00

Adaptive Pulse Width Control of Structurally Flexible Systems
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal 0409905&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
performance of manufacturing machines of all sorts depends upon precise control
of the position of some sort of end-effector. Mechanical friction has forever
been the thorn in the side of the developers of such machines. A 1988
publication by researchers at the University of California at Berkeley describes
a remarkably effective algorithm for point-to-point control of the position of
the end-effector of a rigid-body plant that is subject to mechanical friction,
including stiction. This Pulse Width Control (PWC) algorithm is applied only
when the end-effector is close enough to its desired position that stiction
forces come into play. The algorithm applies a series of fixed-height
rectangular force pulses in a feedback fashion to move the end-effector to its
desired position. For point-to-point position control, the algorithm guarantees
limit-cycle-free operation and zero steady-state error, even when the plant
parameters, including the stiction and Coulomb friction levels, are not known
exactly.&lt;br/&gt;This project's Principle Investigators have investigated PWC
applied to flexible-body plants. They have shown that when the Berkeley PWC
algorithm is applied to a flexible-body plant, the result can be a position-
error limit cycle. They have furthermore shown that this limit cycle can be
avoided, and zero steady-state position error can be achieved, by use of a
piecewise-linear-gain PWC law. In this project a methodology for designing
adaptive piecewise-linear-gain PWC laws will be developed. This methology will
be applicable to the design of end-effector position control laws for industrial
robots and machine tools in bona fide industrial
settings.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The idea of PWC with piecewise-linear-
gain PWC laws was pioneered by this project's Principal Investigators. The
adaptive piecewise-linear-gain PWC law design methodology that will be developed
in this project will constitute a unique and significant contribution to the
control systems design community. The significance of this contribution will
grow as the number of applications of the methodology to the design of end-
effector position control laws for industrial robots and machine tools in bona
fide industrial settings grows.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In our society today,
the expectation is unmistakably that, as time marches on, manufacturing machines
will be capable of manufacturing parts to ever more exacting standards. The only
hope for meeting this expectation is for manufacturing machines to take
advantage of the rate of innovation that is evident today in two areas, namely
instrumentation and computing. This project will ultimately result in dramatic
demonstrations of what can be accomplished when the latest in instrumentation,
control system design methodology, and computing technology are simultaneously
focused on the task of dramatically improving the accuracy of end-effector
position control in industrial robots and machine tools. The broader impacts of
this project will be significantly enhanced by the fact that it will be
performed by a team of researchers from a predominantly undergraduate
institution (Bucknell University) and Research I institution (University of
Washington).&lt;br/&gt;