* 0409484
* Extreme Heat Geotechnics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Deborah Goodings, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2008
* USD 149,999.00

The sensitivity of structures to the insult of fire is well established and was
stunningly demonstrated in the World Trade Center collapse. Fires in underground
structures are not uncommon, and have led to unacceptable loss of life. The 1996
Channel Tunnel fire; the 2001 Howard St. (Baltimore) Tunnel; and the 1999 Mont
Blanc road tunnel fire are recent examples of sustained, large-scale tunnel
fires. As world populations continue to grow exponentially, and are concentrated
in urban areas, public access highway and rail tunnels will become ever more
common and essential links in urban transit networks. The impact of fire on
these key transportation components and other underground spaces, however, has
received relatively little civil engineering attention. The study of the effects
of thermal loading on soil has been largely limited to soil response when
subjected to the narrow temperature and heat flux ranges associated with
climatic changes. Thermal loadings from a fire, in contrast, may be 50 to 100
times that of typical thermal loads from the sun. This intense thermal loading
can result in dramatic temperature gradients within the soil, fluid phase
change, moisture migration, increases in soil pore pressures, and both temporary
and long term changes to mechanical properties of the soil. We propose to
identify through experimentation, the whole system response, both transient and
permanent, of saturated and unsaturated soil to prolonged, intense temperature
gradients that accompany severe tunnel fire conditions, under stress conditions
typical of shallow tunnels. That soil response is expected to impact the
stability of the entire underground structure, both during and after a fire
event. A realistic model of soil behavior will be developed that can be linked,
in turn, to understanding and predicting soil-tunnel interaction during and
after fires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research represents a strong
collaborative effort between students and faculty in the Civil Engineering and
the Fire Protection Engineering Departments at the University of Maryland. This
cross-disciplinary interaction will result in creative approaches and research
findings that may not have been conceived otherwise. The work builds on an
active NSF Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) investigation, which
began in June 2003. This research represents the first scientific work where
non-uniform thermal transport has been experimentally investigated in three-
phase porous media. A credible 1-D thermo-hydro-mechanical model will be
developed based on the experimental measurements and observations. This model
will be used to understand and predict soil-tunnel interaction during and after
fires. From an education point of view, the research will expose graduate
students to a cross-disciplinary research environment in an area of emerging
importance, at the same time developing intellectual capital for engineering of
key civil works, applying a broader approach to the problem. The PIs emphasis on
recruiting student members of underrepresented groups because of the special
opportunity this presents for role modeling and mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;