* 0409283
* Adaptive Chain Observers for Controlling Cooperating Clusters of Nonlinear Delayed-Output Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Maruthi Akella, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 07/31/2006
* USD 110,000.00

Adaptive Chain Observers for Controlling Cooperating Clusters of
&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear Delayed-Output Mechanical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal combines basic research with hardware-in-the-loop experimentation to
generate and validate new control methodologies for cooperating clusters of
uncertain mechanical systems. Uniqueness of this study arises from our explicit
consideration of time-delay characteristics that are integral within realistic
low-bandwidth vehicle-to-vehicle communication networks. Theoretical part of the
research plan focuses upon cooperating clusters of nonlinear dynamical systems
that are commanded through a leader-follower hierarchy. The leader controller
enforces absolute positioning and orientation of the fleet by tracking reference
trajectories generated by a nonlinear reference model. The follower controllers
rely upon time-delayed reference trajectory signals received from the leader to
ensure that the desired "formation geometry" is maintained. Parameter
uncertainty within the respective models of the followers necessitates the
design of adaptive controllers that utilize currently available local state
information. Duly taking the effects of communication delay into consideration,
we propose the development of an innovative chain-observer structure onboard
each follower whose objective would be to "estimate" in a closed-loop sense the
undelayed instantaneous state of the nonlinear reference model of the leader.
This chain structure would be further strengthened by new classes of adaptive
control solutions that will be derived from nonlinear re-parameterization
techniques recently given by the proposer. The adaptive control framework
including the chain-observer avoids over-parameterization and provides certain
unique manifold attractivity properties that significantly boost the closed-loop
performance. The experimental component of this proposal will implement and
evaluate all the theory within the distributed spacecraft formation flying
testbed facility at the Goddard Space Flight Center.&lt;br/&gt;