* 0409002
* Permeability Measurements from Routine On-the-fly CPT Sounding: Validation Against High-Quality Vis-CPT and In Situ Permeability Measurements
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Derek Elsworth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2007
* USD 275,652.00

Cone penetrometer testing (CPT) is a valuable tool for the rapid and continuous
profiling of strength, deformability, density, stress-state, and cyclic mobility
of soils. Despite the continuous refinement of cone-measured metrics for the
determination of these soil parameters, no comparably validated method exists to
determine continuous profiles of in situ permeability. This is especially
prescient given the needs of the environmental services industry for the rapid
and precise reconstruction of permeability fields for the design of contaminant
containment and remediation systems. This project will evaluate the potential to
determine in situ permeability profiles directly from routinely measured cone
sounding metrics recorded on-the-fly. Prospective correlations between in situ
field-scale permeabilities and penetration-induced pore pressures, cone end-
bearing, and sleeve-friction will be developed and verified against high-quality
field data, to be gathered in this study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, we
will:&lt;br/&gt;Fabricate in situ cone-deployable permeameters that examine the
effects of penetrometer-induced disturbance on measured permeability magnitudes.
&lt;br/&gt;Deploy these permeameters concurrently with the visual-CPT to gather
unique ensemble data that link CPT sounding metrics with co-located measured
permeabilities and visually observed fine-scale soil texture. Measure
permeability magnitudes at unusually high spatial resolution and correlate these
with direct visual observations of soil texture derived from the visual-CPT.
&lt;br/&gt;Apply the ensemble data to establish correlations between on-the-fly
CPT sounding metrics and permeabilities. And, &lt;br/&gt;Develop and refine
models for mechanical and fluid transport behavior in the tip process zone that
honor observed data in situ, and explain observed
correlations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPT soundings, co-located with independent in
situ measurements of permeability are meager. This study will add to these data,
apply unusual constraint to permeability measurements through incremental
permeability testing and visual identification of soil texture via the visual-
CPT, and develop and explore CPT-permeability correlations through the directed
use of model development and dimensional analysis. This work addresses an
unresolved problem - that of rapidly determining in situ permeability profiles.
Uniquely, this study hypothesizes, and provides preliminary evaluations, for the
rigorous use of CPT sounding data to determine permeability profiles. The
fidelity of these prospective relationships will be explored and refined using
unusually well-constrained in situ measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
affirmed, these proposed correlations will enable rapid and continuous profiling
of soil permeabilities using standard cone metrics, that is currently not
possible. Permeability profiles may subsequently be evaluated a posteriori from
the wealth of piezocone data available, worldwide. Combined with the in situ
visual identification of porosities and texture, and direct measurements of
contaminant concentrations and fluid saturations, these ensemble techniques will
provide an important tool to determine rates of migration of free-phase and
aqueous components in unconsolidated porous media at spatial scales of
relevance. This study will involve the training of graduate students and the
findings will be disseminated in classes, presentations, and through
publications.&lt;br/&gt;