* 0409172
* Thermo-Mechanical Experiments and Modeling of Shape Memory Alloy Structural Elements
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,12/31/2007
* John Shaw, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2007
* USD 156,000.00

Intellectual Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research consists of experimental and
modeling work to characterize the thermomechanical behavior of shape memory
alloy (SMA) structural elements. NiTi SMAs possess unique thermomechanical
properties and are often deployed in the form of thin wires or tubes (for
example, orthodontic wire and arterial stents) that are loaded in bending,
torsion, or some combination. However, the number of such experiments available
in the literature is relatively few. The PI's recent experimental work on NiTi
SMAs, using optical and infrared imaging and a new temperature control scheme,
has helped to clarify issues arising from self-heating/cooling, mechanical
instabilities, strain and temperature localization, and phase front propagation.
These techniques will be extended in new experimental setups to probe the
structural behavior of SMA elements under bending/torsion and column buckling.
Special attention will be paid material-level and structural-level instabilities
and to interactions between deformation and temperature fields arising from
phase transformations. These experiments will be used to develop a
thermomechanical model and simulation tool for SMA space rods that capture the
important thermomechanical coupling and instabilities in a computationally
tractable way. The PI's existing thermodynamic constitutive model will be
adapted for a new finite element that is endowed with axial, bending, and
torsional degrees of freedom. This will be implemented in a finite element
framework where the mechanical equilibrium and heat equations are solved
simultaneously, coupled with kinetic laws for internal field
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The hope is that the
outcome of the proposed research will enable better use of SMA materials in
commercial, engineering, and biomedical applications. The experimental data and
simulation tools will be widely disseminated by conference presentations and
journal publications. A better understanding of the material behavior and its
subtleties and availability of simulation tools should help engineers determine
which applications can make appropriate use of the material's remarkable
behavior and to assess their performance. The intent of the educational portion
of this proposal is to increase both undergraduate and graduate student's
awareness of these non-classical materials. Interesting research projects for
adaptive aerospace structures that use the unique capabilities of SMAs will be
offered to foster undergraduate involvement. Much of the proposed research will
be conducted with individually supervised graduate students. In addition,
theoretical and modeling issues associated with such materials will be addressed
by introducing a new advanced graduate course in solid mechanics entitled,
"Constitutive Modeling of Complex Materials".&lt;br/&gt;