* 0409917
* The Mechanics of Subduction in Japan from High-Precision Earthquake Location and Tomography
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Gregory Beroza, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin R. Phillips
* 06/30/2008
* USD 257,893.00

THE MECHANICS OF SUBDUCTION IN JAPAN FROM HIGH-PRECISION EARTHQUAKE LOCATION AND
TOMOGRAPHY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P.I. Gregory C.
Beroza&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction zone plate boundaries are host the
largest known earthquakes. They are also the sites of damaging upper crustal and
intermediate-depth earthquakes that in themselves pose substantial seismic
hazard. Under this grant we are developing an improved understanding of the
mechanics of shallow and intermediate-depth earthquakes in the subduction zone
in Japan. &lt;br/&gt;Japan is the ideal place for our study for several reasons.
Subduction zones in Japan exhibit a diversity of styles including: rapid
subduction of old oceanic crust in Hokkaido and North Honshu, nearly flat
subduction of much younger Philippine Sea plate in South Honshu and Shikoku, and
much steeper subduction of relatively young oceanic crust under the southern
island of Kyushu. Japan is highly seismic. Since 1994 there have been over half
a million earthquakes recorded by seismic networks in Japan that appear in the
JMA catalog. What really sets the subduction zones in Japan apart from those
elsewhere on Earth is the level of seismic instrumentation. With over 1500 high-
gain short period instruments available for earthquake monitoring, the
subduction zones in Japan are by far the best instrumented in the world.
Moreover, the new Hi-Net seismic network, which now numbers nearly 700
3-component borehole stations, offers a unique capability for earthquake
monitoring found nowhere else. &lt;br/&gt;In our research we are applying and
improving recently developed high-precision, multiple-event earthquake
relocation and high-precision tomography techniques to earthquakes in Japan.
These methods have revealed remarkable details of the faulting process in other
seismically active regions of the world that have lead to new insights into how
earthquakes work and their application to Japan holds similar
promise.&lt;br/&gt;Our research has two main goals. First are trying to
understand the geometry and mechanics of the plate-boundary interface, where the
very largest earthquakes occur, and the factors that limit the depth extent of
their occurrence. The combination of precise earthquake locations and how they
are situated relative to the velocity structure at depth is the key to this
analysis. Second, we are trying to relate precisely located earthquakes to the
detailed seismic velocity structure of the downgoing plate. We are particularly
interested in constraining the possible role that dehydration reactions due to
metamorphism in the downgoing plate play in enabling intermediate-depth
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;