* 0410267
* Permanent Structures Across Scales: Assessing Stability the Effects of Perturbations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2011
* Christopher Jones, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2011
* USD 589,167.00

Proposal: DMS-0410267&lt;br/&gt;PI: Christopher K. Jones&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of North Carolina Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;Title: Permanent Structures
across Scales: Assessing Stability and the Effects of
Perturbations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis
of structures that span scales pose challenges to mathematics that have led in
recent years to new ideas and theories. The investigator in this work focuses on
issues associated with the stability of permanent structures that have
contrasting structure at the different scales. Their presence in a given system
is the result of a balance between nonlinearity and a spatio-physical effect
such as dispersion (e.g., for a solitary wave in optical communications),
diffusion (e.g., propagating waves in biological media) or convection (e.g.,
shocks in materials or gases). The issue of stability requires a deep analysis
that can reveal more intricate features in the inner workings of a given system.
The work of this project will address four issues: (1) the determination of the
stability for waves that are held together on different scales by different
spatio-physical effects; (2) The assessment of the stability of patterns in
multi-dimensions that have substructures on different scales; (3) The effects of
stability at the macro-scale on controlling variations on a smaller scale; and
(4) For complex structures, the best way to measure the manifestations of
instability that influence a range of scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical
questions in a physical or biological model often concern the stability of a
permanent structure, such as a nonlinear wave or pattern. The work of this
project aims at developing techniques for assessing the stability of structures
that cross physical scales.&lt;br/&gt;A variety of information may be available
at the different scales and the goal is to develop approaches for patching
together these contrasting pieces of information to answer the relevant physical
questions. Problems in advanced technology and communications routinely exploit
the optical properties of materials. The work described in this proposal will
supply techniques for key structures of existing and promised technologies, such
as high bit-rate communications and Bose-Einstein condensates. At a more general
level, the techniques to be developed promise a new viewpoint on stability
determinations for higher-dimensional structures and patterns. Another dimension
is the training of graduate students and postdocs in interdisciplinary
mathematics. This work will both further that effort and systematize some of the
key activities in the training of students for interdisciplinary work. In
particular, a focused effort will be aimed at teaching problem discernment while
working in a team with domain scientists. The involvement of under-represented
minorities will also be a goal and it is anticipated that this effort will bring
a number of minorities and women to a competitive level in modern
interdisciplinary mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;