* 0410991
* Implementation of UC Davis Model Reformed Physics Course
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Charles De Leone, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Warren W. Hein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 70,811.00

&lt;br/&gt;Physics (13) The primary project goal is to improve student learning
in physics for California State University San Marcos' (CSUSM) growing, diverse
student population. It is well established that traditional lecture based
introductory physics courses have less than optimal student outcomes. To improve
student outcomes the physics department at UC Davis developed a reformed
introductory physics course for the students in the bio-sciences. The reformed
course follows an active learning model, including reduced lecture and increased
time in active learning based discussion/laboratories along with reduced topic
coverage and a modified course content sequence that begins with energy instead
of forces. The outcomes of this course at Davis, especially the improved
outcomes for women, make this course an excellent candidate for better serving
CSUSM's diverse student population. This project is adapting and implementing
this course at CSUSM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a two year
staged implementation that includes close collaboration with the course
originator, refinement of the curriculum to adapt it to the structural
constraints of CSUSM, an evaluation of the effects on student learning by a
professor of education, and an outside evaluation of the implementation by a
working committee of physics faculty from institutions that are candidates for
future adoption of the reformed curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
proposal is producing: &lt;br/&gt;1. A newly installed active learning based
curriculum at CSUSM that will become a standard part of the bio-science
student's curriculum, enhancing learning outcomes and contributing to the
culture of active learning at CSUSM. &lt;br/&gt;2. A careful study of the
implementation process for the reformed course that is identifying the barriers
to implementation for this and other reformed courses. &lt;br/&gt;3. A set of
recommendations for the original course developer on the specific adaptations
required for the success of the course at this and other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;4. A dissemination of the results of the implementation to the
original course developers, and to a broader audience at national meetings and
in publications in the physics education research and in the science education
research journals. &lt;br/&gt;5. An improvement to the existing curriculum of
the reformed course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal stem from the implementation of a research based curriculum in a
setting where the process of implementation can be evaluated and results
disseminated to the science education community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact resulting from the proposed activity include: 1) improvement of
student learning in physics at CSUSM, particularly of female students, and 2)
establishment of the reformed course as a viable alternative for other
institutions seeking improved student learning outcomes and resulting in the
advancement of teaching and learning in undergraduate science and mathematics
nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;