* 0410406
* Object-Oriented Image Analysis and Synthesis via Computational Harmonic Analysis and Boundary Value Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Naoki Saito, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2008
* USD 282,492.00

The objective of this project is to develop a set of tools capable of
performing&lt;br/&gt;truly localized Fourier analysis and synthesis of objects
of interest in a given&lt;br/&gt;image that have smooth boundaries but of
general shape. To do so, we will bring&lt;br/&gt;in tools in the traditionally
different fields such as boundary detection and &lt;br/&gt;delineation
algorithms (computer vision), image compression and denoising &lt;br/&gt;schemes
(image processing), elliptic boundary value problem solvers and
&lt;br/&gt;potential function computations (scientific computing), and Fourier
analysis and&lt;br/&gt;fast algorithms (computational harmonic analysis). Our
primary concern is &lt;br/&gt;analysis (e.g., extraction and characterization of
spatial frequency features)&lt;br/&gt;and synthesis (e.g., reconstruction from
the compressed representation of &lt;br/&gt;objects after their boundaries are
detected and they are segmented either &lt;br/&gt;manually by a human
interpreter using a pointing device or automatically by the&lt;br/&gt;algorithms
proposed by other researchers. On the one hand, the boundary of
an&lt;br/&gt;object provides important information: geometry and shape of the
object. On the&lt;br/&gt;other hand, it becomes a nuisance for other tasks such
as the Fourier analysis&lt;br/&gt;of the internal information (e.g., textures)
of the object because it creates&lt;br/&gt;spurious interference patterns due to
the Gibbs phenomenon that masks the&lt;br/&gt;important internal information of
the object. We will decouple the geometry and&lt;br/&gt;internal information of
the object by solving the elliptic boundary value &lt;br/&gt;problem on the
domain where the object is supported. More precisely, for the
&lt;br/&gt;analysis of the object, we embed the detected and segmented object in
an &lt;br/&gt;otherwise empty rectangular domain, and smoothly extend the object
to the &lt;br/&gt;outside of the object boundary by solving the Poisson equation
with the &lt;br/&gt;homogeneous Dirichlet boundary condition at the edges of the
covering rectangle.&lt;br/&gt;Since the values on the edges of the covering
rectangle vanish, this smoothly&lt;br/&gt;extended component can be expanded
into the Fourier sine series with quickly &lt;br/&gt;decaying coefficients,
which enable us to effectively characterize and compress&lt;br/&gt;the internal
information of the object. Finally, we subtract this component&lt;br/&gt;from
the original object on the supported domain to obtain the component
&lt;br/&gt;responsible for geometric information of the object, which turns out
to be a &lt;br/&gt;solution of the Laplace equation on that domain. For the
synthesis or &lt;br/&gt;reconstruction of the object, we need to store the
Fourier sine coefficients of&lt;br/&gt;the extended component and the boundary
coordinates and the original values of &lt;br/&gt;the object at those points in
the analysis stage. Then, the original object is &lt;br/&gt;recovered by adding
the geometric component (which is recovered by evaluating &lt;br/&gt;the single
and double layer potentials on the domain) and the smoothly
extended&lt;br/&gt;component (which is easily recovered from the Fourier sine
coefficients). In &lt;br/&gt;order to solve the Laplace/Poisson equations, we
will fully utilize the advanced&lt;br/&gt;Laplace/Poisson solvers based on Fast
Multipole Methods. We will also extend &lt;br/&gt;our analysis and synthesis
paradigm to an object with holes (i.e., &lt;br/&gt;multiply-connected domains),
investigate the effect of noise on the boundary &lt;br/&gt;shapes and values,
and investigate the effect of compression of the boundary &lt;br/&gt;information
to the quality of the reconstructed images. Furthermore, we
will&lt;br/&gt;develop a gradient and directional derivative estimation
algorithm equipped with&lt;br/&gt;regularization (high-frequency attenuation)
capabilities, which will provide &lt;br/&gt;good boundary conditions and
consequently improve the performance of the &lt;br/&gt;boundary detection and
delineation algorithms as well as the accuracy of the &lt;br/&gt;solutions of
the Laplace/Poisson equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential applications of
our methodology include biometrics and image-based &lt;br/&gt;diagnostics in
medicine and other fields such as geology and material
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;Biometrics has recently become a tremendously important
subject for homeland &lt;br/&gt;security reasons. Since our paradigm provides
both geometric/shape information&lt;br/&gt;and internal texture information of
an object of interest in an separate manner&lt;br/&gt;for images obtained by
various sensors and imaging modalities, it may allow data&lt;br/&gt;examiners to
characterize the features of the objects of interest much more
&lt;br/&gt;reliably compared to the methods which solely use either shape or
texture &lt;br/&gt;information. For example, characterizing and diagnosing
cancerous cells in &lt;br/&gt;various image modalities including Pap smear test
images in gynecology may &lt;br/&gt;benefit from using the tools we will develop
in our project (e.g., object-based &lt;br/&gt;storage, cataloging, compression,
and analysis). Similarly, extracting &lt;br/&gt;quantitative information from
optical images of sections of rock core samples &lt;br/&gt;(e.g., the size and
internal texture/spatial frequency information of some &lt;br/&gt;fossils),
which is important in earth science including oil and gas exploration
&lt;br/&gt;industry, may also benefit from our research. We envision that
scientists in &lt;br/&gt;completely different disciplines such as medicine,
biology, and geology, will &lt;br/&gt;start noticing the importance of
computational harmonic analysis and certain &lt;br/&gt;partial differential
equations (PDEs) if they use our tools to be developed in&lt;br/&gt;this project
and feel that these are useful for their own tasks. This is a &lt;br/&gt;great
thing we, as applied and computational mathematicians, can hope
for.&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the educational impact, this project will create a
common meeting&lt;br/&gt;ground among students in the different fields: applied
mathematics, computer &lt;br/&gt;science, electrical engineering, statistics,
and neuroscience. We expect lively&lt;br/&gt;interchanges of ideas among such
students who will participate in this research&lt;br/&gt;project or attend the
associated courses and seminars we are developing. &lt;br/&gt;Students
participating in our project will also learn computational harmonic
&lt;br/&gt;analysis, the basic theory and fast computational algorithms of
certain PDEs, &lt;br/&gt;and image analysis, which will become indispensable for
the future applied &lt;br/&gt;mathematicians and scientists working in the area
of imaging science, and which&lt;br/&gt;will be surely helpful for their future
career, either in academia or in industry.&lt;br/&gt;