* 0410007
* Studies of Heterogeneous Nucleation of Ice in Thin Films
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Will Cantrell, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2009
* USD 263,700.00

Professor Will Cantrell of the Michigan Technological University is supported by
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Physical Meteorology
Program to investigate the molecular-scale mechanisms responsible for the
nucleation of ice by particulates. Two classes of foreign substances are to be
employed (organic films and insoluble solid surfaces) as a way of interrogating
the relative roles of strain accommodation and crystalline defects in the
nucleation process. The proposed experiments are designed to probe assumptions
of classical nucleation theory such as the role played by the critical embrio,
the effect on nucleation of the substrate morphology and the role of structured
water molecules in the interfacial region. Infrared spectroscopy will be used in
the form of attenuated total reflectance or a variant, attenuated internal
reflection, spectroscopy. Graduate and undergraduate students will be educated
this interdisciplinary research area involving chemistry, physics and
atmospheric science.

Ice formation on or within aerosol particles remains as one of the most poorly
understood phenomena in the atmosphere. An improved understanding will allow
better predictions of precipitation and the effects of changes in atmospheric
aerosols on clouds and climate. This long-standing problem will require careful
experimentation coupled with advanced theory to adequately address it.