* 0410842
* Planning Digital Products To Strengthen Two-Year College Mathematics Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Philip Mahler, American Mathematical Association of Two-Year College
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Davenport
* 08/31/2009
* USD 87,000.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In September 1995, the American
Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC) published Crossroads in
Mathematics: Standards for Introductory College Mathematics Before Calculus
(Crossroads), providing a vision, standards, and recommendations, to faculty
teaching lower division collegiate mathematics. The goal of this project is to
plan the digital products to accompany the updated AMATYC Standards 2006
document to equip faculty teaching introductory college mathematics to meet the
mathematics learning needs of their diverse student populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Determine
the most important areas for which supplements and digital products should be
developed to supplement the updated AMATYC Standards.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Research and
analyze various media to select the most appropriate delivery
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Establish timelines and identify materials and
resources, human and otherwise, needed for developing and producing the various
digital products.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Develop a production and dissemination plan that
places the digital products within easy reach of full- and part-time faculty and
mathematics departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project culminates in fully
developed design plans for approximately five projects related to implementation
of the updated AMATYC Standards. These projects exemplify different modes of
instructional delivery strategies and fit the most pressing demands for
implementation materials. The design of effective digital products establishes a
critical bridge between an updated Standards document and the production of
usable multimedia supplements for more than 20,000 full and part time
mathematics faculty in the nation's two-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project is its potential to impact on student learning
for more than one million mathematics students at the lower division collegiate
level. It builds on, extends, and enhances the 1995 Crossroads and addresses the
major challenge of communicating national standards regarding the teaching and
learning of mathematics in the first two years of college. The project is
informed by the results of research and previous NSF-funded reform projects, and
incorporates appropriate technologies in the design of digital
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact occurs through the potential
of the digital products to influence the teaching practice of individual
mathematics faculty members across the nation. Mathematics departments and
institutions benefit from improved content and pedagogical preparation of
mathematics faculty. The ultimate beneficiaries are the students, who will be
better prepared for the workplace, future educational experiences, and their
roles as educated citizens.&lt;br/&gt;