* 0410439
* BE/CNH: Linking Human and Biophysical Processes in Coastal Marine Ecosystems of Baja California
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Christopher Costello, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,616,474.00

Small-scale fisheries are dominant actors in coastal marine ecosystems, engaging
more than 90 percent of the fishers in the world and producing more than one-
half of the world's annual marine catch, but their dynamics are poorly
understood. Scarcity of data, the multi-species and multi-fleet nature of most
small-scale fisheries, and complex feedbacks among human institutions at the
local, regional, and global scale render existing fisheries models inapplicable
to most small-scale fisheries. The combination of local exploitation with multi-
scale management of multiple target species creates a test bed for comparison of
the biological and socioeconomic effectiveness of management at different scales
ranging from the local community to centralized government. Most small-scale
fishing is concentrated in coastal areas characterized by high productivity and
diversity, such as coral reefs, coastal lagoons, and estuaries. These in turn
are maintained by complex interactions between oceanographic processes in the
nearshore marine environment and exchanges occurring at the land-sea interface.
This interdisciplinary research project will simultaneously consider these
different facets of complexity to examine higher-level, emergent behaviors that
are likely to characterize small-scale fisheries of the Pacific coast of Baja
California, Mexico. This research program will address the following overarching
question: What explains the variation in performance of small-scale fisheries
and associated coastal marine ecosystems? Performance is evaluated in terms of
resource productivity, economic yield, sustainability of human activities and
communities, and persistence of marine populations and ecosystems. Specific
questions to be addressed include: (1) What are the relative roles and feedbacks
between environmental variability and human institutions in determining the
performance of small-scale fisheries? (2) How do feedbacks among biophysical and
human components of small-scale fisheries vary across spatial (local to
regional) and temporal (year-to-year vs. decadal) scales? (3) What fisheries
management systems are more robust to uncertainty? Research will include the
development of a series of integrated biophysical, agent-based, and bioeconomic
models; statistical analysis and retrospective analyses of historical trends in
catches, effort, and oceanographic conditions; and acquisition of new data
through ecological and ethnographic field studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will make significant contributions to biocomplexity theory, research
approaches, and applications. First, it will elucidate complex interactions and
feedbacks among biological, physical, and human processes linked through
fisheries in coastal marine systems. It will integrate socioeconomic,
ecological, and oceanographic approaches to produce predictive models of the
spatial and temporal dynamics of small-scale fisheries. Second, this research
program will provide graduate training in modeling and integrated social and
ecological field approaches to studying human-natural systems. Finally, it will
provide general guidance for the management of small-scale fisheries and a
framework for examining the possible outcomes of environmental change, changes
in fisheries regulations and incentives, and the new and future uses of coastal
resources associated with population increases and coastal development. This
project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2004 special competition
in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;