* 0410760
* Revising intermediate optics for greater conceptual understanding and the development of complex problem solving skills
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Timothy Grove, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Warren W. Hein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 60,566.00

Physics (13) This project restructures the intermediate optics laboratory and
lecture courses at Indiana University-Purdue University Fort Wayne (IPFW). By
adopting interactive lecture demonstrations and an interactive engagement
approach, students exit the course with a much greater conceptual understanding
of optics. In this project we adapt five major elements. In lecture we are using
interactive lecture demonstrations and simulations adapted from Physlets and
other sources. We are bringing aspects of interactive engagement into both the
laboratory and lecture. From a CCLI project recently completed by one of the Co-
PIs we are taking the overall approach and laboratory format. Many of the
initial laboratories are adapted from Tutorials in Physics. From professional
practice we are adapting the process of having students make oral presentations
to classmates and department faculty. Also from professional practice we are
adapting LabVIEW and optical simulation software to provide students with
important work place experience. The laboratory provides 10 weeks of concept and
skill building experiments investigating geometric optics, image formation and
waves. The remaining five weeks of the laboratory are devoted to more in-depth
investigations. Six advanced experiments are being developed that build on the
initial part of the program. This grant has a great impact on the department,
university (IPFW), and surrounding industrial optics and laser community.