* 0410246
* EHS:Embedded Systems for Feedback Control in Fluid Flow Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2008
* Miriam Leeser, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Tadmor - Abstract

This research focuses on the use of feedback in unsteady fluid flow control, and
on the implications born out by feedback control on tightly interconnected
issues of system modeling, control & observer design, algorithm development and
embedded systems implementation. The research pursues the design of distributed
real-time sensing, processing and actuation through the use of distributed
reconfigurable hardware (FPGA) resources. Decentralized computation arises
naturally in the context of sensor and actuator arrays, addressing parameterized
spatiotemporal structures. FPGA resources enables applications to be realized in
real-time that up to know have not been possible. FPGA implementations will give
a factor of ten or more speed up to the algorithms currently being used, and
become a technology enabler by allowing flow control to consider new real-time
algorithms and altogether new forms of computationally intensive actuation.

Effective feedback flow & combustion regulation methods are critical enablers
for improving a wide range of industrial applications that involve shear layer
mixing, ranging from aircraft, automotive, semiconductor and imaging, air
conditioning, the chemical process industry, furnaces and incinerators, to
aeroengines & ground based gas turbines for power generation. The research
conducted in this project is driven by the principal benchmark of suppressing
thermoacoustic instabilities in a bluff body flame holder by using distributed
sensors and actuators and embedded computations. This problem gives rise to a
set of case studies of escalated complexity, used to successively isolate and
remove key stumbling blocks. The project vestigates methods to make such
techniques more easily applicable to future uses through the development of
tools and design libraries. In conjunction with the case studies, the research
is developing a generic toolbox for (hybrid) models, design algorithms and
embedded systems implementations in feedback flow and combustion control.



