* 0410546
* A radical approach to teaching object-oriented programming
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Ann Moskol, Rhode Island College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 06/30/2007
* USD 62,476.00

Computer Science (31)

This project adapts an introductory programming course originally developed at
Brown University for use at Rhode Island College. This course is characterized
by extensive use of graphics, very early object-orientation (encapsulation,
inheritance, and polymorphism are all taught before such traditional topics as
arithmetic and flow of control), and a strong emphasis on design. The materials
need to be adapted because the student populations are very different; the
original course is a large lecture course, and the new course is divided into
separate classes with a maximum enrollment of 26; and the new course has a
weekly in-class lab. The original course materials, including several chapters
of a text, a complete set of slides, and programming assignments, have been
thoroughly tested during the past six years at Brown. These materials will both
interest students and give them a strong grounding in object-oriented
principles. The project includes a detailed evaluation of the resulting course.
By adapting and generalizing these materials, the project makes them accessible
to more colleges and even high schools, which could have a broad impact on the
way introductory programming is taught. Moreover, the design and results of the
evaluation could be useful even to institutions that choose a different approach
to teaching this course.