* 0410335
* SGER:     Biologically Inspired Computation to Understand Regulatory Gene Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Bhubaneswar Mishra, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 01/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

We seek to initiate an exploratory research program aimed at creating design
tools for designing, optimizing, simulating and testing biological circuits
built out of basic machineries of biology; specifically, mechanisms composed of
DNA, RNA and protein interactions. These circuits are dispersed, asynchronous
but are easily replicable as their basic components are created out of those
elements that already occur in nature and can be synthesized, controlled and
degraded using the same principles. The basic biological principles that they
utilize are: polymerase-induced replication, transcription controlled by
transcription activation, translation into proteins, interference by small RNA,
and modulation via extra-chromosomal plasmids. Because of the underlying design
principles, biological circuits created in this manner can be easily transfected
into simple prokaryotic organism such as E. coli, eukaryotic organisms such as
yeast as well as cell lines. We hope to gain a better understanding of the
biological mechanisms of interest by studying the interaction between the
designed biological circuit, whose operation is known, modeled and already
studied, and the unknown function of the genes of the host organism. In this
manner, the proposed research program extends the current functional genomics
methods based on knock-in mutants, knock-out mutants, genes perturbed by extra-
chromosomal plasmids and interference through RNAi.

Thus ultimately the proposed research is aimed at understanding gene networks
through computational and mathematical methods using both forward engineering
and reverse engineering paradigms. For forward engineering, we directly address
various topics dealing with genetic circuits - in particular, we focus on
creating novel artificial circuits out of regulatory genes, RNAs, and proteins.
For the reverse engineering, in the context of our other related research, we
have also addressed the problem of inferring gene networks with techniques
analyzing time-course data in abundance data, such as transcriptome data, but
not excluding proteome, or metabolome data. Furthermore, it should be apparent
that in the near future these methods could play an important role in gene
therapy, genetic modification of organisms or even large-scale systems to solve
challenging computational problems.

The major computational challenge is the development of novel design principles
for delay-independent asynchronous circuits using simple building blocks such as
combinatorial logic-gates (AND, NOT, XOR, etc.), arbiter circuits (Muller
C-circuit) and memory elements (FIFO queue elements).

