* 0410016
* BE/CNH: The Vulnerability and Adaptive Capacity of Coupled Human-Environment Systems in the Southern Yucatan Peninsular Region
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* J. Ronald Eastman, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 149,684.00

Land change and sustainability science calls for increased attention to the
vulnerability and resilience of coupled human-environment systems to various
stresses and perturbations tied to increased human demands in the face of
climate change. Seasonal tropical forest biomes require special attention
because of the amount of deforestation taking place in them. Since 1997, a
large, interdisciplinary project has been developing data and analysis to
understand the human and biophysical dynamics of deforestation, and to model and
project land changes in the southern Yucatan, which includes the Calakmul
Biosphere Reserve. The understanding gained is being used to develop insights
about the vulnerability and resilience of coupled land uses and land covers in
the region, ultimately building towards a full-blown vulnerability study. The
project seeks to identify some of the critical factors linked to sustained human
disturbance and increasing aridity (climate change) on the land systems. It will
complete extant work on an extremely detailed forest-land cover classification
and its accuracy assessment, and it will bring help make that work current into
2004, via ASTER imagery. The project will establish an AVHRR archive that will
ultimately address the question: Have Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
(NDVI) measurements decreased among the extant mature forests, and is this
linked to increased aridity? The study will also use existing data and modest
levels of new data to compare the litter between mature forests and successional
forest and examine the impact of land history on biomass accumulation. A carbon
stock estimate for the region will be generated using extant tree measurements
as well as litter and soil carbon data. Several biodiversity data sets (transect
captures) will be completed in order to address the question of biodiversity
loss linked to habitat change from deforestation. Finally, a survey of farmer's
responses to the recent hurricane Isidore will be completed to determine how
differently endowed households respond to hurricane disturbances.

The Southern Yucatan Peninsular Region (SYPR) project on which this study builds
has laid out one of the most comprehensive assessments of land change undertaken
anywhere, linking biophysical and human subsystem dynamics into several
different kinds of models that explain and project land change. In this sense,
it provides methodological and analytical advances for emerging land-change
science by linking the natural, social, and spatial sciences. Land-change
science now moves toward questions of system response to perturbations and
stresses, such as climate change. The SYPR project has the capacity to take a
leadership role in this effort as well. This research will begin the transition
of the project to questions of vulnerability, resilience, and sustainability of
land systems in one of the most important seasonal tropical forests remaining in
the Americas. It begins to provide the answers to the question: How will forest
types and land-uses respond to a more occupied, frequently used (cut and burned)
landscape that is subject to climate change? The answers are important for the
many people who call the region home as well as to the Calakmul Biosphere
Reserve situated in the center of the region and pivotal the Mesoamerican
Biological Corridor. Research results will have more general utility for
scholars and practitioners working in many other parts of the world, too.