* 0410485
* Flexible Regulation of Dynamic Coalitions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Naftaly Minsky, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2008
* USD 325,000.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research &lt;br/&gt;CI
SE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 0410485&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Minsky,
Naftaly&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rutgers Univ New Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: Flexible Regulation of Dynamic
Coalitions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing tendency for
organizations of various kinds to form coalitions in order to collaborate. And
there is a critical need for such coalitions (sometimes called grids) to be
regulated in order to ensure conformance with their defining policy and in order
to protect the interest of member organizations. With current technologies, such
a regula-tion is usually carried out in an ad hoc manner, often involving manual
intervention by administrators of individual organizations, or by officers of
the coalition. This makes the deployment of a coalition, and its evolution, very
laborious, inflexible and unreliable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this project is to develop a regulatory mechanism for dynamic coali-tions, that
has the following characteristics: (1) high expressive power; (2) scalable en-
forcement; and (3) flexibility, which means that (i) each member-organization is
able to formulate its internal policy, and to change it at will---subject only
to the global coalition policy---independently of the internal policies of other
organizations in the coalition; (ii) and it is easy for a new member to join a
given coalition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project should have the following
impact: First, it would provide flexible and secure means for various
organizations to collaborate by forming coalitions. Second, the con-cept of
policy-hierarchy to be developed, would be useful in many domains, besides coa-
litions--such as in establishing regulatory frameworks for organizations that
consists of many departments. Third, the regulatory mechanism for coalitions
would be useful in the teaching of software engineering, distributed systems,
and e-commerce.&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D. Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program Director,
CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;June 28, 2004&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;