* 0410564
* Hands-on Interdisciplinary Laboratory Program: An Approach to Strengthen the Weather Radar Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Robert Palmer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 08/31/2008
* USD 199,681.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is generating a
unique, interdisciplinary program for training future engineers and
meteorologists in the full set of competencies needed to take raw radar data and
transform it into meaningful interpretations of weather phenomena. The heart of
the project is the development of a set of four undergraduate courses, offered
by the Meteorology and the Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering Programs. These
courses are based on material adapted from a nationlly known radar program at
Colorado State University. They are providing hands-on laboratory experiences in
the special knowledge and skills necessary for organizing real-time weather
data, improving and preparing that data for display, and interpreting its
meteorological and scientific significance. Through this program, on-campus
students have access to weather data from the recently constructed National
Weather Radar Testbed (NWRT). Moreover the PIs are establishing a website
through which students across the nation will have access to this state-of-the-
art radar data. In order to motivate and retain undergraduates, the PIs plan to
use a small, diverse team of undergraduate peer teachers to assist with the
laboratory experiments. An expert in learning and course development on the PI's
campus is devising an assessment plan. The investigators plan to partner with
the Oklahoma Climatological Survey (OCS) to adapt and distribute project
materials directly to K-12 students and teachers via the OCS Earth-Storm
outreach program.