* 0410654
* Zooarchaeological Study of Pan-Mediterranean Trends in Paleolithic Diet, Predator-Prey Dynamics &amp; Ecology
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Mary Stiner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2008
* USD 195,400.00

The Mediterranean Sea forms of the hub of three great continental masses,
Africa, Europe, and Asia, and thus figures prominently in discussions of human
origins, population expansions, and culture change. The Mediterranean Basin
provides a crucial laboratory for this kind of research on account of its unique
ecology, with many endemic taxa enriched over time by periodic incursions of
species from adjacent Afro-Arabian, Irano-Turanian, and Pontic biogeographic
regions. Some of the earliest evidence for resource intensification among humans
occurs in the eastern end of the basin during the Late Pleistocene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Stiner's NSF-funded research examines variation in
human subsistence and animal community structure across the Mediterranean Basin
from 400,000+ to 8,000 years ago in four distinct ecogeographic quadrants. The
project is principally a zooarchaeological study, but it includes stable carbon,
oxygen and nitrogen isotope analyses of key ungulate taxa in order to track
gross variation in vegetation structure, humidity, and temperature through space
and time. The proposed research raises questions about Paleolithic subsistence
and society in the Mediterranean Basin at larger temporal and spatial scales
than could be addressed previously. At issue are the geography and chronology of
key transitions in human predatory niches across distinct areas of the region,
particularly in terms of prey age selection, dietary breadth, and the intensity
of carcass processing efforts. If variation in the prey species hunted by
hunters cannot be explained by climate-driving changes in animal community
structure, it likely indicates changes in human predatory niche. The research
undertakes comparisons of prey species abundance and associations in
archaeofaunas across Mediterranean regions and through time, using established
criteria for categorizing prey. Predator-prey simulation modeling provides
specific expectations in the investigation of hunting pressure and
sustainability that can be related changes in human population densities.
Climate-driven restructuring of animal communities will be evaluated from
independent stable isotope data obtained from tooth enamel carbonate and bone
collagen, and from age/size distortion in the population structures of slow-
growing small animals and ungulates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most enlightening
with respect to human subsistence evolution are "niche boundary shifts" and how
these transitions cluster in time. Prior research has shown, for example, that
the development of the large game hunting niche as defined by prime-age-dominant
mortality patterns dates to the onset of the Middle Paleolithic period or
before. Far more difficult to explain are the downward shifts in trophic level
that characterized later humans. The focus on meat exploitation is an obvious
necessity for any zooarchaeological project, but there is more reason for it
than just this. Meat is one of the very few sources of complete protein in
nature, and its rarity sharpens humans' interest in obtaining it in large
packages. Large animals are available sporadically, although sharing can help to
remedy the unevenness in the supply. The optimal rate of meat consumption is in
small but regular doses, however, and small game can represent reliable,
continuous sources in some circumstances. Any subsistence behaviors that enhance
the predictability of critical nutrients-such as increasing the nutritional
yield and/or more efficient harvesting of resilient (very productive) small
game-can improve childhood survivorship and thereby swell a population without a
change in birthrate. The human "footprint" on Late Pleistocene ecosystems is
difficult to deny in many world regions yet it has been equally difficult to
separate from independent paleoenvironmental changes. Distinguishing these
effects can only be accomplished through careful control of the key variables.
Towards this end, geography is held constant in four study areas of the
Mediterranean Basin in order to make sense of variation in Paleolithic game use.
The project responds to unique opportunities to close significant gaps in each
Mediterranean archaeofaunal series and to understand the causes of subsistence
change there. The scale at which this research integrates zooarchaeological and
stable isotope data has never before been attempted and will provide valuable
reference points for scholars of human dietary change in the Paleolithic and for
wild species that eventually came under domestication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of the research are relevant to global questions about the relation
between human demography, predatory niche, and animal community changes. The new
assemblages targeted by this study will also greatly enhance the value of
existing large data sets and help clarify the timing and geographic centers of
rapid population growth during the later Pleistocene. To date, most information
on human population history has been obtained from comparisons of modern human
genetic diversity, which on the whole suggest several demographic pulses
originating from western Asia and/or Africa. Time is the most difficult variable
to control in these studies, because the biological clocks inferred from gene
mutation rates are notoriously inaccurate. By contrast, human demographic pulses
evidenced by the zooarchaeological record can be dated by radiometric techniques
and their geographic positions compared. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
program fosters international collaboration in four host countries, where Stiner
and students will work directly with local archaeologists and other scientists.
A significant proportion of this grant will fund cost-effective graduate student
research in the context of cross-disciplinary science. The research also
addresses a larger need for integrative approaches with an evolutionary time
depth for documenting the long-term place of people in ecosystems, a plea
underscored recently by the scientists hosted by the NSF-funded Santa Fe
Institute conference in May 2003 on "The Robustness of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;