* 0410220
* Between the Empires: Iron Age Economics 1200 -100 BC
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Lisa Kealhofer, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 24,784.00

During the first millennium BC, after the collapse of the Hittites, Egyptians,
Mycenae and Knossos, the economic and political shape of the world changed
dramatically. During this time, Anatolia emerged as a major nexus for regional
exchange and political interaction. While individual Iron Age centers in
Anatolia have drawn archaeological interest for more than 100 years, little
attempt has been made to understand how they interacted at a regional scale. The
rise of independent merchants and the development of new shipping technologies
produced unprecedented expansion both westward into North Africa and Spain, and
northward into the Black Sea and Europe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite a broad
knowledge of these major political changes, we have very few documents that
provide us with any sense of the contemporary cultural transformations. Stories
remain speculative. In Turkey, or Anatolia - a bridge connecting East and West -
researchers have only the sketchiest sense of how economies changed during this
period of increasingly rapid and distant interaction, yet this is a hotbed of
political and economic development. The larger project proposal seeks to
investigate this little known but critical region of economic
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By investigating the economic relationships
of the eastern Mediterranean, specifically from coastal to inland Anatolia, over
the course of the 1st millennium BC, the investigators aim to more fully grasp
the nature of the economic dynamics of the period and how they formed the basis
for the subsequent expansion of the Greek, Roman, and Persian empires.
Specifically an attempt is made to understand the exchange of elite ceramics
across the region as a key proxy for measuring economic dynamics. Because the
chemical signature of clays are locally unique, elemental analysis of trade
ceramics it should be possible to differentiate trade wares from different
places. By sampling trade ceramics from well-dated archaeological contexts one
can establish a detailed sequence of economic change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this feasibility study for a larger project the researchers will establish the
logistics of sampling ceramics from many different projects, gaining permissions
for export and analysis, assessing the possibility of sampling not only from
ongoing excavations but from museum collections of the period, and running
preliminary elemental analyses to confirm the proposed analytical methodology
(INAA). Over the coming year the investigators will work with site and museum
personnel, collect, prepare and submit ceramic samples for analysis. Identifying
ceramics that have been widely traded, as well as those more regionally
exchanged, will allow an understanding of how the scale and organization of
economic systems change during the 1st millennium BC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
many archaeological projects include some measure of international
collaboration, this work extends the collaboration to include researchers from
Turkey, Europe, Japan, Australia, as well as within the US. This represents a
new and highly ambitious level of research collaboration for the region. The
size of the geochemical and ceramic database created by this project is also
ambitious and will be a major resource for ongoing archaeological research in
Turkey and adjacent regions. The full-scale project should also provide an ideal
setting for graduate student training both in archaeology and archaeological
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;