* 0410328
* Howard University Science, Engineering and Mathematics (HUSEM) Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2013
* Charles Betsey, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 02/28/2013
* USD 2,740,733.00

Howard University is committed to establishing an infrastructure that
coordinates STEM education campus-wide with a focus on producing graduates of
excellent quality who can assume leadership roles in the engineering and
scientific community. Through the NSF Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), Howard will form a coordinated,
cohesive community of STEM scholars, thereby increasing STEM enrollment at all
levels with a special emphasis on students of exceptional quality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Howard University will provide all STEM students with
access to a number of coordinated, multidisciplinary activities that will expose
the student to the culture, traditions and rewards of scientific and engineering
careers through a program called Howard University Science, Engineering and
Mathematics Program (HUSEM). The ultimate goal is to retain these students in
STEM disciplines, to have them graduate and to adequately prepare them to pursue
advanced degrees (particularly the Ph.D.) in STEM fields. All STEM students will
have access to HUSEM activities; however, some activities are particularly
designed for the high-ability student who will be groomed for direct entry to a
Ph. D. program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed initiative will consist of
four activities - the Distinguished Scholars Program; the Undergraduate Research
Program; the Resource Retention Center; and the Interdisciplinary New Frontiers
in Science and Engineering Modular Course. These programs will be integrated to
accomplish the goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The activities
will increase the production of underrepresented graduates who have a stronger
fundamental understanding of mathematics and science, an improved level of
undergraduate preparation and the ability to seek new knowledge through
research. The objectives of the program and activities are all aimed at
addressing these intellectual challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The activities will create a STEM culture, which produces students motivated to
pursue advanced degrees in STEM and careers in the professoriate. This culture
will produce scientists and engineers who have an appreciation for lifelong
learning, leadership skills and the ability to work in multicultural,
interdisciplinary teams. As a national leader in the on-campus production of
African American Ph.D.s in STEM fields and the production of Black
undergraduates who go on to earn Ph.D.s in STEM, Howard is uniquely capable of
creating these broader impacts. &lt;br/&gt;