* 0410055
* Development of Multi-Functional Heat Pulse Probe  for Ecological and  Soil Hydrological Monitoring of Plant Root Zones
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* Benjamin Shaw, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,594,807.00

The objective of this research is to further develop and test the
multifunctional heat pulse probe (MF-HPP) method for simultaneous measurement of
bulk soil thermal, water flow and solute transport properties, and to design,
develop and test a robust MF-HPP with wireless data transmission capabilities
for remote in situ field applications for application in plant root zones of
both natural and agricultural ecosystems. The intellectual merit of the proposed
MF-HPP lies in the combination of various innovative measurement techniques that
combined will (1) resolve measurement uncertainty issues that result from soil
heterogeneities, and (2) provide for an essential new field approach that will
advance the basic understanding of the coupled flow and transport of flow,
chemicals and nutrients, and heat in plant root zones. The broader impacts of
the proposed HPP development are both educational as well as scientific. Through
the already established infrastructure of REMOTE (Real-time Educational
Monitoring Of The Environment) at UC Davis, application of telemetry for
wireless data transmission will make in-situ environmental data, in both
numerical and graphical form, available to K-12 students and for undergraduate
and graduate class instruction. The proposed research will be interdisciplinary
with national and international collaborations, already ongoing through
collaborations of University of California scientists with the co-investigators
in the US, Japan and Australia.