* 0410318
* hp-adaptive FOSLS Methods for Nonlinear PDE Problems with Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Jeffrey Heys, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2007
* USD 380,000.00

This proposal is for development of an effective hp-adaptive First-
Order&lt;br/&gt;System Least-Squares (FOSLS) method for nonlinear partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations (PDEs) that may exhibit singularities and other
non-smoothness &lt;br/&gt;properties. The general FOSLS methodology is already a
powerful tool for&lt;br/&gt;the solution of PDE-based problems in science and
engineering. One of its&lt;br/&gt;main advantages is that it can be used to
transform a given set of&lt;br/&gt;equations into a loosely coupled system of
scalar equations that can be&lt;br/&gt;treated easily by multilevel finite
elements. The reformulation is done&lt;br/&gt;by recasting the equations as a
least-squares principle associated &lt;br/&gt;with a carefully derived first-
order system. Another advantage of FOSLS is&lt;br/&gt;that the associated
functional itself provides a natural sharp local error&lt;br/&gt;estimator,
which can be employed for effective adaptive refinement. In&lt;br/&gt;previous
work, the FOSLS methodology was developed and analyzed for&lt;br/&gt;problems
that include linear elasticity, linear transport, and&lt;br/&gt;incompressible
fluid dynamics. Under standard H2-type smoothness&lt;br/&gt;assumptions on the
original PDE, FOSLS has been proved theoretically &lt;br/&gt;and numerically to
exhibit optimal finite element and multigrid&lt;br/&gt;convergence properties.
However, two principal difficulties currently&lt;br/&gt;prevent FOSLS from being
applied effectively to more complicated problems:&lt;br/&gt;nonsmooth solutions
and nonlinearity. The project aim is to develop an&lt;br/&gt;adaptive weighted-
functional coupled with adaptive nested iteration&lt;br/&gt;schemes to treat
these difficulties. The goal is to obtain a scheme that&lt;br/&gt;can solve
complex nonlinear PDE systems with a total cost equivalent to a &lt;br/&gt;small
number of relaxation steps on the finest grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful
completion of this project will enhance our ability to model&lt;br/&gt;complex
physical processes on high-end computing platforms. In
particular,&lt;br/&gt;this project addresses computational models of coupled
fluid/structure&lt;br/&gt;interactions that occur, for example, in biomechanical
systems such as&lt;br/&gt;blood flow in compliant vessels. Other areas that
could potentially&lt;br/&gt;benefit from this project are aerodynamics,
astrophysics, geophysics and&lt;br/&gt;meteorology. As modern computer
architectures become more complex,&lt;br/&gt;harnessing 10s of thousands of
processors working together on a single,&lt;br/&gt;complex problem, it becomes
even more important to develop optimal&lt;br/&gt;numerical algorithms.
Successful completion of this project will widen the&lt;br/&gt;class of problems
for which optimal algorithms exist.&lt;br/&gt;