* 0410434
* Interdisciplinary Lively Application Projects at Central Washington University
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* W. Curtis, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 09/30/2007
* USD 74,967.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)

Intellectual Merit: Many entry-level (pre-calculus and calculus) mathematics
courses are not meeting the needs of the students. Indeed, the proposed
activities have been deemed urgently needed by teams of educators working on the
preparation for calculus. For example: (a) introductory mathematical skills are
seldom taught within a context of significant interest to the students; (b)
students rarely have the opportunity to use their mathematics skills within the
context of another discipline; and (c) entry-level mathematics courses are not
giving the students the ability to transfer their mathematical knowledge, so
mathematics is underutilized across the university.

The project addresses these concerns by adapting and implementing INTERMATH's
Interdisciplinary Lively Application Project (ILAP) model by forming and
supporting six interdisciplinary teams of faculty in precalculus and calculus.
Each team (composed of a faculty member from mathematics and a faculty member
from a partner discipline) are charged with identifying specific mathematical
skills necessary in the partner discipline, identifying an actual scenario in
which these skills are used, and integrating two new ILAPs in existing
mathematics courses. Expected outcomes include: 1. Stronger mathematics courses:
ILAPs provide students with a contextual use of mathematics that is closely tied
to other programs on campus. 2. Integration of mathematics across the
university: The partnerships created foster collaboration between departments
and help facilitate institution wide change.

Broader Impact: The investigators have designed a broad dissemination plan in an
effort to achieve the greatest possible impact of the project. The ILAPs are
available for all to use (via the web), results are being communicated directly
with regional two- and four-year colleges as well as high schools across
Washington, interdisciplinary partnerships are facilitating greater utilization
of mathematics throughout the university curriculum, and a framework for
sustaining and expanding on the materials and intramural relationships is being
created.