* 0410921
* Enhancing Undergraduate Understanding of Transport Phenomena via Application of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Jennifer Curtis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Burkett
* 05/31/2006
* USD 74,986.00

Chemical Engineering (53)

This project is enhancing undergraduate learning by integrating Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) modules into fluid mechanics and transport phenomena
courses. Students are developing CFD numerical solutions to problems previously
analyzed only via either simplified empirical correlations or laboratory
experiments. The increased understanding the students are achieving through CFD
solutions enable complex problems across a diverse range of engineering
disciplines to be solved more effectively.

Introducing CFD into undergraduate courses is possible because simplified CFD
tools allow undergraduate students to solve complex problems without needing to
become CFD software experts. The FlowLab simulation package, developed by Fluent
Inc., appeals to and enhances the learning experiences of students with a wide
variety of learning styles.

The learning outcomes associated with this project are well defined, and the
assessment techniques for documenting the achievement of these outcomes are
comprehensive and rigorous. Presentations at conferences and published papers
and articles are helping to disseminate outcomes as widely as possible. Close
communication with ongoing, related CFD educational efforts elsewhere also
provide opportunities for improving future CFD education modules and
implementing them at more universities worldwide.