* 0410531
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of Altitudinal Migration in Tropical Birds:  A Test of Three Hypotheses
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Judith Bronstein, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Many animals undertake spectacular annual migrations, across distances ranging
from only a few kilometers to transpolar voyages. A great deal is now known
about the routes these animals follow, and the cues that initiate migratory
behavior. However, why some species migrate and others never do has remained a
mystery. Many possibilities have been suggested, but rigorous tests have been
lacking. This project will test predictions of three hypotheses for why some but
not all fruit-eating tropical birds migrate up mountain ranges to breed, and
back downhill after breeding: the fruit availability hypothesis (migratory birds
track seasonal availability of fruits); the arthropod availability hypothesis
(migratory birds track seasonal availability of arthropods, a minor but critical
component of their diets); and the nest predation hypothesis (birds migrate
uphill to escape high densities of predators that feed upon eggs and
fledglings). The research will be conducted along an elevational gradient in
protected tropical forest on the Atlantic side of Costa Rica, where patterns of
bird movement and both bird and plant diversity are unusually well-known. The
work will focus on one typical and abundant species, the white-ruffed manakin
(Corapipo altera). Tests of the hypotheses involve determining (a) what foods
are available, (b) what manakins feed upon, and (c) how often predators attack
artificial nests, at different elevations and at different times of year. Beyond
shedding light on a renowned biological mystery, understanding why birds migrate
should illuminate the consequences of habitat variation for tropical organisms.
This work ultimately should suggest the likely impacts of human-caused habitat
alterations, including climate change and deforestation, in these threatened
landscapes.