* 0410469
* Using Design, Build and Test Projects for Improving the Design of Fluid-Thermal Systems and HVAC Design
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Marc Zampino, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen A. Alfano
* 07/31/2007
* USD 119,050.00

Engineering-Mechanical (56) The project is adapting and implementing selected
design-build-test (DBT) activities in fluid-thermal systems, heating ventilation
and air-conditioning from projects developed at the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee, Colorado State University and the University of Idaho. Thermal
science curriculum are being reformed with changes to three required lecture and
laboratory courses in such a way that the contents of a stand-alone mechanical
engineering laboratory course is integrated with lectures through the execution
of design, build, and test (DBT) activities. Two DBT course modules are being
developed, one in heat exchangers and the other in scaled building air-
conditioning systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structure and methods being employed
include the following. (1) A hands-on experience is being used to provide
students with a better understanding of the abstract concepts discussed in
lectures by establishing a clear linkage to industrial applications through
Design Build and Test (DBT) projects. (2) The adaptation is enhancing students'
learning by providing them with open-ended design problem experiences in the
mid-stage of their engineering degree program. (3) Improved comprehension of the
thermal-fluid contents is being achieved through practical application and
immediate, relevant implementation. (4) DBT activities are enhancing students'
critical thinking skills by requiring the students to make decisions that
directly affect the outcomes of the process. (5) The process is fostering a
cooperative learning environment and is providing a strong sense of
accomplishments for the students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation process is
assessing (1) how well the DBT approach equips students to apply mathematics,
science, and engineering to thermal-fluid systems design, (2) students' ability
to function within teams to develop, professional and ethical responsibility,
and (3) how well the reformed curriculum contributes to an increase in student's
interests in thermal/fluid subjects, retention, and recruitment of prospective
students, and in particular, underrepresented classes of students. &lt;br/&gt;