* 0410068
* Improving Student Understanding of Physics at an Inner-City University through the use of Concept and Activity-Based Tutorials
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Samuel Bowen, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/2007
* USD 53,467.00

The physics program at Chicago State University (CSU) is making major
improvements in its classes by implementing high quality instructional materials
that utilize results from Physics Education Research (PER) and stress modern
pedagogy and technology. This implementation is expected to produce large gains
in student understanding and greatly improve the physics program at CSU.

Current conceptual activities are being supplemented with microcomputer-based
activities focusing on the same ideas, particularly the University of Maryland
Activity-Based Tutorials (UMD-ABTs) and the RealTime Physics Laboratories (RTP-
Ls). This combination of concept and activity-based materials (CAB-Ms) will
constitute a series of three-hour laboratories in which students will be engaged
in "minds-on" and "hands-on" activities. In addition, the University of Illinois
Tycho Web-based Homework System is being used in classes. The inclusion of these
materials helps students make explicit links between the concepts and how they
are applied to real situations.

The main goals of this project are (1) to improve learning for all students in
the introductory algebra- and calculus-based physics classes at an inner-city
university in Chicago, (2) to involve undergraduate science majors in the
implementation and creation of innovative teaching materials, and (3) to
document the effectiveness of the implementation in promoting student learning
through the use of multiple assessment instruments and disseminate these results
to the community of physics teachers and education researchers both locally and
nationally. Additional goals are to create a program in physics that can serve
as a resource and model to the community of teachers and students on the
predominantly low-income south-side of Chicago, and to foster new dialogue and
to continue collaborations with colleagues testing similar materials at other
institutions.

The intellectual merit of the project is in the adaptation of well-established,
well-tested curricula. Both PIs have experience with these materials and are in
an excellent position to build upon existing efforts and improve student
understanding of physics.

Although the project specifically targets students in the introductory physics
courses at CSU, it will have a much broader impact. Current efforts have
highlighted the fact that one must be intimately aware of the strengths and
weakness of the student population before providing effective instruction.
Because of CSU's location on the south-side of Chicago, this work has the
potential to be important in informing the community of teachers at inner-city
colleges and universities throughout the country and to aid students
underrepresented in STEM education. The effectiveness of the implementation will
be well documented and therefore closely integrates aspects of research and
education.