* 0410344
* BE/CNH: Global Effects of Human and Terrestrial Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Jerry Melillo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2009
* USD 400,000.00

As moderated by climate and atmospheric composition, the global-scale
interactions of human systems and terrestrial systems are complex. Energy use,
agricultural practices, and demographics are entwined with the desire of people
to improve their well-being and to manage economic growth and its effects
through well-meaning but sometimes misdirected policies. The goal of this
interdisciplinary research project is to evaluate fundamental interactions
between human and terrestrial systems through agriculture and land use, both of
which are impacted by forces that are global in nature and moderated by climate
and atmospheric composition. The approach that will be used to model these
interactions entails use of complex but separate models of human activity, the
atmosphere and ocean, terrestrial systems, and sector-by-sector models of
economic and human effects. The researchers plan to develop the dynamic linkages
needed between a complex global model of the economy and a complex model of
terrestrial systems to evaluate these costs and potential feedbacks of changes
in atmospheric composition and climate. The proposed work is to link the MIT
Emissions Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model, and the Terrestrial
Ecosystems Model (TEM) to dynamically simulate changes in crop productivity
driven by environmental change and the economic consequences and changes in land
use driven by changes in trade in agriculture and the price of agricultural
goods. The work will take advantage of existing capabilities of the two models
with some additional improvements needed to make the linkages between them.
Principally, this involves further disaggregating the agricultural sector of
EPPA and linking the economic data to a supplemental data set on physical land
use being developed at the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) at Purdue
University. The project also will involve the development of a mosaic approach
in the TEM to represent the regions and land uses represented in EPPA. These
developments will allow simulation studies of the dynamic linkages among
terrestrial systems, land use, the economy, international trade, and economic
policy as affected by such changes in climate and atmospheric composition as
increasing levels of carbon dioxide and tropospheric
ozone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will constitute a first attempt to
study complex interactions between terrestrial systems and the economy in a
fully coupled model at the global scale. Project results will help to inform
policies designed to mitigate different environmental and economic problems,
showing where policies may complement one another and where they may be in
conflict. This project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2004
special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics
of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;