* 0410694
* Design Techniques for Repairable Data Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Tzi-Cker Chiueh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2009
* USD 280,000.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research
&lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: 0410694&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Chiueh, Tzi-
Cker&lt;br/&gt;Institution: SUNY Stony Brook&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Design
Techniques for Repairable Data
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of a
computer security solution is to maximize the availability of the system it
protects. Towards this goal, most past research focused on in-creasing the mean
time between security breaches by improving methods to de-tect and prevent
attacks. However, there is another alternative, which is the approach that the
Repairable Data System (RDS) project takes: reduce the time required to restore
a system back to normal order after it is compromised. More specifically, a
repairable data system can quickly restart itself after an intrusion and
eliminate those and only those side effects directly or indirectly left by the
intrusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key design issues in building repairable
data systems are (1) how to log all updates so that every update is undoable,
and (2) how to track the dependen-cies among updates so that all the updates
affected by an attack can be identi-fied and erased. The RDS project develops
novel techniques to solve these two problems in the context of network file
servers and relational DBMS servers. The main result of this project is expected
to be a reusable implementation framework for adding a fast repair mechanism to
existing network file servers and DBMS servers without requiring any
modifications to their internals The fast repair mechanism added drastically
shortens the time taken by and im-proves the accuracy of the post-intrusion
repair process. Therefore, this tech-nology renders existing information systems
intrusion-tolerant in that the im-pact of an intrusion is diminished to the
point of a transient system outage. All the software resulting from this project
will be published in the SourceForge web site for dissemination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D. Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program Director,
CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;June 30, 2004&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;