* 0410598
* SGER: US-Portugal International Workshop on Earthquake Engineering Research Using NEES Facilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2006
* Genda Chen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 07/31/2006
* USD 34,595.00

Abstract for: US-Portugal International Workshop on Earthquake Engineering
Research Using NEES Facilities, CMS proposal 0410598 PI: Pedro Silva, U.
Missouri-Rolla

The main plan for this proposal is to assemble a team of U.S. and Portuguese
researchers that will actively participate in an international workshop to be
held in Portugal. This international workshop will focus on establishing
research partnerships between U.S. and Portuguese scientists in the field of
earthquake engineering research. These research partnerships will be established
within the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation
(NEES) collaborative goals, which emphasize shared use and timely access to
research data. In particular it is expected that these research partnerships
will lead to the formulation of Grand Challenge (GC) NEESR projects among
international collaborators.

A new era in earthquake engineering research is upon us. Today the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Research (NEES) is attempting to
revolutionize earthquake-engineering research to a more predominant
multidisciplinary, multi-institutional and worldwide collaboration. Under NEES,
16-research equipment sites are currently in the final stages of construction
and are geographically distributed around the U.S. An important feature of these
NEES research facilities is the teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities,
which allows researchers at different locations to observe and operate the same
physical test at one site. This feature of teleconferencing can benefit the
exchange of information between institutions, while simultaneously expanding the
experimental capability of many research institutions. NEES equipment portfolio
for improving the seismic design and performance of the U.S. civil and
mechanical systems will have a significant impact on education and training of
the next-generation engineers. Under NEES these research facilities will be open
to a large number of researchers for conducting research in the field of
earthquake engineering. This without a doubt will propel the field of earthquake
engineering research to new horizons.

The goal for establishing NEES was to provide a national and international
resource that will shift the emphasis of earthquake engineering research from
current reliance on physical testing to integrated experimentation, computation,
theory, databases, and model-based simulation. Over the next 10 years, and
starting in 2004, another main goal of the NEES consortium is to add other
research facilities in the US and around the world. In line with this goal; the
main objective of the proposed international workshop is to develop research
ties between researchers from the U.S. and Portugal. Participants in this
international workshop will comprise of U.S. and Portuguese researchers in the
field of seismic design of civil infrastructures. The PI expects to assemble a
team of 10 researchers from the U.S. and an equal number from Portugal.

