* 0410257
* Infrared, Raman, Fluorescence and Laser Based Spectroscopy: Using Case Studies to Integrate Physical Chemistry Across the Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Peter Schaber, Canisius College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 94,481.00

Chemistry (12) This project is a joint effort between analytical and physical
chemistry faculty within the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry . New FT-
IR/ FT-Raman instrumentation and existing fluorescence and laser instrumentation
(accessorized with a new time-of-flight vacuum chamber) are being integrated
into the laboratory component of several analytical and physical chemistry
courses using modern teaching methodologies. Case Studies to be used within this
cluster are being written by adapting experiments from the educational and
research literature. Students explore the Case Studies by working in small
groups and focusing on issues of physical chemical relevance.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: By participating in this project, students are
becoming aware of the connection between theoretical aspects learned in the
classroom and practical application in the laboratory. They are learning
valuable and versatile experimental techniques and are applying these techniques
to interesting and challenging problems. The project is exposing students to
increasing responsibility for instrument operation, data collection, and
interpretation. The approach adapted in this proposal better prepares science
students by involving them in the consideration of "real world" problems, and by
providing "hands-on" experience using modern physical and analytical
instrumentation and techniques. Students are expected to become more efficient
learners, retain what they learn longer, and exercise their critical thinking
skills because they are involved in more interesting and challenging experiments
than were available prior to implementation of the project. The project engages
students in the exploration of science and scientific process, and also
integrates modern methods and techniques from research fields into their
undergraduate experience.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Canisius College routinely
graduates approximately 20 chemistry/biochemistry majors and approximately 60
biology majors annually. Recently the Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
and Biology have experienced a steady increase in the number of graduates who
elect to go on to graduate school. In this regard the long term impact of this
proposal is large and growing. In addition, Case Studies are be written in a
manner that will allow other colleges and universities, similarly equipped, to
readily adapt the methods developed. The educational impact of the project is
being quantitatively evaluated using formative and summative assessments that
allow detailed statistical analysis to be performed. Results of the project will
be reported at national and regional meetings and published in appropriate
college science teaching journals. It is anticipated that this proposal will
have local, national, and even international impact.&lt;br/&gt;