* 0410526
* EHS:    Highly Flexible Multi-Mode Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* John Lach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Lach - Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A challenging aspect of embedded system
design is hardware/software partitioning. Many system tasks may be performance-
sensitive, but hardware implementation of all such tasks may be prohibitively
expensive. In addition, hardware implementation of tasks that are performance-
sensitive but rarely executed results in low resource utilization. Multi-mode
systems have emerged as an area-efficient solution to this problem, implementing
multiple time-wise mutually exclusive performance-sensitive tasks in a single
hardware space. To execute a particular task, the hardware is configured to the
appropriate mode. However, existing multi-mode techniques have limited
reconfigurability, as only the datapath interconnect can be changed and only
from mode-to-mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a highly
flexible multi-mode embedded system design technique that enables inter- and
intra-mode reconfiguration of datapath components and control structures as well
as interconnect. This added flexibility results in significant area and power
savings over existing multi-mode techniques. The hardware flexibility is
efficiently obtained via a new small-scale reconfigurability (SSR) design
technique, which integrates small amounts of reconfigurable logic and
interconnect into primarily fixed logic circuits, thus avoiding the area, delay,
and power penalties associated with general-purpose reconfigurable fabric The
design paradigm provided by these techniques requires a reevaluation of
hardware/software partitioning in embedded systems, as the cost model associated
with hardware implementation changes significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project contains three primary components. First is the development of multi-
mode system synthesis techniques that leverage the extra hardware flexibility
provided by reconfigurable datapath components and controllers and intra-mode
reconfigurability. The goal is a generic system synthesis algorithmic framework
(including scheduling, allocation, and binding algorithms) that is applicable to
a variety of embedded system applications. Second is the development of SSR as a
hardware implementation technique for flexible datapath components and
controllers. Third is exploring the effect this new design paradigm has on
hardware/software partitioning in embedded system desig&lt;br/&gt;