* 0410989
* Updating and Enriching an Undergraduate Physiology Laboratory Curriculum by Introducing Modern Techniques using an Inquiry-based Learning Model
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Klaus Beyenbach, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 146,309.00

Biological Sciences (61) The aim of this project is to prepare and inspire
students to embark on successful careers in cutting edge scientific research or
teaching by introducing inquiry-based learning strategies into the physiology
laboratory curriculum. Educating students in how to do research is best
accomplished by engaging them in research. In this project students are 1)
conceiving of hypotheses; 2) planning projects, 3) carrying out the experiments;
4) critically analyzing the results, and 5) formulating the next step in the
research. The equipment being introduced in the laboratory through this project
exposes students to an array of contemporary technologies and skills, so that as
they pursue their research they become aware of the utility of each
technique/equipment introduced in the progression of the project. The interest
of students in research is stimulated when they participate in the process of
experimental design and discovery rather than following protocols provided to
them. This approach follows the example of an NSF funded project at Loyola
College in which students used a "goal-oriented approach, ... working
cooperatively in small groups to answer basic biological questions..." A survey
of students compares the career paths of those participating in the new
Physiology Laboratory curriculum as compared to previous students of the
Physiology concentration. We are updating and enriching four of our
Undergraduate Physiology Laboratory courses by introducing current research
equipment and techniques within the context of a research project. We plan to
integrate a recently established course, Cell Physiology and Genomics
Laboratory, by expanding a unifying theme and research project, "Investigating
the Transfection, Expression and Role of Apoptotic Genes in a Cell Culture
System." The approach of introducing a research orientation is also being
adopted into our courses in Animal Physiology Experimentation, and Histology.
Taking advantage of faculty expertise at Cornell, students in both courses are
involved in phenotyping genetically modified mice with cardiomyopathyies.
Histology students examine the morphology while Physiology students examine the
function of modified as compared to normal hearts. The equipment acquired is
also accessible to students enrolled in "Undergraduate Research in Biology," a
course in which students can continue to pursue research started in the other
laboratory courses.