* 0410504
* Picturing to Learn:  Making Visual Representations by and for Undergraduates - A New Approach to Teach Science and Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Felice Frankel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 108,100.00

Abstract

Proposal 0410504 Picturing to Learn: Making Visual Representations by and for
Undergraduates - A New Approach to Teach Science and Engineering Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Felice Frankel

Computer Science (31)

This project develops of a new type of program for freshman and sophomores in
science and engineering. Students collaborate in groups, with advice from senior
scientists, engineers and graphics experts, and develop their own visual
representations of ideas fundamental to specific courses and research. The dual
emphasis on visualization and on explaining to others is the basis for a new
form of teaching and learning that is both active (in the sense that it will
require the students to formulate their own understanding and to explain to
others) and different from the familiar verbal and mathematical explanations.

The program adapts methods already available for visualization: animations,
photographs, drawings, and illustrations. It relies on the interactive
capability of computers, but also embraces the power of thinking and
communicating in simple drawings, the latter being a universal yet underutilized
tool in undergraduate teaching. The products of these explorations will
primarily target the national undergraduate community, however the obvious
benefits for the research community and for the public should not be
underestimated.

Intellectual Merit. This project builds a way to learn that uses one of the most
highly developed of the human senses--appreciation of images--rather than the
more familiar verbal and mathematical approaches, and emphasizes how: * The
process of students' visually representing scientific concepts enhances their
understanding, * Finding appropriate and communicative visual representations
specific to particular concepts helps in exchanging information among
disciplines, * Developing a visual vocabulary by undergraduates adds a new
component to the education of researchers--learning to communicate science to
the public.

Broader Impact. This project has the potential to revolutionize the teaching of
science and engineering, both to concentrators and to non-science
undergraduates. It provides a new method of reaching women and under-represented
groups, many of whom are interested in science and engineering but are
intimidated by the conventional languages used in science education.