* 0410937
* EHS:     Adaptive, Power-Efficient Processors for Sensors and Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Douglas Clark, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 294,889.00

Margaret Martonosi, Princeton University, Adaptive, Power-Efficeint Processors
for Sensors and Embedded Systems &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensor network systems
have seen increasing research attention recently, &lt;br/&gt;with a wide range
of scientific and commercial applications. Sensor &lt;br/&gt;processors need
"agile" performance that responds quickly to &lt;br/&gt;high-throughput bursts,
with also lower-energy execution when&lt;br/&gt;possible to minimize energy
consumption. Sensor systems have &lt;br/&gt;limited power budgets, with
traditionally most energy going to &lt;br/&gt;radio communications. But as
radios improve and computational&lt;br/&gt;demands increase, more of the energy
budget is shifting back&lt;br/&gt;to the processor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research examines processor architectures for agile,&lt;br/&gt;energy-efficient,
stream-based processing in sensor networks&lt;br/&gt;and other embedded systems.
A particular focus is on using&lt;br/&gt;parallelism (through tiled processing
units) for energy management.&lt;br/&gt;Another key aspect is investigating the
interconnect between on-chip&lt;br/&gt;processing units, and exploring design
techniques that let different&lt;br/&gt;processing elements run at different
clock rates. Connecting processing elements by &lt;br/&gt;a system of hardware
queues, for example, allows the chip to exploit &lt;br/&gt;a thread-based,
producer-consumer model to adapt processor settings&lt;br/&gt;to running
threads; this enables efficient energy and speed control&lt;br/&gt;via dynamic
voltage/frequency scaling. By exposing&lt;br/&gt;queue/memory status to near
neighbors, processors can use&lt;br/&gt;control theoretic approaches to
coordinate performance/energy&lt;br/&gt;needs across local and broader regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major research questions include: (i) How much on-chip
parallelism&lt;br/&gt;best balances application performance and energy? (ii)
What range of applications &lt;br/&gt;are applicable to this model? (iii) How to
design performance and&lt;br/&gt;power-efficient speed-control models based on
local and global&lt;br/&gt;control approaches? (iv) What are the roles of
distributed and&lt;br/&gt;hierarchical control techniques? (v) Can control
theoretic&lt;br/&gt;approaches be devised that offer good responsiveness and
stability&lt;br/&gt;in the face of sensing errors and sensing/actuation
delays?&lt;br/&gt;