* 0410804
* Collaborative Project: Implementing Physics by Inquiry Using Undergraduate Peer Instructors and Cooperative Group Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Leonardo Hsu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Warren W. Hein
* 12/31/2007
* USD 28,709.00

The Physics by Inquiry curriculum (PbI), developed at the University of
Washington with support from the National Science Foundation, has been shown to
be very effective in helping students learn scientific concepts. However, the
low student to instructor ratio normally required to implement PbI is one
barrier to a widespread adoption. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the project is to adapt and investigate how
the PbI curriculum can be implemented without the need for physics graduate
student teaching assistants as it is currently being implemented by its
developers. Instead, formal cooperative group learning techniques and
undergraduate teaching assistants are being used. The investigators all have
extensive experience with recent innovations in the teaching and learning of
physics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The project allows
PbI to be more easily adopted by institutions that serve populations targeted by
the PbI curriculum (e.g., underprepared students and K-12 teachers). These
institutions, including community colleges and teaching colleges, often do not
have graduate students or any history of using undergraduate teaching
assistants. The institutions collaborating on this effort are Baltimore City
Community College (BCCC), Southern Connecticut State University (SCSU), and the
General College at the University of Minnesota (GC-Minn). At SCSU, the target
audience for PbI is pre-service K-12 teachers. At BCCC and GC-Minn, the majority
of students are underprepared for university course work. Many students at BCCC
and GC - Minn are under-represented minorities.