* 0410266
* Computational Challenges in Geometrical Flows: Numerical Methods and Analysis, Algorithmic Development and Software Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Xiaobing Feng, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2008
* USD 147,472.00

This research is an attempt to conduct an extensive and comprehensive numerical
study of geometrical flows, such as the mean curvature flow, the inverse mean
curvature flow, the Gauss curvature flow, the surface diffusion flow, the
Willmore flow, and the Ricci flow, from differential geometry, fluid mechanics,
materials science, and cosmology, and to address theoretically and numerically
challenging issues arising from geometrical flow computations. The goal of this
project is to develop accurate, robust, and efficient adaptive finite element
discretization methods, parallel iterative solution algorithms and computer
codes for computing geometrical flows based on both level set and phase field
formulations. The investigator aims to carry out a balanced numerical study for
the geometrical flows by emphasizing both qualitative analysis and quantitative
computation, and thus to provide reliable computational tools for discovering
and analyzing fine properties such as dynamics of the singularities of the
geometrical flows, which often are difficult and even may not be possible to
predicate and characterize by analytical means. The methods and algorithms
resulting from this research will have the following attractive features: high
accuracy, strong stability, low cost, and high efficiency. In addition, the
proposed methods are also capable of accurately and efficiently approximating
the geometrical flows not only before but also beyond the onset of
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As critical applications from fluid
mechanics, cosmology, and materials science are directly tied to the solutions
of geometrical flows, it is expected that successful completion of the proposed
research has the potential to significantly impact these applied sciences not
only by presenting new methods for solving underlying mathematical problems but
also providing insights for the understanding of each of these
&lt;br/&gt;applications. Furthermore, the methods to be developed will find
applications in other fields such as cell biology, geophysics, image processing,
and computer vision. The educational component of the project consists of
graduate graduate course development, training and mentoring both graduate and
undergraduate students through the project.