* 0410187
* BE/CNH: Virtual Watershed: Agricultural Landscape Evolution in an Adaptive Management Framework
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Steven Kraft, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2009
* USD 450,000.00

Agricultural land constitutes about 50 percent of the land in the U.S. and other
inhabited regions. Decisions regarding the use of agricultural land have
significant economic and environmental consequences. While these decisions are
focused mainly upon the production of food and fiber, agricultural landscapes
and watersheds also have the potential to produce enhanced flows of ecosystem
services (such as nutrient cycling, regulation of atmospheric gases, soil
formation, and wildlife habitat) through investments in natural capital like
wetland restoration, riparian filter strips, and changes in farming methods that
increase soil organic carbon. Unfortunately, there is a narrow range of
socioeconomic circumstances under which resource managers are willing to make
substantial private investments in the present to achieve more substantial
public environmental benefits through enhanced flows of ecosystem services in
the future. This interdisciplinary research project will investigate solutions
to this socio-environmental dilemma by constructing a spatial decision-support
system called Virtual Watershed. Virtual Watershed will combine environmental
simulation models, geographic information systems, evolutionary algorithms, and
agent-based modeling to capture the dynamic nonlinear interactions among
economic and ecological conditions, public policies, land and water managers'
behavior, and other variables that generate rural landscape patterns. These
patterns in turn determine ecological and economic performance at a watershed
scale. Issues of particular interest are the complex nature of landscape change
over time and the capability of adaptive management processes to guide landscape
change to meet user-defined social goals in an evolving environmental and social
system. Case studies in two watersheds (one in Illinois and the other in Quebec)
will examine whether landscape change displays self-organized complexity as
captured in the concept of "panarchy," a concept associated with the idea that
human-environment systems have characteristic cyclic dynamics that are linked in
a hierarchy to faster and slower cycles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
clear and direct applications in environmental and agricultural policy. One
primary hypothesis is that the environmental performance of agricultural
landscapes can be markedly improved while not reducing income to land managers
through changes in incentive structures. Such incentive structures include among
others, forms of agricultural subsidization, land retirement programs, and cost
sharing for practices adoption. Additionally, improvement can occur though the
responses of land managers to other stimuli, such as neighboring land uses and
neighbors' adoption of new practices. The project will further test the
hypothesis that an adaptive management process that first simulates near
theoretically optimal landscape performance and then is used to adjust the
decision environments of land managers to guide them toward that optimum can
result in improved ecological-economic performance over time. This occurs
despite disturbance events and changing social preferences that have the
potential to turn this adaptive management process into a treadmill of change
without improvement rather than a path toward ecological-economic improvement.
In testing these hypotheses, the project will achieve a better understanding of
the independent and interdependent roles of economic conditions and incentives,
environmental policies, resource manager behavior, and pre-existing landscape
patterns on the dynamics of landscape change as well as trade-offs and
complementarities among economic and ecological goals for agricultural
watersheds. The visually improved Virtual Watershed model will be valuable in
educational and policy-making settings. This project is supported by an award
resulting from the FY 2004 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;