* 0410203
* Runtime/Operating System Synergy to Exploit Simultaneous Multithreading
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Vincent Freeh, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2008
* USD 380,000.00

National Science Foundation Distributed Systems Research CISE/CNS

ABSTRACT

Proposal Number: 0410203 Principal Investigator: Freeh, Vincent W. Institution:
North Carolina State U Proposal Title: Runtime/Operating System Synergy to
Exploit Simultaneous Multi-threading

Simultaneous multithreading (SMT), a new hardware paradigm combining uni- and
multi-processor features, currently lacks adequate software support. Most of
today's software --- operating systems, runtime systems, and applications ---
naively treats an SMT as a conventional multiprocessor. Thus, today's SMT-
equipped computers do not fully unfold their potential.

This proposal focuses on a synergistic approach combining runtime and operating
system support to fully exploit the capabilities of SMTs. To meet this
objective, this project stud-ies three different approaches. First, it
investigates the benefits of using a helper thread along side the primary
thread, by building a reference implementation of an SMT-aware Message Passing
Interface (MPI) library. Second, this project investigates the benefits of
dynamic mode switching an application between single-thread and multi-threaded
con-figurations. Third, it modifies the operating system creating an SMT-aware
scheduler. Benefits of this work are demonstrated for a variety of applications,
including large-scale benchmarks and other nationally relevant parallel codes.

The broader impact of this work is in three main areas. First, both PIs are
working to create an inter-disciplinary educational and research program.
Second, students will be educated in the interaction between distributed
systems, operating systems, and architecture. Finally, the proposed work allows
for technology transfer to a wide arena of fields, such as server-style
computing, cluster computing, and massively parallel comput-ing. The developed
framework and tools will be made generally available to the research community
and labs.

Dr. Brett D. Fleisch Program Director, CISE/CNS May 28, 2004 .

