* 0410130
* Real-Time Data Distribution in Asynchronous Network Communications Environments (Real-Time Data DANCE)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Timothy Henry, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2009
* USD 599,997.00

Many emerging applications rely on asynchronous data distribution, where several
embedded computing notes act as sensors that feed data to other parts of the
system. An important class of these systems is distributed real-time embedded
(DRE) systems where the applications have timing constraints that must be
correct, and the data have temporal intervals during which they are valid. This
project addresses technology for asynchronous real-time data distribution in DRE
systems, focusing on the substantial challenges of severely constrained
resources in complex dynamic networks. It is developing new models of real-time
scheduling theory, and implementations of the algorithms in a prototype sensor
network. The models and algorithms being developed in this project will broaden
the applicability of existing solutions developed for less-constrained
environments. The project is also formalizing a taxonomy to describe the DRE
data-distribution problem space. This taxonomy will provide researchers with a
common tool to classify and apply future work in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being evaluated through theoretical
analysis of algorithm goodness and correctness, through simulation, and through
transition to the Coast Guard's Automated Identification System (AIS)
application to sensor network applications at Raytheon. Through applications
such as these, this project is expected to have an impact on many applications
that employ real-time data distribution in sensor networks. The project is also
contributing to Computer Science education in this emerging area, and through
publication of algorithms and open-source release of the prototype software that
adds to the base of widely applicable technology for DRE
applications.&lt;br/&gt;