* 0410147
* Integration of Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry Problem-Based Laboratories into a Newly Revised Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Rose Clark, Saint Francis University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 53,016.00

Chemistry (12) As part of our continuing effort to integrate new technology into
our curriculum, the chemistry department is integrating gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry (GC/MS) problem-based laboratories throughout the undergraduate
curriculum. The goal is to enliven instruction for our students in general
chemistry by studying chemical separations and molecular structure analysis
followed by a coordinated progression of learning throughout our curriculum.
Graduates of Saint Francis completing this progression of problem-based learning
laboratories are expected to be better prepared to face the difficult challenges
in industrial as well as graduate school settings. The training begins in the
freshman year with the Virtual Mass Spectrometry Laboratory (VMSL;
http://chemed.chem.pitt.edu/VMSL; CCLI Grant 9950867) and initial access to the
GC/MS instrument. Dr. Joe Grabowski (University of Pittsburgh) is assisting
faculty and students using the interactive internet program, which introduces
problem-solving to the students. In the upper level courses, the experiments
become more sophisticated with less information provided by the instructor. A
problem-based approach is being implemented in instrumental analysis, forensics,
environmental, and physical chemistry, where the students are responsible for
developing course specific application laboratory projects by using the current
literature. A major application of the GC/MS is in research projects for our
newly added concentration of forensic chemistry since GC/MS is a major piece of
instrumentation in forensic chemistry laboratories. Dr. Michael Baird who has
recently implemented GC/MS into Wheeling Jesuit University laboratories (CCLI
Grant 0088357) is serving as a consultant for the project. Several impacts of
the grant include: incorporation of innovative materials and technology across
the newly revised curriculum; excitement potential of younger scientists
(especially underrepresented groups) through use of technology; students well-
trained in problem-solving techniques and prepared for success in advanced
degrees/industry; and an increased number of chemistry majors through
recruitment potential of new technology. Saint Francis chemistry currently has
31 majors, a 200% increase over the last five years, of which 71 % are women.
&lt;br/&gt;