* 0410978
* Introduction of Modern MS into the Upper Division Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Lawrence Sayre, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 63,285.00

Chemistry (12) Intellectual merit: The major objectives of this project are 1)
to improve the teaching and laboratory experience in undergraduate analytical
and physical chemistry by providing experiments in areas of greater immediacy to
students and 2) to stimulate their interests in modern chemistry. Mass
spectrometry (MS) has become one of the major analytical techniques in the post-
genomic era. Mass spectrometric analysis of both proteins and small molecules
promises molecular advances that will revolutionize molecular medicine,
molecular toxicology, and efforts to safeguard the environment and facilitate
responses to bioterrorism. In revamping our upper division undergraduate
laboratory curriculum, we therefore are introducing MS to both B.A. and B.S.
students. The experiments being developed are adapted from the educational and
research literature. The analytical chemistry laboratory (CHEM 304) is adding of
the use of liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify
an unknown protein. The physical chemistry laboratory (CHEM 305/322) is adding
the use of MS/MS to analyze a collision induced dissociation. The instrument is
also available for other laboratory courses and for undergraduate research
projects. The new experiments are being implemented over a three-year period,
with the assistance of and feedback from our B.S. majors in the first year and a
team of faculty consultants outside chemistry. Broader impacts: Making MS
accessible at the undergraduate level is an innovative way to prepare students
for the interdisciplinary future of science. The impact on student learning of
incorporating the MS experiments in the laboratory courses is being evaluated by
directed questionnaires and exit interviews regarding the MS experiments
themselves, and in general by comparing test performances and student interest
among the control B.A. major group in the first year (before the MS experiments
have been implemented for them) to these data in the subsequent two years. We
believe that students will become more excited about careers in chemistry and
science in general as a consequence of their experience, and we expect to convey
the projected success of this endeavor to other undergraduate programs.