* 0410553
* Collaborative Research:     Embedded Control Systems for X-by-Wire Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Richard Gillespie, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 212,000.00

Freudenberg-Krogh (collaborative) - Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to develop concepts and tools for model-based development of
embedded control systems for automotive x-by-wire systems. X-by-wire systems
replace mechanical connections between the driver and the vehicle with embedded
computers and actuators (e.g., motors) to control the automobile and provide
physical responses to the driver. These systems are characterized by multiple,
highly integrated and interacting feedback loops. This project is creating new
methods for designing these embedded control systems to improve performance
while enhancing safety and reliability and reducing development cost. The
research draws on control theory to deal with physical dynamics and synthesis of
the feedback loops and with formalisms and techniques from computer science to
deal with the logical aspects of the embedded software. Using a laboratory
implementation of a steer-by-wire system as a test bed, models of the dynamics,
including driver behavior, are being analyzed using new compositional methods
that make it possible to design elements of the embedded control systems with
guaranteed performance characteristics. The theory of fundamental design
limitations is being extended and applied to these models to evaluate the
tradeoffs between dynamic performance and robustness. Verification methods for
hybrid systems (systems with continuous and discrete state variables) are being
developed to demonstrate the safety of the system, even when there are failures
in sensors and other system components. Tractable verification problems are
being developed based on model decompositions reflecting the model structure,
time-scale separation, and novel representations of the interaction dynamics.
The embedded software design is being implemented and evaluated on the
laboratory test bed in cooperation with an industrial partner.&lt;br/&gt;