* 0410685
* EHS:     Real-Time Distributed Control Networks:    Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation via Adaptive Sampling
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Robert Marks, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 311,000.00

Ian A. Gravagne, Baylor University, Real-Time Distributed Networks: Dynamics
Bandwidth Allocation via Adaptive Sampling &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
applies an emerging field of mathematics&lt;br/&gt;known as Dynamic Equations on
Time Scales to the problem of bandwidth&lt;br/&gt;utilization in real-time
distributed control networks. Time scales&lt;br/&gt;theory allows for the
seamless analysis of dynamic processes on&lt;br/&gt;continuous, discrete, or
mixed time domains, including non-uniform&lt;br/&gt;discrete time domains.
Recent advances in time scales show that periodic&lt;br/&gt;servo control
processes on distributed networks can adapt their
timing&lt;br/&gt;characteristics in the presence of aperiodic high-priority
traffic&lt;br/&gt;bursts without losing control of their plants. The adaptive
servo timing&lt;br/&gt;method results in an increase in the effective available
bandwidth for&lt;br/&gt;aperiodic traffic and better integration of the
overall&lt;br/&gt;plant/processor/network system. Study of the theory of time
scales is&lt;br/&gt;leading to further advances toward the unification of
continuous and&lt;br/&gt;discrete systems as well. This unique
application&lt;br/&gt;of an area of mathematics previously unknown to the
computer science and&lt;br/&gt;engineering communities has the potential to
stimulate external&lt;br/&gt;research into related topics such as network
scheduling and real-time&lt;br/&gt;control performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will pursue empirical validation of the new theory on a
40-node&lt;br/&gt;Controller Area Network of embedded processors developed at
Baylor&lt;br/&gt;University. Successful research in this area has
immediate&lt;br/&gt;utility and potential economic impact for a large industrial
base&lt;br/&gt;employing distributed control networks, notably in the
automotive,&lt;br/&gt;aerospace, and manufacturing industries.
Baylor's&lt;br/&gt;relatively new graduate engineering programs will continue to
support&lt;br/&gt;the educational needs of engineers employed by local
industries in the underserved Central Texas area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;