* 0410771
* Flexible Scheduling in Real-Time Control Systems with Uncertainty
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Lemmon, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 276,000.00

This research aims at developing novel models and methodologies for designing
high performance, low cost real-time control systems. Using a networked control
system as the target application, the project emphasizes an integrated treatment
of control and real-time system development. The main focus of this work is on
scheduling approaches for dealing with uncertainty and flexibility presented in
many real-time control applications. Research activities for dealing with
uncertainty includes the design of adaptive scheduling strategies to enforce a
Markov-Chain based constraint and the evaluation of different schedulers. To
maximally exploit flexibility existing in real-time control systems, the project
investigates the effect of quantization on closed-loop system performance, and
devises adaptive scheduling strategies to achieve the desired system performance
while reducing resource demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative effort
by the team of control and real-time system researchers provides unique
opportunities for introducing new concepts and perspectives in tackling many
challenges that are inherently interdisciplinary. The goal of the project is to
advance understanding of the interplay between control system design and real-
time system design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project can
be felt in two main aspects. First, as an integrated part of the project, a new
course is being developed at the graduate/senior undergraduate level to expose
students to both the theory and the practice of designing embedded real-time
control systems. The project is expected also to have impact through a
collaboration in real-time control and civil engineering, in conjunction with
Notre Dame's Center for Environmental Science and Technology (CEST). &lt;br/&gt;