* 0410992
* Peer Review as a Mechanism for Both Curriculum Reform and Assessment
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Sarah Woodin, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 199,813.00

Biological Sciences (61) A review of the undergraduate biology laboratory
experiences at the University of South Carolina revealed a lack of emphasis on
science inquiry skills, dissimilar introductory experiences for transfer
students and the lack of comprehensive performance assessment benchmarks. USC's
Biology Department has enacted several inquiry-based reforms, including the
frequent use of peer review, and is now integrating a performance assessment
system to illuminate the students' evolving inquiry skills. We have chosen the
Calibrated Peer Review system developed at UCLA as the central mechanism to
achieve these goals. The objectives of this project are to 1) integrate the
Calibrated Peer Review system in our introductory and sophomore biology
laboratories; 2) develop comprehensive performance assessment criteria and
evaluation of the efficacy of our undergraduate curriculum by tracking changes
in student inquiry skills from freshman to senior year; 3) provide professional
development for faculty and teaching assistants in the pedagogical practices
associated with inquiry-based, reflective learning; and 4) integrate curriculum
reforms at our largest two-year partner institution (Midlands Technical
College). The Calibrated Peer Review software facilitates students' critical
thinking and evaluation skills by providing a framework within which students 1)
receive guided experiences in evaluating example work (calibration phase), 2)
anonymously review the work of peers and 3) self-assess. We are evaluating the
impact of these reforms by tracking changes in students' written lab reports
across freshman, sophomore and senior year. Capturing these laboratory reports
via the CPR system provides a novel mechanism to evaluate the efficacy of our
curriculum as a whole. We are providing professional development to faculty and
teaching assistants responsible for enacting the curricular innovations. The
fourth objective extends these curriculum reforms to Midlands Technical College.
We are comparing performance of MTC transfer students in the sophomore level USC
courses to the performance of students who took the entire sequence at USC to
determine the effectiveness of the curriculum alignment efforts over time.