* 0410373
* Symbolic Methods for Classification Problems In Lie Theory and Differential Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Ian Anderson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 177,217.00

Anderson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator develops and implements
algorithms for a number&lt;br/&gt;of classification problems in the areas of Lie
algebras,&lt;br/&gt;differential geometry, and differential equations. For each
of&lt;br/&gt;the problems of interest, the list of representative objects
is&lt;br/&gt;very large. Therefore he encodes these classification
results&lt;br/&gt;within a computer algebra system and develops software
that&lt;br/&gt;allows for the efficient but flexible manipulation of the
large&lt;br/&gt;amounts of data contained in these classification results.
This&lt;br/&gt;work provides researchers with powerful new tools to
find&lt;br/&gt;examples and test conjectures on a wide range of subjects.
The&lt;br/&gt;specific classification problems that are addressed first
deal&lt;br/&gt;with the classification of low dimensional Lie algebras and
their&lt;br/&gt;sub-algebras, the classification of vector field systems in 2
and&lt;br/&gt;3 dimensions, and the classification of 4- and
5-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;space-times with symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
classification of mathematical structures is a central theme&lt;br/&gt;in many
branches of mathematics. While these classification&lt;br/&gt;problems can be
easy to state, the solutions are often very long&lt;br/&gt;and complex and
therefore not accessible to the larger&lt;br/&gt;mathematical and scientific
community. A major component of this&lt;br/&gt;project explores new
nontraditional methodologies (based on&lt;br/&gt;computer algebra systems and
also data-based Java applets) for&lt;br/&gt;the dissemination and generalization
of these results. &lt;br/&gt;Applications to the automated solution of
differential equations&lt;br/&gt;are studied. The computer software that is
being developed to&lt;br/&gt;support these specific goals has applications in
other areas of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical research and in theoretical physics. It
also has&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated pedagogical value for both undergraduate
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate mathematics education.&lt;br/&gt;