* 0410466
* Development of a Novel, Problem-Based Forensic Geology Laboratory for Earth Science and Forensic Chemistry Students Utilizing XRD Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Elisa Bergslien, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 06/30/2007
* USD 87,403.00

Discipline: Earth System Science (40)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
developing a project-based laboratory course in Forensic Geology, presented at a
level that is accessible to any student, which introduces students to the
principles of Earth Science and their application to forensic science, which
allows Earth Science and Science Education majors to apply their knowledge in a
novel way. The course makes use of a research-grade X-ray diffractometer (XRD)
and other analytical instruments, and emphasizes team learning, with the
students working in groups where individuals act as "team experts" on some
aspect of the course. A research-grade XRD is necessary to this work because it
can perform micro-diffraction and thin film analysis, capabilities that the
current generation of compact diffractometers lack. Students in the Forensic
Geology course use the XRD to analyze soils, coals and/or ores to identify
source areas; to identify the minerals in cosmetics and paints; to analyze
building materials and safe insulation; and to track the origin of contaminants.
The XRD is also being incorporated into existing courses in Mineralogy and
Applied Environmental Methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project includes introducing students to Earth Science via real world
examples, and training them in the principles of forensic geology, raising
awareness of this discipline. The broader impact of utilizing the inventive
combination of forensics and earth science should enhance science education and
the uniqueness of this approach is expected to attract more students to an Earth
Science course and increase understanding of geology among undergraduates in
several disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;