* 0410661
* Algebra Pathways
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Wade Ellis, San Diego Mesa College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2008
* USD 84,997.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)

Broader Impacts: Algebra Pathways Project addresses the national and statewide
need to improve the mathematics skills of undergraduate students, particularly
for at risk special populations. The Pathways project is expanding and adapting
tested strategies to both Elementary and Intermediate algebra by developing a
collaborative, research-based, system-wide approach to the improvement of
teaching and learning basic mathematics. With support from a consortium of
California community colleges, the Community College and Lumina Foundations, and
the Center for Student Success, the Pathways Project is designed to leverage
extensive resources from multiple partner organizations.

Intellectual Merit: Project objectives center on the adaptation, pilot testing
and evaluation of three recommended approaches to increasing student success in
algebra: 1) providing a specialized mathematics study skills course in a
learning community format; 2) the implementation of a peer tutor training
program for a math study center and 3) the use of computer aided instruction.
The purpose of the project is to investigate and determine which of these
strategies are most effective for use with specific groups of at risk community
college students. Project objectives include the development of a virtual
resource center and a summer Algebra Institute that facilitates communication
among mathematics faculty members. Project-produced educational materials,
evaluation instruments, pilot test results and lessons learned are contained in
a final project report, shared with project partners and made available to
others through the new electronic resource center.