* 0410062
* PDE Techniques in Wavelet Based Image Processing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Hao-Min Zhou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 156,939.00

The goal of this research is to develop mathematical principles&lt;br/&gt;and
new methodologies for problems in and applications of digital&lt;br/&gt;image
processing, and study their associated mathematical foundations.&lt;br/&gt;The
emphasis is on combining partial differential equation
(PDE)&lt;br/&gt;techniques with multi-resolution wavelet
representations.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, we focus on two different image
processing applications:&lt;br/&gt;wavelet inpainting (filling in missing or
damaged wavelet coefficients),&lt;br/&gt;and PDE image compression. To achieve
the tasks, we will integrate several&lt;br/&gt;high level mathematical tools
including geometrical PDE's,&lt;br/&gt;multi-resolution harmonic analysis and
variational frameworks&lt;br/&gt;together with some state-of-the-art engineering
methods in image&lt;br/&gt;coding, such as group testing wavelet (GTW)
algorithms for image&lt;br/&gt;compression. The key is to exploit the power of
multi-resolution&lt;br/&gt;properties of wavelets while at the same time use PDE
techniques to&lt;br/&gt;systematically and explicitly control the geometrical
information&lt;br/&gt;in the image so that salient features, such as edges and
corners,&lt;br/&gt;can be recovered in the reconstructions. Efficient
computation algorithms&lt;br/&gt;will be designed and
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Image compression and inpainting are two typical
tasks of image&lt;br/&gt;processing. Due to the large number of pixels of
digital images,&lt;br/&gt;most of them have to be stored in compressed format.
The current&lt;br/&gt;international compression standard (JPEG2000), which is
largely&lt;br/&gt;based on wavelet representation, is one of the most popular
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;Image compression has been used everywhere in our daily life,
examples&lt;br/&gt;include images transmitted on the Internet, wireless
communications,&lt;br/&gt;medical images (such as MRI), satellite images.
Efficient compression&lt;br/&gt;methods are highly desirable and the universal
goal is to represent the&lt;br/&gt;most salient features (typically geometrical
structures) using minimal&lt;br/&gt;possible resources. This is one of the
objectives of this project.&lt;br/&gt;Image inpainting refers to automatic
procedures to fill&lt;br/&gt;in incomplete, missing or damaged image
information. Such loss&lt;br/&gt;is often unavoidable in many applications such
as wireless&lt;br/&gt;transmission, intelligence, homeland security (airports'
screening),&lt;br/&gt;robotic path finding in unknown environment, three-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;object reconstruction from two-dimensional medical images.
Because&lt;br/&gt;many digital images are stored in wavelet formats, and damages
to such&lt;br/&gt;formatted images correspond to loss of wavelet
coefficients,&lt;br/&gt;wavelet inpainting demands special attention. Again, a
key objective&lt;br/&gt;in filling in the missing information is to restore
missing&lt;br/&gt;geometrical properties. We will investigate new models and
methods for&lt;br/&gt;wavelet inpainting and related mathematical
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;