* 0410875
* Adapting Intermath to a non-Traditional Urban University
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* William Briggs, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2008
* USD 87,374.00

Mathematical Sciences (21)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: In teaching
undergraduate service courses for engineering, physics, biology, chemistry, and
economic students, many mathematics departments face similar challenges: too
much material, too little time, appropriate use of technology, and retention of
skills. Several traditional four-year institutions have developed a mathematics
curriculum called Intermath that has been successful in meeting these
challenges. Similar concerns expressed by the engineering faculty at the
University of Colorado at Denver (CU-Denver) have led the Mathematics Department
to begin implementation of Intermath. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of Intermath are to (1) develop a spiraling pattern of subject
material within the curriculum; (2) infuse the appropriate use of technology
into the instruction of the courses; and (3) incorporate real-world application
projects developed in conjunction with partner faculty members. In addition to
these goals, CU-Denver has added the additional goal of reinforcing basic
skills. Students participating in Intermath are more motivated to learn
mathematics, have strengthened problem-solving ability, have an increased
understanding of essential concepts, and a mastery of basic skills. Secondary
outcomes include improved written and oral communication skills, increased
familiarity with technology, and a greater appreciation of the role of
mathematics in technological fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: At
the instructor level this project is planting the seeds for a cultural change in
teaching undergraduate mathematics at CU Denver, surrounding community colleges,
and local high schools offering calculus level mathematic courses. Full
implementation of Intermath at CU-Denver is the first at a nontraditional,
urban, comprehensive institution. It requires adapting existing Intermath
programs to accommodate transfer students, part-time students, and part-time
instructors at CU-Denver. The outcomes of this project will impact mathematics
programs at high schools and colleges/universities, both in the Denver
metropolitan area and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;