* 0410218
* Collaborative Research:    EHS:    Components and Aspects for Embedded Middleware
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Raymond Klefstad, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2008
* USD 330,000.00

Hsieh-Klefstad Abstract&lt;br/&gt;---------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project is developing new software engineering principles,&lt;br/&gt;techniques,
and programming technology based on an improved understanding&lt;br/&gt;of how
crosscutting concerns, such as real-time behavior and
memory&lt;br/&gt;constraints, interact and can be modularized within embedded
middleware.&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how a combined component-based
and&lt;br/&gt;aspect-oriented software engineering approach can advance the
development&lt;br/&gt;of embedded applications and middleware. Experience with
existing&lt;br/&gt;middleware for distributed, real-time, and embedded (DRE)
systems has&lt;br/&gt;illustrated both the benefits and the limits of
implementing&lt;br/&gt;configurability through previous approaches to components
and aspects.&lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to achieve expressive power through
an&lt;br/&gt;integration of components and aspects. The new model supports
aspect&lt;br/&gt;definition and application at the component level: aspects are
constructed&lt;br/&gt;through new compositional forms, and conversely, aspects
introduce&lt;br/&gt;functionality at the level of component definitions and
interconnections.&lt;br/&gt;Real-time predictability constraints are addressed
through the model's&lt;br/&gt;support for real-time Java: components and aspects
adapt to real-time&lt;br/&gt;concerns according to their contexts. The model
allows developers to&lt;br/&gt;manage complexity in new ways: by allowing
flexible middleware&lt;br/&gt;configuration; by supporting both component-like
encapsulation and&lt;br/&gt;controlled exposure to aspects; and by providing
sound type checking of&lt;br/&gt;middleware configurations. The new techniques
are being validated through&lt;br/&gt;the development of new, modular, and
highly configurable DRE middleware&lt;br/&gt;for real-time Java.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge that comes from this research
will&lt;br/&gt;drive progress in embedded systems development and enable more
effective&lt;br/&gt;techniques for modularizing concerns across application and
middleware&lt;br/&gt;boundaries. The project's technology is expected to be
particularly useful for &lt;br/&gt;designing and building embedded and real-time
software systems, as well as software&lt;br/&gt;systems in general. Both
component systems and middleware have become&lt;br/&gt;popular commercially;
this technology should enable and demonstrate the evolution of future component
systems and middleware.&lt;br/&gt;