* 0410489
* The power of moving sediment: integrating experimental sedimentology into the undergraduate geoscience curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* James Meyers, Winona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 06/30/2008
* USD 119,856.00

Discipline: Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on successful instructional
models developed at MIT and Univ. Wisconsin-Eau Claire, this project is
integrating a flume laboratory into instruction throughout the undergraduate
curriculum at Winona State University (WSU). The laboratory helps students
better visualize complex geologic phenomena through the experimental examination
of sedimentology. WSU students model a variety of surficial processes in the
laboratory and connect their experiments with field studies as they explore
research questions of their own design. To make the results of the project
available to the broader geological community, short videos are being prepared
of experimental runs, and these videos will be posted to a new project website,
making them available through DLESE and other venues. Video content and
complexity are targeted as appropriate to different learner levels throughout
grades K-16. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A standing institutional community outreach
program is being leveraged by this project to draw local K-12 students to the
facility, introducing younger students to active scientific experimentation.
Community members can interact with the ducts via remote control access at times
when they are not in use for student experiments. This hands-on approach with
the general public is intended to increase the numbers of undergraduate students
attracted to careers in science. Increasing the numbers of females in geoscience
majors is a specific project goal. At the K-12 level, the project should inspire
more students to pursue STEM careers, and to increase public awareness of the
river community in which they live.&lt;br/&gt;