* 0410918
* A Holistic Approach to Compiler-Assisted Optimization of Software Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Saumya Debray, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2009
* USD 580,000.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research
&lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
NUMBER: 0410918&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Debray, Saumya
K.&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: U of Arizona &lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE: A Holistic
Approach to Compiler-Assisted Optimization of Software Systems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve computer software
by considering the operating system and application programs running on a
processor together in a holistic manner, and consider-ing global as well as
individual behaviors of such systems. Each component of a com-puter system,
i.e., the operating system and the different applications, runs in its own ad-
dress space. Existing approaches to software optimization consider these
components as isolated entities and assume nothing about the behavior of, or
interactions with, other ad-dress spaces. This has the shortcoming that the
software improvement process cannot take advantage of knowledge of interactions
between code modules in the different ad-dress spaces. This project aims to
develop tools and techniques to address this shortcom-ing. A key element in our
approach is the use of compiler techniques in novel ways, and in particular, in
a multi-address space systems context rather than a single address space
application-level context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this work will be
to improve the performance of software systems across a wide variety of contexts
and according to several different metrics. In particular, we ex-pect to be able
to improve user applications, operating systems kernels, and system ser-vices,
with performance metrics that include execution speed, amount of memory re-
quired, fault tolerance, and enhanced security. Our results will be disseminated
in the form of publications describing our algorithms, experimental methodology
and results, as well as software developed as part of the project, which we will
make available via the World-wide web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D.
Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;June 24,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;