* 0410103
* BE/CNH: Complex Interactions Among Urban Climate, Air Quality, and Adaptive-Reactive Human Response
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Robert Bornstein, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,711,972.00

Interactions among urban climate, air quality, and human activities are complex
and replete with feedback mechanisms that are poorly understood. The current
framework for investigating how urban planning, policy actions, and regulatory
decisions impact targeted outcomes (such as reducing energy consumption and
improving air quality and human health in urban areas) is relatively crude,
ignoring these complex and non-linear feedback mechanisms. For example,
strategies to mitigate air pollution generally are tested by sequentially
linking separate models for meteorology, emissions, and atmospheric chemistry,
bypassing human and other feedback mechanisms that act both on short and long
time scales. Furthermore, the very nature of the current modeling paradigm makes
it difficult to assess potential interactions among endpoints of interest, such
as questions regarding whether policy recommendations intended to improve air
quality have unintended impacts on health or energy consumption. Consequently,
current approaches are severely limited in their ability to assess how
population growth, technological change, global climate change, and adaptation
may affect the urban environment. The goal of this interdisciplinary research
project is to develop an integrated analysis framework that can be used to
evaluate human response to, and impact on, heat waves and episodes of poor air
quality. This framework will link models of meteorology, air quality, energy
consumption and human response, incorporating feedback mechanisms among
individual modules. The data required to develop and validate this analysis
framework will include (1) survey instruments to quantify human activity
response functions; (2) field measurement campaigns to spatially resolve air
pollution and meteorological conditions; and (3) energy and transportation data
to quantify anthropogenic waste heat release profiles. The scientific objectives
of this study will be tightly coupled with the interdisciplinary environmental
science and policy education of participants across the educational spectrum
(high school students, teachers, undergraduates, graduate students, postdocs and
faculty). While the analytical framework developed in this project will be
generally applicable to any urban area, it will be implemented for two test
sites (Portland Oregon, and Houston Texas) where diverse response
characteristics are likely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
important insight into the nature and significance of feedback mechanisms among
urban climate, air quality, and human activity systems that have been heretofore
neglected or not properly accounted for and quantified. In addition to
clarifying how human activity levels respond to adverse weather conditions and
to health advisories, this research will relate these changes in behavior to
their subsequent impacts on urban climate and air quality. Such a comprehensive
modeling framework is necessary for evaluating the performance of both short-
and long-term policy actions intended to mitigate the harmful effects of adverse
weather conditions and pollutant emissions in the urban environment. The
resulting framework will be robust, allowing for updating and expansion of
individual modules as well as enabling researchers to apply this modeling
paradigm to other cities of interest. This project is supported by an award
resulting from the FY 2004 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;