* 0410336
* BE/CNH: Interactions Among Human, Biological, and Physical Processes Within Large Lake Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Elena Irwin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2009
* USD 1,399,923.00

Booms in lake-based human activities have consistently followed increases in the
quality of large lake ecosystem services, including abundant gamefish, clear
water, and uncontaminated water for drinking and swimming. For example,
substantial improvements in water quality and clarity in Lake Erie achieved in
the 1970s and 1980s through the reduction in external phosphorus loadings from
point sources have been followed by a period of lakeside recreational and
residential development that extends to the present. More recently, increases in
phosphorus concentrations and the frequency of harmful algal blooms in the lake
have combined with other biophysical conditions to generate "surprise events,"
such as the, expansion of the summertime "Dead Zone" and adult gamefish kills.
While linkages between the human and biophysical systems clearly are key factors
producing these changes, their underlying structural dynamics and the extent to
which the linkages have led to fundamental and perhaps irreversible changes in
biological and human processes is unknown. This interdisciplinary research
project will examine the coupled linkages between lake functioning and lake-
related human activities and explore how these couplings generate nonlinear
changes in ecological outcomes, such as water quality and fish stocks, and human
behavior, including land use and lake-based recreational activities. Of
particular interest are the conditions under which coupled linkages lead to
bifurcations or other "surprise" outcomes that may not occur in their absence
and the influence of fine-scale variations, time-delayed feedbacks, and
stochastic processes that may be embedded in the couplings. The objectives of
this research are (1) to construct a simple, coarse-scale model of a generic
large lake ecosystem with coupled human-biophysical interactions that can be
used to examine system dynamics and the role of human-biophysical couplings; (2)
to develop a more detailed, fine-scale model by increasing the model's spatial
and temporal resolution and, parameterizing the model using Lake Erie data and
use this model to test hypotheses regarding the impact of human activities on
lake eutrophication and the impact of these ecological changes on land and
economic development in the Lake Erie region; and (3) to use this set of models
to study the impacts of historical policies and new management strategies of
large lakes on both human and biophysical processes. A combination of
analytical, statistical, and computer simulation methods, including agent-based
modeling, will be used to build these models. Dynamical systems techniques,
including numerical simulations and bifurcation analysis, will be used to
analyze the models. Much of the historical data on lake dynamics, water quality,
fish stocks, land use, and recreational activities are already available.
Additional data will be generated using geographical information systems, remote
sensing, and household surveys of residents and lake recreational
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide both scientific and
societal benefits. By testing hypotheses regarding the coupled linkages between
human and biophysical large lake processes and examining the way in which these
interactions influence the self-organization and resiliency of biological and
human systems, the project will make an original contribution to the scientific
understanding of large lake biocomplexity. The research will make methodological
contributions by advancing methods used to study the stability and multiscale
properties of complex, coupled systems. By providing a better understanding of
how feedbacks occur between lake functioning and human behavioral responses, the
results will generate social benefits by providing information to policy makers
who seek to protect lake resources while also providing high-quality amenities
to people. The project will integrate biocomplexity research and education
through the development of a new biocomplexity course; through training a new
generation of interdisciplinary biocomplexity researchers; and through
incorporation of research ideas and results into K-12 educational materials and
programs aimed at policy makers and the broader public. This project is
supported by an award resulting from the FY 2004 special competition in
Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and
Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;