* 0410900
* Improving Reasoning and Technological Competency Across the Curriculum through Targeted Applications of GIS
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* William Montgomery, New Jersey City University
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 06/30/2007
* USD 88,493.00

Discipline: Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
integrating Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technology into five (5)
courses of study (business, criminal justice/security, fire science, nursing,
and public health) in the College of Professional Studies, as a means of
facilitating the improvement of critical thinking, quantitative reasoning, and
technological competencies across the curriculum at New Jersey City University,
a Hispanic-Serving Institution in the heart of the New York City metropolitan
area. Five new, 1-credit, discipline-specific exercise modules are being
developed to augment a current 3-credit core course, creating a single 4-credit
(3+1) sequence that will serve all five degree programs. The discipline-specific
exercises originate from GIS courses taught by disciplinary experts, and are
being adapted and implemented to fit the economic climate, demographic
distribution, and urban environment of northern New
Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this activity is in
marrying the strengths of generalist and specialist approaches to GIS training
by integrating exciting, relevant exercises into an introductory course.
Students immediately see relevance in these exercises and take ownership of
their learning experience. This produces high motivation, which results in
improved persistence and retention. The increased motivation and self-esteem
that result from surmounting GIS-related challenges are reflected in improved
competency in other areas, especially technology, critical thinking and
quantitative reasoning. Improved competency in these areas is being identified
and measured with NJCU rubrics derived from national models. The broader impacts
of this project are that improvements in core competencies, coupled with
improved motivation, retention, and persistence to graduation, enable NJCU
students, many of them members of under-represented minorities, to compete
successfully in the 21st century workforce.&lt;br/&gt;