* 0410493
* An Integrated Field Hydrology, Geochemistry, and Geophysics Module for Geoscience Field Camps
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Robert Bauer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2006
* USD 62,335.00

Discipline: Geology (42)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing an
integrated sequence of hydrogeology and geophysics instructional modules,
modeled instructionally on the SAGE and SHAEP programs, for the geology field
course at the University of Missouri-Columbia, targeted to serve two classes of
students: students with little or no previous coursework in hydrology and
geophysics (Track 1) and students with previous courses in these subjects who
have advanced interests in hydrology or geophysics (Track 2). The modules
provide background instruction on the objectives and previous results from the
field sites, a series of data gathering activities that teach students numerous
techniques of field study, and a series of questions that students are exploring
through their data interpretations. The modules are building upon the foundation
of field mapping, stratigraphic, and structural studies that students have
completed during the first weeks of our field course. By building upon this
foundation, the modules emphasize the multidisciplinary nature of field
hydrogeology and geophysical studies and their relationship to 3D surface and
subsurface geology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of our
project include: 1) field hydrologic and geophysics learning opportunities for
students who may have little or no background coursework in hydrology or
geophysics, 2) undergraduate research opportunities for students who have pre-
requisite coursework in either hydrology or geophysics, 3) a model two-track
approach to integrated field hydrology and geophysics instruction within the
context of a general field geology course, and 4) dissemination of the general
aspects of our model that can be implemented at other geology field courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impact lies primarily in
demonstrating that selected equipment commonly used in research can be
integrated into geology field instruction to provide a high quality educational
experience for students of varied backgrounds. This project can serve as a model
for enhancing field geology courses nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;