* 0410596
* A Vertically-Integrated Application-Driven Undergraduate Signal Processing Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Lisa Huettel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 199,358.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing a
signal-processing laboratory that is vertically integrated into the curriculum
to illustrate theoretical concepts through application-driven exercises. The
proposed laboratory experience is modeled after the successful signal-processing
laboratory at Rice University, but introduces two unique features. First, the
new laboratory is integrated into multiple courses from the sophomore to senior
level, rather than serving a single course. Second, the laboratory exercises are
application-driven and emphasize the development of signal processing algorithms
to be implemented on hardware. As students advance through the signal-processing
curriculum, they transition from high-level algorithm generation to hardware-
level design and implementation. Using assessment tools developed jointly with
the institution's Office of Assessment, the project is being evaluated on four
criteria: conceptual learning, retention and enrollment, student motivation, and
quality of materials. The investigators plan to publish their work in
engineering education journals and present it at regional and national
conferences, through their own website, and through an independent site that
hosts educational material (cnx.rice.edu). They also plan to make their material
available in a printed laboratory manual with an accompanying CD containing
real-world data and signals for use in the various experiments.&lt;br/&gt;