* 0410427
* Multiplexed Ion-Mobility Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry for the Study of Iron Biogeochemical Cycling in Seawater
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,418,249.00

With support from the Biocomplexity in the Environment - Instrument Development
for Environmental Activities (BE-IDEA) Program, Richard Zare in the Chemistry
Department at Stanford University will develop instrumentation based on ion-
mobility spectrometry - time-of-flight mass spectrometer (IMS-TOF-MS) to
investigate poorly understood aspects of the iron biogeochemical cycle: (a) the
role of iron in the photochemical reactivity of surface water Chromophoric
Dissolved Organic Matter (CDOM); (b) the influence of iron complexation by
tetrapyrroles in its role as a micronutrient in marine systems; and (c) study of
the biochemical fate of iron associated with heme and iron-sulfur moieties in
metallo-proteins. Two different Ion-Mobility (IM) drift tubes will be designed
and built to be coupled to existing mass spectrometers: one employing Hadamard
multiplexing at the Time of Flight (TOF) analyzer and another that uses Hadamard
multiplexing at the IM drift tube. The goal is to improve sensitivity allowing
for the analysis of very dilute seawater samples while simultaneously providing
two- and three-dimensional information to identify unknown iron-binding chemical
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves researchers at three
institutions: Scripps Institute of Oceanography, Georgia Institute of Technology
and Stanford University. These instruments will boost novel features allowing
high sensitivity and high mass accuracy. The ion mobility spectrometry
capability will provide conformation and isomeric information about iron-
macromolecular complexes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate
students directly involved in the building stages of the project will be trained
in instrument development and environmental activities. Results will also be
valuable for companies seeking to develop mass spectrometry instrumentation
focused on environmental analysis. &lt;br/&gt;