* 0410787
* Incorporating Investigative Labs &amp; Active Learning Into Non-majors Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Josephine Kurdziel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 89,761.00

Biological Science (61). This CCLI Adaptation and Implementation project
addresses the issue of student disengagement in large-enrollment science courses
by incorporating two research-based solutions in a non-majors biology course: 1)
the incorporation of active learning (via a Personal Response System), and 2)
the addition of an investigative laboratory component. Adapting materials
developed by Workshop Biology, students enrolled in the laboratory course work
in small cooperative groups to execute original investigations in each of the
five areas of biology covered (ecology, evolution, genetics, cell/molecular
biology, and physiology). Cooperative groups are also utilized in lecture, where
students solve conceptual problems posed by the instructor, interpret graphs and
tables, or design experiments to address a research question. Issues related to
the training of teaching assistants are addressed in this project through the
production of online training materials. The impact of these structural and
pedagogical changes on students' understanding of scientific inquiry, key
biological concepts, scientific reasoning skills, and attitudes about science,
technology and the course are assessed using a variety of quantitative (pre-
tests and post-tests, exam questions, lecture activities) and qualitative
methods (focus groups, open-ended responses to survey questions, classroom
observations). This project has the potential to elucidate mechanisms for
improving the scientific literacy of populations of students who do not plan to
major in science.