* 0410046
* US-Turkey Workshop on Seismic Retrofit and Post-Earthquake Evaluation of Highway Bridges
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Mehdi Saiidi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 06/30/2006
* USD 34,995.00

Contacts between the earthquake engineering communities in the United States
and Turkey have intensified since the 1999 Kocaeli and Duzce earthquakes that
led to damage and failure of numerous structures in Turkey. Many bridges were
affect by these earthquakes. The US engineers and researchers have been working
with their Turkish counterparts to maximize the lessons learned from these
earthquakes because these lessons would benefit both countries. A joint US-
Turkey workshop is proposed with the following objectives: (1) To provide a
forum to enhance communication between engineers and scientists involved in
earthquake engineering of bridges in the United States and Turkey, (2) To
exchange information about recent lessons learned in each country in seismic
retrofit of bridges and health monitoring techniques to aid in post-earthquake
investigations, (3) To develop areas of common needs and interest in bridge
seismic retrofit and health monitoring, (4) To develop a list of priorities for
future joint US-Turkey research in seismic retrofit and post-disaster evaluation
methods for bridges, and (5) To identify sources of funding for joint research
in both countries. Relative to previous US-Turkey workshops, the proposed
program will have the new dimension of post-disaster evaluation of bridges.
Approximately 18 to 20 US delegates will be selected for participation, some
with full and others with partial support from this project. The delegates will
be from federal and state transportation agencies, NSF, the private sector, and
the academia. A steering committee will be formed to help select the members and
develop the workshop program. The workshop is tentatively scheduled for August
2004 in Ankara.

The proposed workshop will provide an opportunity for close exchange of ideas
and lessons that have been learned in the US and Turkey in seismic retrofit and
post-earthquake evaluation of bridges. Both countries will benefit from the
workshop as information is discussed in detail in the course of the four-day
workshop. Seismic retrofit and post-disaster evaluation of bridges are still
emerging. Both areas encompass a great deal of technical and non-technical
issues. Learning the perspectives of engineers and researchers from other
earthquake-prone countries that face problems similar to those of the US will
enrich the knowledge of the scientific and design community in the US.
Furthermore, the new potential collaborative research could involve
undergraduate and graduate students in the US. These students will be trained in
earthquake engineering research and design and will be exposed to international
views and perspectives. The training of skilled individual with understanding of
international issues will enhance the manpower in the US scientific work force
and will improve the labor pool for more advanced design and research work in
the global market.