* 0410719
* Implementation and Enhancement of Internet Based Robotics, Automation, and CAD/CAM/CNC in a New Manufacturing Engineering Technology Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Horacio Sosa, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen A. Alfano
* 07/31/2007
* USD 155,648.00

Engineering-Engineering Technology (58) The project is enhancing Drexel's new
Manufacturing Engineering Technology (MET) curriculum through the incorporation
of state-of-the-art Internet based robotics, automation, and CAD/CAM/CNC
technology. The project is using information and communication technologies to
develop real-time control of production processes, which is a key element in
creating and deploying global manufacturing enterprises. The project is adapting
Internet based technologies that other schools of engineering have developed in
robotics, CAD, communication, and information management. Adaptation includes
Internet programming, design and production, E-commerce, and advanced
manufacturing systems from Industrial Engineering at the University of Iowa;
sensor-based intelligent process control, tele-robotics, and machine vision
systems and motion control in Mechanical Engineering at Drexel University;
E-transactions, and Internet supply-chain and network integration from
Industrial Engineering at Arizona State University; Internet based reverse
engineering and advanced manufacturing, and artificial intelligence in
manufacturing and process optimization from Industrial and Manufacturing at
Bradley University; and E-manufacturing, precision, sensor-based manufacturing
and automation, and Internet based collaboration and product design from
Manufacturing Sciences at Western Kentucky University.

Courses are being restructured and new courses developed to support a new
Mechatronics laboratory. This is providing students with contemporary practices
and hands-on skills for an expanding e-manufacturing sector. The project is
integrating Internet based technologies with those at other universities and
community colleges in the Greater Philadelphia Region to provide students access
to the curriculum that is being develop at Drexel. Distant delivery is enabling
students of diverse educational backgrounds to develop technical skills needed
to enter the workforce in this emerging technology. The project is targeting
women and minority students.