* 0410748
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Substrate Limitations to Tsuga Canadensis and Betula Allegheniensis Seedling Establishment
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2004,08/31/2005
* Michael Walters, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2005
* USD 8,549.00

In northern Michigan and Wisconsin, eastern hemlock trees often grow in dense
stands bordering sugar maple forests. These borders are remarkably stable,
sometimes not changing for thousands of years. Because hemlock trees cast such
dense shade, sugar maple is unable to invade hemlock stands. But why can't
hemlock expand into sugar maple forests? Part of the reason is that hemlock
seedlings cannot survive more than a few years on the forest floor. Older
hemlock seedlings (and yellow birch seedlings) are usually found growing on
rotting logs and stumps, which stay moister than the surrounding soil and also
shed leaf litter. Previous work by these investigators has found that both
hemlock and yellow birch seedlings prefer hemlock logs to those of sugar maple
and other deciduous species. This may explain not only why hemlock trees are
unable to "invade" sugar maple forests, but also why hemlock and yellow birch (a
slow-growing conifer and a faster-growing deciduous tree) are commonly found so
close together that their roots are intertwined. Having already counted and
measured seedlings on logs and the forest floor, the investigators are now
measuring water, light, and nutrient levels of logs, along with wood decay rate,
to explain why hemlock and yellow birch seedlings prefer hemlock logs. This
research may eventually be used to help restore hemlock forests destroyed by
hemlock woolly adelgid, a pest from Asia that has invaded the east coast. The
preliminary results of this study are currently being used to improve management
of old-growth hemlock forests in Michigan.