* 0410896
* Collaborative Research.  Conquest-2:  Improving Energy Efficiency and Performance Through a Disk/RAM Hybrid File System
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* An-I Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 06/30/2007
* USD 267,331.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research &lt;br/&gt;CI
SE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
NUMBER: 0410908/0410896&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Reiher Peter/Wang
An-I&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of California, Los Angeles and Florida
State University&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE: Collaborative Research: Conquest-2:
Improving Energy Effi-ciency and Performance Through a Disk/RAM Hybrid File
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project improves energy efficiency and
performance for many kinds of com-puters. Portables must be shut down when their
battery is exhausted. While large servers do not rely on batteries, their energy
consumption is a significant fraction of overall cost. Disk drives incur large
energy costs for both types of machines, consuming up to 77% of all energy used
by some servers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Conquest-2 file system reduces energy
consumption by replacing disks with inexpensive RAM for persistent storage of
many files. The earlier Conquest filesystem demonstrated impressive speed
improvements through this tech-nique. Conquest-2 builds on Conquest to reduce
disk power consumption as well. Conquest-2 is being built as a working prototype
to demonstrate that it can reduce the energy demands of both individual laptop
machines and huge data centers, while achieving speeds better than traditional
systems. Files that were previously kept on disk are stored in persistent RAM,
saving energy by keeping the disk spinning much less. Since RAM itself consumes
power, a re-search challenge for Conquest-2 is to use the persistent RAM in a
power-efficient way without compromising the system's speed. Under popular Web
server loads, Conquest-2 is expected to save up to 77% of power on servers and
achieve up to a 96% increase in file system speed, to be demonstrated by
measuring the prototype with realistic workloads. The source code of Con-quest-2
will be available under an open-source license. Conquest-2 will sup-port many
different machine types and applications, including databases, web and other on-
line servers, and laptops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D.
Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;May 26,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;