* 0410683
* Practice-Based Manufacturing Education - Adapting a Learning Factory Approach
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Constance Ziemian, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 03/31/2007
* USD 95,526.00

Mechanical Engineering (56) The project is adapting and implementing The
Learning Factory model developed at Pennsylvania State University, the
University of Washington, and the University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez by creating
an on-demand fabrication laboratory to integrate design, manufacturing, and
business curriculum. The project is integrating manufacturing topics and
equipment within existing core curriculum courses in fluid mechanics and
dynamics, solid mechanics, materials sciences, manufacturing processes, fracture
mechanics, and computer aided manufacturing, rather than creating new courses.
The project is providing appropriate hands-on experiences and practical
applications related to important course topics. Syllabi are being coordinated
between core classes in order to provide common laboratory experiences for
students when they are concurrently enrolled in two or more core courses.
Assessment of the project is being coordinated through an independent evaluator
who has been part of the original Learning Factory team at Pennsylvania State
College.

A Haas CNC Machining Center and an EDM Die-sink Machine is being purchased with
matching funds provided by the Department of Mechanical Engineering and the
College of Engineering. The equipment is the foundation for expanding the
laboratory infrastructure, which is providing the opportunity for complementary
coverage of fundamental fabrication principles; providing senior design
experiences that simulate real life-product development processes including
manufacturing planning, fabrication, assembly and testing of functional
products; providing the resource to integrate industry-based projects within
undergraduate research; expanding the opportunity to offer programs to industry
through the institute's Small Business Development Center; providing
accessibility for the Society of Women Engineers to engage fifth graders in
annual engineering workshops; and developing outreach programs and activities
for K-12 STEM students.