* 0410608
* Weather Trackers for Inquiry-Based Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mark Francek, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 08/31/2008
* USD 28,363.00

To provide undergraduates with stronger inquiry-based field experiences
involving hypothesis testing and data collection, this project will revise
existing curricula to include weather data gathering projects using 80 hand-held
weather trackers, instruments that have cable hookups permitting the easy
transfer of weather data to computer files for statistical manipulation. Faculty
from geography/earth science, biology, and engineering departments are using the
weather trackers in a variety of introductory and advanced classes. Students are
exploring spatial and temporal variations of weather variables in classrooms, on
campus grounds, at local forests, and at local elementary and middle schools,
where pre-service teachers taking these courses regularly work with K-8
students. Examples of specific projects include students measuring temperature
and dew point variations within buildings, testing for the existence of an urban
heat island, and correlating changes in barometric pressure with associated
changes in wind speed and air moisture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project lies in the promotion of an inquiry-based approach for
learning about weather in series of existing science courses in earth science,
biology, and engineering. Non-majors, pre-service teachers, and K-8 students are
collecting and analyzing their own field data. Students who might ordinarily not
gain such abilities learn technical and analytical skills that are useful in the
workplace, a significant broader impact. With the needs of pre-service teachers
in mind, the project's inquiry based approaches are aligned with state and
national science standards. &lt;br/&gt;