* 0410790
* EHS:    Dynamic Hardware Reconfiguration to Accelerate Java-Based Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2007
* David Andrews, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 01/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

Sass - Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advantages in Information Technology
continue to play a vital role in our nation's ability to innovate and compete in
theglobal market. Advancements in computing performance, especially in the
embedded computing systems domain, are enabling these advantages. This project
combines commercially available, hybrid devices (that is, single integrated
circuits with processors, memory, and configurable hardware) and a novel run-
time system with the goal of building systems with better performance and fewer
resources. To accomplish this, the project is investigating and developing
technology in two steps. First, every subroutine in the embedded systems
application is processed to find those suitable for acceleration by configurable
hardware and a new hardware feature is synthesized. Then, as the application
executes, the run-time system continually reconfigures the hardware to keep the
most profitable features resident. By carefully managing the overhead
introduced, the aim of this work is to provide the performance advantages of
custom hardware with fewer physical resources. The advantage of the particular
system under investigation is that it automates reconfiguration -- which
presently is an engineering-intensive, manual process. To test the effectiveness
of this approach, the University of Kansas has teamed with Grand Valley State
University to judge the performance of the system on applications developed by
senior undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;