* 0410845
* Effective Integration of Electromagnetic Compatibility and Signal Integrity in Electrical and Computer Engineering Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* David Voltmer, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 101,994.00

Engineering - Electrical (55)

This project is developing a new course on electromagnetic compatibility and
signal integrity for electrical engineering students. The course is being
adapted from educational materials developed for graduate students and working
engineers by the faculty at a nationally recognized electromagnetic
compatibility laboratory at the University of Missouri, Rolla. In order to allow
the students to develop useful and flexible knowledge, the course is exploring
the impact that electromagnetic compatibility and signal integrity have on the
performance of real systems. The PIs are creating a learning environment in
which students gain conceptual and theoretical understanding as they develop
laboratory and measurement techniques. A review board of nationally-recognized
experts in electromagnetic compatibility and educational assessment is helping
to assure that the materials developed are of excellent quality, that the
assessment plan is well-conceived and fully implemented, and that the materials
are disseminated in a form that can be readily adopted by faculty members at
other colleges and universities. The evaluation effort is examining the effects
of the course on cognitive skills and affective outcomes using surveys, focus
groups, and concept and laboratory inventory tests, which the project team is
developing. The dissemination plan includes publications and presentations in
both educational and disciplinary research venues. The PIs are exploring the
inclusion of some of their material in an existing textbook and the publication
of a new textbook.