* 0410653
* Enhancing Interdisciplinary Interactions in the College of Engineering and Natural Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Shirley Pomeranz, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 06/30/2006
* USD 99,242.00

This project strengthens connections among science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines in order to create a more productive environment
for STEM students and faculty. Interdisciplinary Lively Application Projects
(ILAPs) are used to assist STEM undergraduates in benefiting from these
connections. The concept of ILAPs was developed by a consortium of 12 colleges
and universities led by the United States Military Academy through a National
Sciences Foundation funded project, Project INTERMATH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has three primary goals. The first goal develops and implements ILAPs
for use in both the mathematics courses and the science/engineering courses. The
second goal fosters interaction among STEM faculty, in part, by direct
participation in ILAPs formation and use. The third goal coordinates curricula
across the STEM disciplines, primarily with the development of web-based,
portable Mathematics Modules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of
the project are as follows: (i) Students take a degree of ownership in their
curriculum by publishing select group ILAP results at the project web site. (ii)
The mathematical core programs for the ILAPs are available at the project web
site as independent Mathematics Modules, thereby increasing their versatility.
Each ILAP has web links to these course-independent extractable Mathematics
Modules. (iii) STEM curricula and use of technology/computer software is
coordinated. (iv) Team-teaching and student-centered learning in computer
classrooms, science/engineering laboratories, and standard classrooms emphasize
the interdependence of the disciplines and foster faculty interactions. (v) A
mathematics faculty member sits in science and engineering courses, reporting to
the mathematics faculty their observations with respect to what mathematics STEM
students need in order to ensure success in science and engineering. (vi)
Faculty colloquia providing ILAP and educational feedback and an
interdisciplinary partnership of STEM faculty members are developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributing engineering and natural science
departments from The University of Tulsa include the Departments of Chemistry
and Biochemistry, Electrical Engineering, Geosciences, Mathematical and Computer
Sciences, Mechanical Engineering, and Physics and Engineering Physics. The
project duration is three years, during which information is disseminated in
international publications, at national STEM association meetings and at two
regional STEM society workshops&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
project: (i) Provide a formal assessment of the effectiveness of ILAPs in
learning; (ii) Promote the use of ILAPs among similar institutions; and (iii)
Encourage the coordination of STEM curricula. &lt;br/&gt;