* 0410540
* Development of Educational Materials and Acquisition of Equipment for a Nanoscale to Microscale Engineering Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Luz Martinez-Miranda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 08/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

This project is developing a laboratory curriculum and laboratory based on the
concept and facilities of the Materials Testing Instructional Laboratory at the
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. The laboratory is providing
undergraduate students in the Departments of Aerospace (AERO), Materials Science
(MSE), and Mechanical Engineering (MECH) at the University of Maryland (UMD)
with an integrated lab experience that connects the nanoscale structure of
materials to the macroscopic physical properties. Two experimental systems are
being developed, which will facilitate the changes in the curriculum through the
use of miniature test specimens: 1) a pair of micro-tensile testers, one for
conventional uniaxial testing and one with state-of-the-art biaxial testing
capability, and 2) an integrated nanoindentation/AFM testing system. The
laboratory curriculum and facilities are being shared across (at least) three
Departments at UMD through the use of a common college-wide undergraduate
laboratory for the testing and characterization of materials. This sharing of
joint undergraduate laboratory facilities across Departments and fields
represents a new interdisciplinary view of the undergraduate curriculum that
emphasizes micro- and nano-technology, and connection of nanometer and micron
scale characterization to macroscopic properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
curriculum being developed and associated laboratory facilities integrates
recent research in materials characterization and testing into the undergraduate
curriculum. The research covers the use of atomic force microscopy and
nanomechanical testing of materials along with fabrication and testing of
micromechanical systems. These techniques and concepts have not been covered in
the undergraduate curriculum and represent the transference of current topics
and developments into the educational system. The lab modules being developed
will expose students to this rapidly developing field and provide training with
direct application in modern manufacturing in the areas of microelectronics,
packaging, and MEMs. The lab modules and procedures developed in this revised
laboratory curriculum will be provided on the web with metadata for indexing in
the National Science Digital Library to allow other institutions to either adopt
or modify the materials for their own use. This laboratory will benefit close to
400 students a semester, of which approximately 20% are women and 15% are
minorities. This laboratory will also aid the extensive outreach activities for
high school students already in place at UMD.&lt;br/&gt;