* 0410524
* Fragment Caching to Improve Distributed Access
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* David Nadeau, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 07/31/2006
* USD 170,000.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research
&lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
NUMBER: 0410524&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Nadeau, David
R.&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Fragment Caching to Improve Distributed Access
&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE: University of California-San
Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabled by dramatic improvements in compute power,
network bandwidth, disk capacity, and digital sensing devices, the last decade
has seen the emergence of massive scientific data sets archived in data
repositories scattered across the country. Few sites have the capacity to copy
an entire data set to local storage prior to analysis or visualization. In-
stead, this work explores distributed access strategies to enable remote
applications to query and receive on-demand delivery of relevant fragments of
large data sets. Integrated into a data grid that manages distributed data
collections, these strategies monitor appli-cation access patterns and pre-fetch
and cache needed portions of a data set, delivering to the remote application
only the data that is needed, as it is needed. The approach is simi-lar to
virtual memory paging systems found in operating systems, but uses knowledge of
the spatial and temporal structure of data sets and the application's observed
access pat-terns to efficiently pre-fetch, format, cache, and deliver the data.
The results of this work enable distributed access to data sets far larger than
local storage resources would other-wise allow. Network bandwidth is used more
efficiently by transferring only the data that is needed, and local storage is
used only as a cache for frequently used portions of a data set. Expected
results of this work include predictive pre-fetch algorithms, cost mod-els, and
a prototype implementation whose usefulness will be validated by its application
to several real-world problems involving distributed access to enormous data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D. Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program
Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;June 23,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;