* 0410348
* BE/CNH: Understanding and Modeling the Scope for Adaptive Management in Agroecosystems in the Pampas: Response to Interannual and Decadal Climate Variability and Other Risk Factors
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2010
* William Easterling, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,600,000.00

Agricultural ecosystems combine the complexity, multiplicity of scales, and
feedbacks of biophysical interactions in natural ecosystems with the additional
intricacies of human decision making. Climate variability is one of the top
sources of risk to agricultural production. In particular, climate fluctuations
on seasonal-to-interannual and interdecadal scales are relevant to decision-
making, resource management, and infrastructure planning. On seasonal-to-
interannual scales, the emerging ability to forecast regional climate
variability associated with the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon
offers a natural laboratory to learn how a complex system such as agriculture
may respond. An excellent site to study such responses is the Pampas of central-
eastern Argentina, a major agricultural region that shows marked interannual and
interdecadal climate signals. On interdecadal scales, an increase in spring-
summer precipitation since the 1970s has contributed to significant changes in
land-use patterns and a large increase in Argentine agricultural output. There
are growing concerns about the environmental consequences and the sustainability
of production and life support systems, however. This interdisciplinary research
project will address these issues, which are part of the dynamic interactions of
natural and human components in agroecosystems. Special emphasis will be placed
on assessing the scope for adaptive management in response to newly available
knowledge on climate variability and recent insights on human decision making.
The project will (1) map key components of the decision landscape in
agricultural systems of the Pampas; (2) build plausible scenarios of interannual
and interdecadal climate variability; (3) assess impacts and outcomes of climate
variability; (4) seek to understand how probabilistic climate information and
uncertainty about outcomes are received and acted upon; (5) explore best
practices for the design and communication of climate information and the
characterization of uncertainty; (6) assess consequences on natural systems of
human actions; and (7) conduct a self-reflective analysis of factors that
promote or impede integrative science research and outreach with stakeholder
participation. The project involves linked modeling approaches for generation of
climate scenarios and decision outcomes, controlled experiments on decision
making and behavior, and participatory research that will draw on contextual
knowledge and agricultural stakeholders' experiences and
preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The link between climate variability and
decision making is a fundamental issue that influences resource management in
many regions and sectors. This project will provide an integrated analysis of an
important and prevalent complex system (agricultural production) that involves
interactions between several natural and human systems. From a perspective of
scientific innovation, the project will develop conceptual and procedural
approaches to bridge the spatial and temporal scales of climate scenarios and
the scales associated with regional impact assessment and resource management.
Scale mismatch has been at the heart of problems of climate impact assessment.
The project will include a fully probabilistic characterization of uncertainty
based on modern statistical and computational techniques. The availability of
uncertainty estimates will enhance the salience of project findings for
stakeholders. Finally, a reflective analysis of the challenges of
interdisciplinary, multiple-place collaboration, and stakeholder involvement in
integrative science will stimulate theory development relevant to biocomplexity
problems elsewhere. The similarity in production scale, crops grown, and
technology of the Pampas to those in other major production areas (such as the
U.S. Midwest, Brazil, and Canada) with comparable climate signals suggest a
broader relevance of results from the project. This project is supported by an
award resulting from the FY 2004 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;