* 0410437
* BE/CNH:  Biocomplexity and Fisheries Sustainability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Gunnar Knapp, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,018,000.00

Humans have exploited animal populations by hunting and fishing for thousands of
years, but extensive commercial harvest of animals is now largely limited to
aquatic ecosystems. Even in marine ecosystems, evidence has accumulated that
many fisheries may not be sustainable. This lack of sustainability stems in part
from the inability of the fish populations to generate enough surplus production
to meet the expectations of the fisheries. In addition to this biotic dimension,
however, there are equally important human dimensions, including regulations,
investments in vessels and gear, locations of communities, property rights and
fishing licenses, and other traditional and cultural aspects of fishing. Aquatic
ecologists have described many aspects of the complexity of biotic systems that
affect the productivity of fish populations, including diversity of phsical
habitats, effects of changing environmental conditions, intra-specific
competition, nutrient cycling, and community dynamics. These studies have not
been adequately integrated, however, with work on the complexity of human
systems, the commercial, recreational, and subsistence fisheries that are
intimately and inextricably linked to the population dynamics of the fishes. The
sockeye salmon fisheries in Bristol Bay, Alaska, present an ideal opportunity to
understand the linkages between complex biotic and human systems, thereby
extending basic understanding of these critical components of healthy human and
natural communities. These fisheries, operating at commercial levels for a
century, are among the best examples of sustainability, yet their complexity has
only recently been investigated. Sockeye salmon breed in streams, ponds, rivers,
and beaches associated with large lakes in five major drainage basins, and their
offspring rear in the lakes for one or two years before migrating to sea for
another two or three years. Tens of millions of these salmon return as adults
each year, and fractions of the total are caught in mobile gillnet fisheries,
fixed-site set net fisheries, recreational fisheries, and subsistence fisheries.
Forecasts and in-season information are used by managers to decide on
appropriate levels of fishing and by fishermen do decide where to fish. The
forecasts are based on scientific information derived from research on climate-
related and density-dependent processes governing the dynamics of the salmon
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary concepts of interest in this
interdisciplinary research project are the resilience of the biotic system (in
this case, salmon abundance and diversity) to harvest and environmental change
and the resilience of the human communities in the face of these changes in
salmon abundance and associated changes in price and costs of fishing. The
fundamental hypothesis is that the ability of the salmon populations to persist
in the face of changing environmental conditions and the ability of the human
communities to persist in the face of changing social and economic forces both
depend on the diversity of "life history" strategies as well as a blend of site
attachment and mobility. The overall objective of this research project is to
test this hypothesis and thereby understand the coupling between salmon
populations and human communities. The project will pursue this objective with
five themes at increasing levels of scale: (1) the links between genetics and
life history traits of salmon that result from post-glacial colonization and
contemporary homing and gene flow, (2) the role of climate in determining the
productivity of salmon populations using different breeding habitats and
different nursery lakes, (3) the importance of marine-derived nutrients (from
salmon carcasses) in the productivity of lake ecosystems and success of salmon
populations, (4) the ways in which the current fishery management policy of
maximum sustainable yield could be modified to consider economic and ecological
processes to the benefit of both humans and the natural ecosystem, and (5) the
extent to which the regulatory policies should consider the behavior of
fishermen in an effort to rationalize the size and capacity of the fisheries.
The project will be closely coordinated with the agency regulating the fisheries
(Alaska Department of Fish and Game) and the community development organizations
in the area (especially the Bristol Bay Native Association). Outreach efforts
will include extensive contacts with local schools and economic development
groups. The findings will have significant implications for theories of
sustainability and broad application to the many other systems where human
communities depend on natural resources that are subject to the effects of those
humans, and to external environmental changes. This project is supported by an
award resulting from the FY 2004 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;