* 0410315
* BE/CNH: Feedbacks Among Forestry, Agriculture, and Fire in Amazonia
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Lisa Curran, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,598,998.00

As the rural economies of the Amazon Basin become tied to world markets, new
pulses of logging and deforestation will follow. Potential consequences of this
trend include a reduction of forest-dependent rainfall, the spread of savanna-
like scrub vegetation, substantial losses of biodiversity, and increased
greenhouse gas emissions. Greater investments in governance of new highway
corridors and the strengthening of forest-based economies could favor a more
equitable and sustainable developmental pathway that maintains the forest
ecosystem. Policy interventions that could foster this alternative pathway are
poorly understood, however, in part because of the complex interactions among
ecological, economic, and climatic systems operating across multiple scales
spatial and temporal scales in the Amazon region. The interdisciplinary research
project will develop quantitative, spatially explicit models of Amazon land-use
change, fire, vegetation dynamics, and carbon flux for a major new highway
corridor and for the entire basin. The ecosystem model will describe fire risk
as a function of drought, land use, and disturbance history, and will be coupled
to the economic models through land-use effects on the fire regime and through
fire-risk effects on the behavior of land users. The ecosystem model will track
vegetation structure and recovery with associated carbon pools to estimate the
carbon fluxes and flammability associated with land-use scenarios. The economic
models will first calculate the potential profitability of each pixel for
competing agricultural and forestry land uses as a function of infrastructure
and biophysical factors determined using satellite data and a large GIS
database. Land uses that actually occupy each pixel will depend on population
and urbanization variables that are captured within an econometric model of
municipal-level census data and spatial associations that are represented within
a cellular automata model. Ecological and economic modeling will be supported by
field research already underway along two of the five major highway corridors
that are being paved in Amazonia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
would develop the first spatially explicit simulation model for a tropical
frontier region that integrates the rent-seeking behavior of land users with the
ecological and climatic processes that shape this behavior. The model will be
designed to assess the responses of regional economies and ecosystems to
infrastructure investments, regulatory and fiscal interventions, macroeconomic
factors, and climatic change, and may therefore increase the scientific quality
of the region's policy-making process. This research provides the foundation for
a program of interdisciplinary education that supports the training of at least
16 doctoral and 15 masters-level students. Interdisciplinary graduate field
courses, a tri-lingual textbook, and an educational simulation model will be
developed in collaboration with an NSF IGERT program. This project is supported
by an award resulting from the FY 2004 special competition in Biocomplexity in
the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;