* 0410137
* FASEB Conference: Post-transcriptional Control of Gene Expression: Mechanisms of mRNA Decay, to be held  2004 in Tucson, AZ
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Roy Parker, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2005
* USD 6,000.00

The FASEB Summer Research conference entitled "Post-transcriptional control of
gene expression: mechanisms of mRNA decay" will be held June 26-July1, 2004, in
Tucson, AZ. Turnover of mRNA is a key but frequently unrecognized regulator of
gene expression as the stability of an mRNA dictates its ultimate steady-state
level. Moreover, programmed instability is an important mechanism of repressing
gene expression. In addition, it is increasingly recognized that most organisms
employ means of surveillance of mRNA quality to ensure that only "fit"
transcripts exit the nucleus and are translated. Targeted mRNA turnover is
integral to this process. Finally, newly discovered means of antisense
regulation, including RNA interference, rely on selective mRNA turnover for
their biological consequences. For all these reasons, mRNA turnover is
attracting great interest from the broader life sciences community. The goal of
this meeting is to explore the mechanisms that underpin the universal process of
mRNA turnover, at both the cellular and molecular levels. This conference will
focus on mRNA decay in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. The topics to
be covered include the multifunctional ribonucleases of prokaryotes and
eukaryotes, RNA quality control, the role of mRNA binding proteins in mediating
mRNA (in)stability, mRNA decay and disease, RNA interference and genome-wide
approaches to mRNA turnover.