* 0410012
* Harmonic, Number-theoretic, and PDE Analysis of Talbot's Phenomenon
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Konstantin Oskolkov, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 133,002.00

This research applies methods of harmonic analysis, analytic number theory, and
partial differential equations to the study of Talbot's effect. The project will
furnish a detailed study of local and global properties of solutions to
Schrodinger and Helmholtz equations with periodic initial data. The work focuses
on self-similarity properties of solutions, such as quantum revivals and domains
of extremely low density. The role played in these properties by the smoothness
of the potential function will be understood. For this purpose, solutions of
infinite systems of ordinary differential equations with oscillatory Wigner
matrices will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
mathematical theory of Talbot's phenomenon in diffraction gratings. This optical
phenomenon consists in self-reproduction (revival), with variable discrete
scaling factors, of an original space-periodic image. It is now understood that
Talbot's scaling factors are quadratic Gauss exponential sums, classical objects
of analytic number theory. Talbot's phenomenon is also a typical feature of the
solutions of the Schrodinger equation of quantum mechanics, and the phenomenon
recently returned to the attention of physicists because of its potential in the
creation of quantum computers. The objective of this work is to develop the
mathematical theory of Talbot's phenomenon, with a focus on technological
applications. The project brings together several branches of mathematics -
harmonic analysis, analytic number theory, and partial differential equations -
in the solution of problems of quantum mechanics and optics.&lt;br/&gt;