* 0410514
* Scalable algorithms for safety verification and reachability analysis of hybrid systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,03/31/2006
* R. Vijay Kumar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 03/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

In the past few decades, there have been tremendous advances in microprocessor
technology and the use of digital controllers in the automation of physical
plants. The increasing integration of such controllers results in highly complex
systems involving both continuous and discrete event dynamics. In addition to
discontinuities introduced by the computer, most physical processes exhibit
discrete dynamics due to the action of elements ranging from valves, gears and
switches in electromechanical systems to transcriptional regulators in genetic
and metabolic networks. Such systems combining discrete and continuous features
are called hybrid systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formal verification is a very
important issue during system design. Its goal is to prove that the system
performs as expected. As the automated systems are growing in scale and
complexity, the possibility of subtle errors is much greater. This project
develops scalable, provably correct algorithms and software tools for safety
verification and reachability analysis of hybrid systems. First, the project
investigates the construction of discrete abstractions. While doing this, this
work attempts to enlarge the class of known decidable hybrid systems. Second,
enabled by recent advances in semialgebraic methods and convex optimization, the
project investigates a new method for safety verification that does not require
explicit calculation of trajectories or reachable sets, and provides a nested
family of sufficient conditions for system safety that are polynomial-time
checkable. Third, bringing ideas from motion planning based on randomized
techniques, the project develops an algorithm for test case
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms developed in this project are
implemented as a Reachability Analysis and VErification (Rave) toolkit and
tested by considering two very difficult problems arising in the safety of
multi-agent robotic systems. The results of this project also have an immediate
impact in a wide range of areas where hybrid systems are used for modeling, such
as automated highway systems, air-traffic management systems, genetic and
metabolic networks, embedded automotive and avionic controllers, robotics, and
real-time communication networks.&lt;br/&gt;