* 0410269
* BE/CNH: Land-Use and Landscape Socioecology in the Mediterranean Basin:  A Natural Laboratory for the Study of the Long-Term Interaction of Human and Natural Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,09/30/2010
* C Michael Barton, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,523,996.00

All of modern society depends ultimately on the products of agriculture and
animal herding. When this agropastoral economy first appeared in the
Mediterranean basin in the early Holocene, nearly 10,000 years ago, it
represented a dramatic reorganization of human ecology. It involved increasingly
intensive efforts by farming peoples to control environmental factors favorable
to the life cycle of domestic plants and animals, with a consequent cascade of
complexly interlinked effects on regional landscapes and human society.
Agropastoral land use remains the most significant way in which humans impact
natural landscapes, and the recursive social effects of these impacts are
important global issues. However, landscape evolution takes place over the
course of decades, centuries, and even millennia. Even the loss of a landscape's
ability to support a people and their subsistence economy is often the result of
longer-term changes that are most apparent at the resolution of the prehistoric
record. Only by studying this long-term record can people truly begin to
appreciate the real consequences of past and present land-use decisions on
earth's landscapes and society and use this understanding to make more informed
decisions today. The longest and best-studied record of the ways in which human
activities have transformed the world is found in the Mediterranean Basin,
encompassing both the earliest known agricultural land use and the earliest
civilizations to become dependent on these human-managed socioecosystems.
Decades of intensive study by archaeologists, geoscientists, and ecologists have
amassed rich and diverse data about human-environmental interaction in this
region. This interdisciplinary research project will integrate this information
with recent advances in geospatial modeling and agent simulation to create a
natural laboratory for investigating the long-term social and ecological
consequences of alternate land-use practices. In this project, the modeling
laboratory will be used to study (1) the effects the of growth in agropastoral
systems on biodiversity; (2) the changing impacts of land-use intensification
and diversification on landscapes, their resilience, and vulnerability to
degradation; and (3) the long-term sustainability of human maintained
socioecosystems in varying environmental and social contexts. The study will
focus on two ecologically diverse regions at opposite ends of the Mediterranean
Basin, eastern Spain and the southern Levant in Jordan. These two regions
encompass much of the social and natural variability of the entire Mediterranean
Basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate significant new knowledge
about long-term consequences of alternative land-use practices that can help
communities make more responsible and effective decisions about land use today.
It will also generate integrated archaeological and paleoenvironmental datasets,
and dynamic land use-landscape modeling algorithms that will be disseminated via
the internet, conferences, and publications for use by researchers addressing
other socioecological questions. The research is tightly integrated with an
active educational program for undergraduate and graduate students especially
geared towards hands on training in the research process, and collaborative
transdisciplinary work. This includes a K-12 outreach partnership with the
Arizona Geographic Alliance and collaboration with educators to co-develop and
disseminate curricula that enables science learning within the context of core
requirements of the No Child Left Behind legislation. This project is supported
by an award resulting from the FY 2004 special competition in Biocomplexity in
the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;