* 0410916
* Adaptation of Groundwater Physical Models and Activities for Introduction to Environmental Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Amy Chan Hilton, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 06/30/2008
* USD 97,648.00

Discipline: Civil Engineering (54)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
enhancing student learning through effective teaching techniques that include
hands-on and real world activities that are thoughtfully integrated into
courses. The goal is to improve student interest and learning of groundwater
topics. Project tasks include: modify and adapt hands-on physical models and
real world active learning activities, integrate and implement the activities
into Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Laboratory, and assess and
evaluate the effectiveness of the activities in enhancing student learning.
Models and activities were adapted from Project WET, AEESP laboratory manual,
and EPA material, while implementation is based on the ASCE ExCEEd teaching
model. Project results are being disseminated through presentations at
conferences and workshops, project webpage, and publications in engineering
education journals. The intellectual merit of this project is the application of
proven effective teaching techniques to environmental engineering courses and
implementation of physical models and activities based on these techniques. The
broader impacts include: improved student learning and enthusiasm for
environmental engineering; increased participation of women and minorities
pursuing environmental engineering; improved awareness of the interdisciplinary
nature relationship between civil and environmental engineering projects; and
potential application of adapted models and activities to other courses and
outreach activities.