* 0410909
* EHS:     Hybrid Estimation and Control with Bounded Probabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Mark Campbell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Mark E. Campbell, Cornell University, Hybird Estimation and Control with Bounded
Probabilities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a novel approach
for hybrid estimation for &lt;br/&gt;applications envisioned in hybrid systems
research. Three areas of hybrid estimation research are developed, with an
integrated evaluation process using known examples and real time testbeds.
First, a bounded probability hybrid estimator is developed, where multiple
continuous estimators, each at a different level of probability, are implemented
in parallel. The system (user or hybrid controller) can switch estimators to the
level of probability desired. Level sets are used to define each probability
level, and relate it back to the original probability density function. Second,
connections between hybrid estimation and control and planning are made, with a
specific focus on switching hybrid vehicle control, including transition of
bounded model uncertainties. Third, a computational infrastructure for the
hybrid estimators is developed, including real time implementations. Theoretical
work is systematically validated using simple, known examples first, followed by
more complex examples that can be numerically evaluated, to ultimately a real
time, embedded hybrid systems evaluation on a Cornell testbed. The Cornell
SeaScan UAV testbed is a suite of up to four small UAV's, and a similar lab-
based, hardware-in-the-loop testbed. During the summers, undergraduate students
are teamed with PhD students and post-docs in an effort to transition and verify
the technologies experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is expected to
advance hybrid systems theory by enabling a general class of hybrid theory (such
as control and planning) to be implemented in a realistic setting. The hybrid
estimator allows a level of probability (such as risk) to be "dialed up." While
vehicle control and planning are used as motivation, the hybrid estimator is
developed to allow general implementation for hybrid systems, from biological to
air traffic control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;