* 0410572
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH  The Mediating Effects of Food Web Structure and Habitat Complexity on the Occurrence of Terrestrial Trophic Cascades
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Robert Denno, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2006
* USD 9,049.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Food-web structure, intraguild predation, and
habitat complexity have often been implicated as important mediators of top-down
effects, yet little experimental work has been done to specifically test the
impact of these factors on the occurrence of trophic cascades (natural-enemy
suppression of herbivores which results in enhanced primary production). Complex
food webs, such as those with intraguild predation, may preclude trophic
cascades because enemy impacts attenuate through a reticulate network of species
interactions. However, habitat complexity may provide refuges for predators from
intraguild predation, thereby simplifying the food web and enhancing the
strength of top-down effects. By conducting manipulative mesocosm experiments,
we propose to 1) determine the effects of food web complexity (predator species
richness and predator functional group composition) on the occurrence of trophic
cascades and 2) assess the role of habitat complexity in reducing reticulate
interactions among predators and enhancing the strength of top-down effects. By
determining how these factors influence the strength of top-down effects,
generalizations can be made about the composition of systems in which cascades
may occur. This predictive ability has broader impacts for both biological
control (eliciting a trophic cascade in an agricultural setting) and species
conservation (minimizing community-wide impacts following species loss or
invasion).&lt;br/&gt;