* 0410522
* Improving the Scientific Communication Skills of Students in Introductory Physics Lab Courses Using an Organized Scaffold of Formative and Summative Writing Assignments
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Ruth Howes, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/2008
* USD 94,335.00

Physics (13) Problem: Traditional introductory physics laboratory assignments
ask students to complete worksheets or to write formal laboratory reports for
each of a series of short individual exercises. All too often, students
regurgitate the information they have acquired that week and forget it before
the next experiment is performed. Therefore, students frequently develop only a
superficial acquaintance with physics facts rather than a deeper understanding
of physics concepts. Objectives and Outcomes: The goal of this project is to use
writing in introductory laboratories more effectively as a tool to improve
student learning of physics and to make the introductory labs more closely
resemble research. The project is changing the traditional approach to
laboratories while using experiments and equipment already found in most
university physics laboratories. It also is developing TA training materials
that prepare undergraduate teaching assistants to give effective feedback on
scientific arguments presented in their students' papers. Methodology: The
project uses a method of grouping shorter laboratory assignments into clusters
of experiments that deal with the same physical concept, such as Newton's Second
Law. Weekly formal laboratory reports are then replaced with summative papers
that ask students to discuss the ways in which the individual laboratory
experiences work together to form a bigger picture of the physical concept(s) in
question. In the process, students hone both their understanding of the physics
concepts and the critical skill of presenting a scientific argument and
supporting it logically with appropriate references to the data. The Marquette
University Department of Physics is collaborating with the Writing Center to
adapt a proven science writing heuristic developed by Brian Hand and Vaughan
Prain for use in assessing both the formative draft writing assignments and the
summative papers. These materials are being tested in large sections of algebra-
based physics, then revised and beta tested. Audience: The initial phase of the
project addresses both the students in introductory algebra-based physics
laboratories and the undergraduate teaching assistants who are grading their
reports. The beta testing phase uses the materials with the calculus-based
physics course for engineering students and the survey of science course for
pre-service teachers. Intellectual Merit: This project combines and adapts
proven pedagogical threads from several disciplines to form a coherent model to
improve scientific communication in the introductory physics laboratory. It
focuses specifically on the role that verbal communication plays in the
assimilation of science concepts by students with less than optimal mathematical
preparation for introductory physics. Broader Impacts: The method of grouping
related experiences encourages students to look beyond the particulars of a
specific laboratory exercise to the broader theoretical contexts for the
experimental results. It also encourages students to engage in meta-cognitive
analysis of the scientific process. As such, it can be applied not only to
introductory physics, but to other science courses and to the training of future
science teachers at universities nation-wide.