* 0410036
* Collaborative Research: Numerical Algorithms and Software for Solving Polynomial Systems with Parameters
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Jan Verschelde, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 80,870.00

In this collaborative project the investigators Sommese,&lt;br/&gt;Wampler, and
Verschelde construct and implement new algorithms to&lt;br/&gt;numerically
describe algebraic sets defined by systems of&lt;br/&gt;parameterized polynomial
equations. The scope of work goes&lt;br/&gt;beyond conventional problems, where
one seeks the solution set&lt;br/&gt;when the parameters are given, to include
the determination of&lt;br/&gt;parameter sets that change the nature of solution
components in a&lt;br/&gt;specified manner. Of special interest are solution
sets whose&lt;br/&gt;dimension is exceptionally large. Problems such as these,
e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;the discovery and classification of overconstrained
mechanisms,&lt;br/&gt;can be reduced to computing the irreducible decomposition
of&lt;br/&gt;certain exceptional loci of polynomial systems with parameters.
&lt;br/&gt;This is then reduced to finding the numerical
irreducible&lt;br/&gt;decomposition of a finite number of associated
polynomial&lt;br/&gt;systems. As this leads to large systems, a
new&lt;br/&gt;equation-by-equation approach to solving polynomial systems
is&lt;br/&gt;developed. To tackle nontrivial problems, the algorithms
is&lt;br/&gt;implemented on parallel computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Solving a
polynomial equation -- finding the roots of the&lt;br/&gt;polynomial -- is an
old problem that occurs over and over in more&lt;br/&gt;complicated forms
throughout science and engineering. In&lt;br/&gt;applications involving
mechanical design, finding the solution of&lt;br/&gt;a system of polynomial
equations is only one step in a larger&lt;br/&gt;scheme: to arrive at better
designs by describing how the set of&lt;br/&gt;solutions of a polynomial system
depends on parameters of the&lt;br/&gt;system. This problem arises in design of
industrial robots, for&lt;br/&gt;example. The investigators develop new methods
for describing&lt;br/&gt;the solution sets of polynomial systems with
parameters. The&lt;br/&gt;methods have the potential to become a standard tool
in the&lt;br/&gt;design of robots and mechanisms. Furthermore, the
methods&lt;br/&gt;promise to have a wider impact on the research fields
of&lt;br/&gt;numerical analysis and computer algebra, especially in
efforts&lt;br/&gt;seeking to provide the scientific community with software
to&lt;br/&gt;solve mathematical problems. An important result of this work
is&lt;br/&gt;publicly available software based on these new methods,
with&lt;br/&gt;interfaces facilitating use by the wider community. By
solving&lt;br/&gt;some difficult polynomial systems that arise in science
and&lt;br/&gt;engineering, the team stimulates interest in these
advanced&lt;br/&gt;methods and provides illustration of their usage for
the&lt;br/&gt;nonspecialist. The project includes collaboration with
and&lt;br/&gt;training of students.&lt;br/&gt;