* 0410492
* A Media Usability and Effects Laboratory for Undergraduate Psychology Research
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Matthew McGlone, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* David J. Mcarthur
* 05/31/2005
* USD 56,329.00

Social Psychology (72), Cognitive Psychology (73)

Commercial media and communication technologies are the primary means people use
to receive and transmit information about their cultures. However, there are few
opportunities for undergraduates to investigate the processes by which children
and adults use and acquire knowledge from various media sources. This project is
establishing the first media psychology research laboratory at an undergraduate
college. The lab provides resources for undergraduates to conduct research not
only on media effects on users' attention, attitudes, beliefs, and knowledge,
but also on the usability of media technologies. Our development plan has two
specific aims. First, we are creating new media research activities in three
psychology laboratory courses (Cognitive Psychology, Human Factors and
Engineering Psychology, and Advanced Social Psychology). Second, we are
providing advanced students with the tools necessary to conduct research on
usability and media effects in student-directed research and honors projects. To
offer these research experiences we are employing eye-tracking workstations,
digital video editing equipment, event-logging analytic software, and a
continuous response measurement system. To assess the impact of the laboratory
on students understanding of usability and effects research, the evaluation plan
combines standardized testing and interviews conducted by professional usability
engineers and media researchers.