* 0410744
* Implementing Tutorials Sustainably:  Restructuring Undergraduate Recitations and Laboratories in Introductory Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Michael Dubson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2007
* USD 179,587.00

Physics (13) This comprehensive effort focuses on improving traditional
recitation sections and laboratories in an introductory calculus-based physics
sequence. Such laboratories and recitations are demonstrably ineffective at
developing students' conceptual mastery of physics and expectations of learning
physics. However, proven solutions, in the form of Tutorials in Introductory
Physics from the University of Washington require demands of the university that
cannot immediately be provided -- particularly, the number and training of
adequately prepared instructors or TA's. This adaptation and implementation
effort creates a long-term solution by institutionalizing a unified, transformed
course experience that ultimately demands no more resources of the university
than presently allotted. The assembled research team is implementing Tutorials
in Introductory Physics, which are among the most deeply researched and widely
used, effective reforms of traditional physics recitation sections. These
reforms are being coupled with a revised laboratory sequence using Maryland's
Activity Based Physics that emphasizes sense making and experimentation, with
the goal of marked improvement in students' conceptual mastery of physics and in
students' expectations of what it means to learn physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significantly, these transformations are supported and
sustained by a new advanced course in teaching and learning physics. The new
physics course, Teaching and Learning Physics, is modeled on a proven activity
designed to train upper division undergraduates and graduate students in physics
education research and reforms. The course includes a 'practicum' component
where students serve as learning assistants (LA's) to supplement departmentally
appointed teaching assistants. Three CU physics faculty members lead this effort
by: teaching the lecture course sequence, adapting Tutorials, restructuring the
laboratories, and implementing the course Teaching and Learning Physics.
Evaluation of this project is conducted to assess the effectiveness of these
reforms on improving student conceptual mastery, student expectations, graduate
student effectiveness and understanding, and course structural formation and
institutionalization. Local complementary resources - funding for equipment,
faculty interest and expertise in reform, and synergistic research efforts -
insure that CU is well positioned and committed to successful adaptation and
implementation of these proven models. Finally, this grant is resulting in a
model of course-wide, sustainable reform that is being disseminated broadly
through presentations at AAPT meetings and through appropriate peer-reviewed
journals such as AJP. &lt;br/&gt;