* 0410048
* BE/CNH: Feedbacks Among Patterns and Processes of Land-Use and Land-Cover Dynamics in the Northern Ecuadorian Amazon
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2009
* George Malanson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2009
* USD 336,488.00

Land-use and land-cover change (LULCC) associated with tropical deforestation
has been characterized as complex in that feedbacks between the human and
natural components of the system create dynamic trajectories with emergent
properties. The most important feedbacks are those related to the spatial
structure of the system. In this interdisciplinary research project, the
researchers will investigate how feedbacks at a frontier of human settlement in
the Ecuadorian tropical rainforest create system dynamics that constrain the
future trajectories of human settlement. The tropical rainforest of northeastern
Ecuador is an area of complex interactions among a number of diverse
stakeholders:(a) spontaneous colonists who have in-migrated from other regions
of the country and settled on household farms; (b) newly emerging communities
and market centers that have consolidated services and offer off-farm employment
to colonists; (c) indigenous people who are affected by the rise of commercial
agriculture, oil production within their territories, and a transition to a
consumer-based economy; (d) oil exploiters who have built roads and laid
pipelines for petroleum extraction in colonist and indigenous areas; and (e)
conservation and protected areas established to impeded development and retain
biodiversity in a rapidly transforming frontier environment. The most extensive
changes on the land are those wrought by agricultural colonists who migrated to
the region in the wake of oil exploration, settling along roads built by oil
companies starting around 1970. Interrelationships with the other stakeholders
in the region are complex, resulting from different, often conflicting,
interests and feedbacks between spatial patterns and rates of change on the
advancing frontier environment. Feedbacks constrain or even reverse some of the
original changes in LULCC through system dynamics. Properties emerging from
local non-linear feedbacks constrain the evolving patterns of land use and
produce a system with identifiable potential future alternative states and
dynamics characterized by phase changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Land-use and land-
cover change is reshaping the Earth's biosphere and altering species habitats.
As a result LULCC has significant implication for the vulnerability and
sustainability of earth systems. Human-environment systems have characteristic
cyclic dynamics that are linked in a hierarchy to faster and slower cycles. The
cycles that change a system are often those in which feedbacks cross scales. The
LULCC dynamics on which people depend may be subject to rapid changes and shifts
to situations that cannot support growing populations and their activities. The
characteristics of systems that determine their responses in such conditions are
summarized as resilience. The use of complexity theory to analyze LULCC system
dynamics on an ecologically vital frontier will yield better understand its
resilience and its future. An integrated simulation modeling approach that draws
upon collected ethnographic data and a household and community survey will serve
as a focused statistical base to create rules for an agent based model (ABM)
that will represent the land use decision making of the key actors, and will
provide parameters that simulate LULCC in the past and for future periods. This
project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2004 special competition
in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
and Human Systems.&lt;br/&gt;