* 0410646
* Physiology for the 21st Century: A  Sourcebook of Effective and Economical Experiments
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Dee Silverthorn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 12/31/2009
* USD 189,769.00

Biological Sciences (61) The BIO 2010 report calls for biology education to
become more interdisciplinary, quantitative, and active through the use of well-
designed curriculum modules. Physiology lends itself to this approach as its
integrative nature includes all levels of biological organization, complex
systems with emergent properties, and mechanisms that must be understood by
applying basic principles of physics, chemistry, and mathematics. This project
brings together a diverse group of physiologists to adapt two existing but out-
of-date sets of laboratory experiments into a teachers' source book of
inexpensive, low-tech, inquiry-focused laboratory and classroom activities
suitable for students from K-12 through post-graduate levels. A core group of
U.S. and international physiologists are coordinating the revision process,
which is being accomplished with the assistance of colleagues from diverse
institutions. Project participants receive training on how to convert cookbook
laboratories to inquiry and develop a format template at a 3-day workshop
associated with the 2005 International Union of Physiological Sciences (IUPS)
Congress in California. The development group reviews revised activities and
sends them to the Education Office of the American Physiological Society (APS),
which has agreed to be responsible for dissemination. The activities are being
distributed free through the online APS Archive of Teaching Resources, part of
the National Science Digital Library as well as in a CD-ROM version. APS is
carrying out project evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Physiology
laboratory activities that are pedagogically sound yet easy to perform are
almost unavailable commercially, limiting curriculum choices for new teachers.
Yet studies have shown that actively engaging students in carefully designed
activities is an effective method for developing adaptive expertise as well as
uncovering and correcting student misconceptions. This project is adapting
existing physiology laboratory exercises to make them more learner-centered and
inquiry-based. The core personnel on the project team have extensive experience
in teaching physiology laboratories, adapting physiology curriculum to learner-
centered teaching environments, and carrying out peer-review of curriculum
materials. The APS is a leader in the digital dissemination of curriculum
materials, and the APS Education Officer is a nationally recognized leader in
the area of science education program evaluation. Broader Impact: The activities
created are being published electronically through the APS Archive of Teaching
Resources and on a CD-ROM. The collection of activities is not a student-ready
laboratory manual but a resource that provides the educational rationale for
each experiment, along with supply lists, use notes, and suggestions for
execution of the activity. Downloadable files in *.rtf format can be modified by
end-users to fit a wide spectrum of student populations. The active role of the
APS in physiology education at all levels and its association with other
professional societies ensures wide dissemination both in the United States and
around the world. The format template for these exercises can serve as a model
for others who wish to modify existing activities.&lt;br/&gt;