* 0410066
* Contact topology of 3-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Gordana Matic, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2008
* USD 108,415.00

Tight contact structures are closely related to the topology of
the&lt;br/&gt;underlying 3-manifold. They provide bounds on the genus of the
surface&lt;br/&gt;representing a homology class, are related to taut foliations
on&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds and to the topology of symplectic 4-manifolds,
to&lt;br/&gt;Seiberg-Witten theory and Floer homology. Matic proposes to
further&lt;br/&gt;analyze contact manifolds using cut-and-paste techniques
developed in&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with Honda and Kazez. The main part of cut-
and-paste&lt;br/&gt;contact topology are gluing theorems. Matic proposes to keep
studying&lt;br/&gt;the gluing techniques and to apply them to various open
questions, like&lt;br/&gt;the existence of tight contact structures on Haken
homology spheres.&lt;br/&gt;Here the techniques from foliation theory fall
short. There are in&lt;br/&gt;fact recent examples of Haken homology spheres
that do not carry taut&lt;br/&gt;foliations. As a result of her investigations
she hopes to be able to&lt;br/&gt;better understand a basic question: what
information about the topology&lt;br/&gt;of the 3-manifold can we get from
existence of a tight contact&lt;br/&gt;structure.&lt;br/&gt; Three-dimensional
manifolds are modeled on the three dimensional space&lt;br/&gt;we live in.
Questions in symplectic and contact geometry were&lt;br/&gt;originally motivated
by dynamical questions in physics and contact&lt;br/&gt;structures arise
naturally in hydrodynamics. The proposed research has&lt;br/&gt;the potential to
produce new results applicable to these questions.&lt;br/&gt;