* 0410216
* Exploring Science: Using Hands-On Research to Build Science Literacy for Non-Science Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Jeff Ashley, Philadelphia University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2006
* USD 85,000.00

Discipline: Interdisciplinary (99)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative inquiry-based
teaching approaches address the national challenge facing the scientific
community of how to effectively build the analytical and critical thinking
skills needed for full participation in a democratic society. As part of
Philadelphia University's general education requirement, non-science majors must
complete a two-course science sequence. The first science course, Environmental
Science, has successfully engaged students by adding service learning projects
with over forty environmental agencies. This project is designing and
implementing an interdisciplinary inquiry-based second course in the sequence
called Exploring Science. This research-oriented course is adapting successful
approaches from SENCER (DUE-0088753) and ESA21 (DUE-0231171) to build critical
thinking and life-long learning skills, instill a greater appreciation of the
scientific mode of inquiry, and enhance and sustain awareness of critical
environmental issues. Exploring Science students collect, analyze and present
vital and usable data to agencies addressing pressing environmental problems in
the Philadelphia area. Half of Philadelphia University students are first
generation college students and seventy percent are women. Exploring Science is
being designed to engage these often underrepresented groups. Collaboration with
regional environmental agencies provides scientific data for management and
policy decisions. The Exploring Science approach is being disseminated at a
regional hands-on workshop, symposia at two national meetings and publication in
professional journals.