* 0410552
* GSE/DIS:  Creating a Community of Practice on Science, Gender and Afterschool
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Barbara Sprung, Academy for Educational Development
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2007
* USD 199,118.00

Educational Equity Concepts, Inc. (EEC), lead agency, in collaboration with the
Center for Youth Development and Policy Research at the Academy for Educational
Development (AED) and in partnership with the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS), proposes to create a unique web-based community
of practice on science, gender and after-school (SGA). Objectives are to: (1)
further research in the STEM, gender, and after-school fields; (2) aid after-
school program practitioners in accessing high quality STEM content that they
can incorporate into their existing programs; and (3) foster connections between
researchers, policymakers and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SGA
Community of Practice will continue and extend the dialogue that began at a
conference in September 2002 which resulted in a Research-Action Agenda.
Participants will be able to communicate through online video and web-cast
forums, threaded discussions, bulletin boards, and listservs, and disseminate
science curriculum designed to address girls' interests. While the immediate
audience will be the core leadership group of 50 experts who participated in the
SGA Conference and/or contributed to the development of the Research-Action
Agenda, others will be recruited through extensive outreach and marketing
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will access the site through a
portal in the website (www.afterschool.org) developed and managed by the AED
Center. The site receives 14,000 visits and over 300,000 hits monthly. The site
will be launched with a webcast forum at the AAAS Annual Conference in February
2005; this launch date is critical in that it will coincide with the new science
achievement provisions mandated by No Child Left Behind, slated to go into
effect the same year.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The SGA
Community of Practice is a unique and innovative resource for leaders of after-
school programs concerned with informal STEM education. The programs are
scattered across the country but in the aggregate represent significant
research, program evaluations, curricula, best practices and publications in
need of dissemination and exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
overall goal of the SGA Community of Practice is to broaden the participation of
underserved girls in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
The goal is to develop a large and geographically distributed of researchers,
practitioners and policymakers into a community of
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;