* 0410097
* Investigation of Adaptation to the Arid Zone in the Levantine Early Neolithic
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Donald Henry, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 84,051.00

Through support from The National Science Foundation, Dr. Donald Henry and an
international group of collaborating scientists will continue the investigation
of the Early Neolithic site of Ayn Abu Nukhayla, located in southern Jordan. The
site falls at the time when humans were first beginning to engage in cereal
cultivation and animal (sheep/goat) herding. The research builds on earlier NSF
supported work and focuses on understanding how the occupants of this 8,500 year
site were able to exploit a setting that today is one of the driest on earth.
The research continues to center on the excavation of this large,
architecturally rich site in conjunction with geologic and paleoenvironmental
investigations of the nearby area. The study will have three specific
components: (1) a high resolution climatic-environmental reconstruction; (2) an
evaluation of alternative subsistence-settlement models using cementum increment
analysis and stable isotope signatures; and (3) a detailed inter-site spatial
analysis that is intended to trace the social and economic dimensions of the
settlement. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The remarkable growth and expansion of the
Near Eastern Early Neolithic followed by disruption is often attributed to
climatic-environmental changes, but researchers disagree on the timing and
direction of such changes. The proposed research will address this issue through
the recovery of environmental proxy data in the form of plant ( pollen,
phytolith, diatom) and geologic (sedimentological, geochemical, and isotopic)
evidence from deposits of a large dry lake near the site. Additionally, the
geologic column should identify rather precisely the first appearance of
cultivated cereals and herding as reflected in cereal pollen and phytoliths
(silica elements from plants) and fecal spherulites (calcite bodies in
sheep/goat dung) . Earlier soundings and pilot studies confirm the presence of
such data in association with datable charcoal. Extrapolation of the radiocarbon
chronometry established from the earlier soundings indicates that a high
resolution, climatic-environmental record can be developed through deeper
soundings that stretches back some 8-12,000 years ago.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earlier research indicates the occupants of Ayn Aba
Nukhayla followed a combination of foraging, herding, and farming thought to
have been integrated within a strategy of transhumance (i.e., seasonal and
elevational shifts in settlement). This is likely to have involved farming the
nearby mudpan (watered from upland run-off) from Fall through Spring followed by
abandonment of the site during the warm-dry season for the movement of herds to
upland pastures. To test this idea, the cementum increments of the teeth of
hunted (hare, gazelle, ibex) and herded (sheep/goats) animals will be studied to
provide seasonal information relative to the occupation of the site. Also,
differences in vegetation and geologic substrates between the local setting and
the nearby uplands offer a means of tracing herding practices through the
analysis of stable isotope signatures derived from herbivore teeth and
bones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The well preserved occupational floors within the
fills of the pithouses also provide an unusual opportunity to study spatial
patterns of human interaction in an Early Neolithic community. Despite interest
in understanding changes in community organization that are likely to have
accompanied the emergence and elaboration of food production, there remains
considerable disagreement on the composition of households and community
structure. While the spatial patterning of features, artifacts, and ecofacts
(bones, plant and dung signatures) can trace the degree to which households were
economically and socially autonomous, such detailed spatial studies have here-
to-fore not been undertaken in the region &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts
of the proposed research include a pedagogical component in which graduate
students will engage in a full range of science related tasks involving research
design, field and laboratory instrumentation, data management, hypothesis
testing, and report preparation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;