* 0411628
* Subfactors and Quantum Double
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Marta Asaeda, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 33,410.00

Orbifold subfactors have been first described by Y. Kawahigashi as an
application of paragroup theory. It is known that subfactors of type D_4n and
D_4n+2 give rise to fusion algebras of bimodules with different natures, but the
origin of the difference is unknown. Asaeda has been working on this problem,
and obtained the clue to clarify the fusion structure of orbifold subfactors. On
this research, the relation between the representation theory of classical Lie
group and that of quantum group (WZW model) plays a crucial role. Her research
includes further research on this matter, and clarification of the relation
between orbifold of WZW model, structure of the representation of the classical
Lie groups, and the nature of subfactors arising from WZW model. On the other
hand, her research extends to the study of subfactors which are not arising from
quantum groups or classical groups. These subfactors are called exotic
subfactors. Her focus is on the structure of quantum double constructed from
exotic subfactors. &lt;br/&gt;The theory of operator algebras was founded by von
Neumann as a mathematical background of quantum mechanics. Lately the relation
among operator algebras, quantum physics, and low dimensional topology has been
sought from the aspect that is totally different from that of von Neumann. The
research on this subject and it's relation with other subjects will contribute
the development of many subjects in mathematics and mathematical physics.
&lt;br/&gt;