* 0411823
* Collaborative Research: Constructing Mental Images of Geologic Structures from Field Observations
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2011
* Toru Ishikawa, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2011
* USD 619,820.00

The investigators propose to conduct a series of studies concerning how it is
that people visualize and comprehend large-scale geologic structures and how it
is that instructors in Geoscience ought best to teach about them. This project
will contribute to basic knowledge of spatial cognition. The investigators will
conduct a series of behavioral experiments, using artificial geologic outcrops
constructed on the Lamont-Doherty campus and using tabletop architectural models
of the campus. The outcrops, each about a meter across, would together form a
buried geologic structure, such as a basin, a symmetric syncline, or an
asymmetric plunging syncline, at a realistic scale (i.e., hundreds of meters
across). The outcrops will not be visible from each other, so the participants
will need to integrate what can be seen to construct a mental image of the
entire structure. Participants will be guided around the outcrops and then be
tested on their representations (e.g., asked to choose accurate models of the
structure). They will also take standard tests of spatial ability and verbal-
spatial learning style. The investigators will examine (a) the development of
skill on the outcrop task among novices through practice and repetition in the
absence of instruction; (b) the relationship among spatial abilities, learning
style, and performance on the outcrop task; and (c) strategies used by experts,
low-performing novices, and high-performing novices in doing the outcrop task.