* 0411165
* Solving Polynomial Systems by Polyhedral Homotopies
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Tangan Gao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2008
* USD 95,000.00

The project is aiming at solving polynomial systems numerically by
the&lt;br/&gt;homotopy continuation method. Over the years, practical evidences
have been&lt;br/&gt;given that the homotopy method is efficient, reliable and
much powerful in&lt;br/&gt;solving polynomial systems. Recently, modeling the
sparse structure of a&lt;br/&gt;polynomial system by its Newton polytopes leads
to a major computational&lt;br/&gt;breakthrough called the polyhedral homotopy
method. Based on it, a source&lt;br/&gt;code HOM4PS, produced by the PI and his
students, leads all the other&lt;br/&gt;existing codes for solving polynomial
systems in efficiency and storage&lt;br/&gt;requirement by a great margin.
Nonetheless, there are numerous models of&lt;br/&gt;large polynomial systems in
application still do not have a satisfactory&lt;br/&gt;line of attack. And it
has become apparent that the numerical techniques for&lt;br/&gt;following
homotopy paths are far from thoroughly developed for large&lt;br/&gt;systems.
The essence of the project is the advance development in all&lt;br/&gt;aspects
of the solver HOM4PS based on the conduct of further research
to&lt;br/&gt;greatly enlarge the scope of its applications, especially
applications to&lt;br/&gt;large systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of
solving polynomial systems arises very frequently in various&lt;br/&gt;fields of
science and engineering, such as formula construction,
geometric&lt;br/&gt;intersection, inverse kinematics, robotics, power flow
problems with&lt;br/&gt;PQ-specified bases, vision and the computation of
equilibrium states of&lt;br/&gt;chemical reaction equations, etc. This topic has
been an important research&lt;br/&gt;subjectin Europe. In the last decade, a
considerable research effort&lt;br/&gt;involving seven countries and twenty
universities had been directed to this&lt;br/&gt;problem in two consecutive
major projects, PoSSo and FRISCO, supported by&lt;br/&gt;European Commission. As
mentioned above, the code HOM4PS developed by the PI&lt;br/&gt;for this problem
is far more advanced and the ultimate goal of the current&lt;br/&gt;project is a
more complete high-quality block-box software which will&lt;br/&gt;incorporate
the best state of the art to provide the general scientific&lt;br/&gt;community
a reliable source for solving polynomial systems on a wide variety&lt;br/&gt;of
advanced architectures.&lt;br/&gt;