* 0411578
* IIS/HCI: Collaborative Research: Development and Assessment of Head-Mounted Fovea-Contingent Display Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Hong Hua, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2008
* USD 350,510.00

While head-mounted display (HMD) technologies have undergone significant
developments and their functional benefits for 3D visualization have been
recognized, they have suffered from tradeoffs and limitations in capability,
which impose critical affects on visualization accuracy, user performance, and
user safety. Chief among these problems is an ignorance of eye movement. Most
state-of-the-art HMDs use head pose to approximate line-of-sight, which may
cause a significant disparity between what users are intended to look at and
what they actually see. The integration of eye tracking capability into HMDs
would significantly improve display quality and user interface. In this project,
the PIs will optimize the conceptual design of HMD-eye tracker integration from
low-level optical configurations; the PIs expect to achieve by this means a more
compact, comfortable, easy-to-use, and dependable system than would result from
integration of off-the-shelf commercially available displays and eye trackers.
The PIs will set up a comprehensive methodology to calibrate and quantitatively
assess the testbed, and to quantify rendered and perceived depth/size
representations of virtual objects with and without eye tracking capability in
the HMD; the PIs expect thereby to determine whether integration can
significantly improve the performance of both eye tracking accuracy and display
quality as it relates to accuracy and precision of registration of real and
virtual objects in augmented environments. Finally, two pilot studies will be
pursued. The first of these will explore the concept of a unique fovea-
contingent display scheme which utilizes photonics technology to position a high
resolution inset at the gaze point, innovatively with no moving parts, in order
to address the trade-off between field of view and resolution existing in
conventional HMDs. The second pilot study will investigate a "pointing by
looking" visual interface in remote collaborative environments in which the
focus of attention of a participant follows the point-of-regard of a remote
collaborator, or vice versa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research
will not only advance display quality and the user interface, but most
importantly it will drive new and thrilling applications of augmented reality
technology. In particular, the new HDM-eye tracker technology will lead to novel
interactive interfaces for information retrieval, will provide more accurate
eye-movement monitoring for human factors and vision research, will support
improved assessment of behavior in virtual environments, and will afford new
methods of interaction and communication for people with certain types of
disabilities. The mixture of basic optical science and engineering, computer
graphics, human factors, and hands-on experience with building a testbed will be
an excellent interdisciplinary training ground for the graduate and
undergraduate students involved.