* 0411094
* A Watershed Based Approach to Environmental Education Integrating Ecology, Hydrology, and Geochemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Weixing Zhu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 08/31/2007
* USD 85,000.00

Earth System Science (40) This project adapts and implements approaches from
published studies and recent NSF-CCLI projects in developing a cross-
disciplinary watershed-based approach to environmental education within the
watershed on the Binghamton University campus. The approach involves integrated
study of physical, chemical and biological processes at three field sites within
areas of differing land use. Instrumentation installed within the watershed is
being used in hands-on learning activities, and is within walking distance of
classrooms on campus. Pollution is serving as the common unifying theme as
students assess the complexity of biogeochemical processes. The project is
directly linking concepts within three courses in three disciplines:
Environmental Hydrology (Environmental Studies), Environmental Measurements
(Geology), and Ecosystem Ecology (Biology). Students, including future K-12
science teachers, are participating in designing and evaluating field exercises
and in archiving the environmental data being collected. Project data is being
archived in a website for rapid dissemination and retrieval.

This multidisciplinary approach to environmental education is allowing students
from diverse backgrounds to discover that processes ongoing in a mixed land-use
watershed have universal relevance to quality of life issues and concerns
including: 1) atmospheric deposition and its relation to air quality; 2)
subsurface processes and the relation to groundwater quality, and 3) the
relation of land use to surface water quality. The hydrological-geological-
ecological linkage, using sites within a watershed on campus as the common
platform, is providing an approach to studying earth system processes that is
directly applicable to environmental problem solving in the real world.