* 0411483
* Calculategy: Exploring the Impact of Tutorial Dialogue Strategy in Shaping Student Behavior in Effective Tutorial Dialogue for Calculus
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Carolyn Rose, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 01/31/2006
* USD 96,627.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a component of the dialogue
portion of LeActiveMath which is an innovative third-generation eLearning system
for high school and college or university level classrooms that can also be used
in informal contexts for self-learning. LeActiveMath adapts to the learner and
learning context and comprises personalization, tutorial dialogues, open student
modeling, and interactivity that is tool-supported for active and exploratory
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The value added to previous systems is due
to:&lt;br/&gt;o intelligent feedback and tutorial dialogues&lt;br/&gt;o
integrated interactive tools that understand the semantics of learning
objects&lt;br/&gt;o pedagogically grounded elements, contexts, and strategies
that employ tools beneficially&lt;br/&gt;o reaction to the student's
motivational and emotional state&lt;br/&gt;o advanced
personalization&lt;br/&gt;o opportunity and scaffolding of self-guidance and
learner-initiative&lt;br/&gt;o open, inspectable student model&lt;br/&gt;o
accessible exercise repository&lt;br/&gt;o free non-commercial usage&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;From a more specific technological point of view there is more added
value because of&lt;br/&gt;a truly open and distributed architecture with one
student model, the reusability of single components and tools, the integration
in one configurable system and the innovative semantic knowledge representation
and integrated tools using it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools and components are
motivated by pedagogical and cognitive results. In particular, the system will
be learner-centered and support the learner's initiative. The main technologies
will be employed beneficially for learning at different levels of mastery and in
different organizational contexts. The content and some tools are specific for
mathematics, but the technology is not restricted to
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Rose's contribution will be in the
development of a Calculus corpus and in the analysis of student-tutor
dialogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;