* 0411651
* Cosmic-Ray Modulation and Solar Particle Studies Using Neutron Monitors
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* James Ryan, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 07/31/2007
* USD 147,357.00

This effort would be a continuation of UNH studies of cosmic-ray modulation near
the Earth. The global network of neutron monitors relies on both the Durham and
Mt. Washington stations for standard data products. The PI plans on using data
from Mt. Washington, Durham, and other ground-based neutron monitors, as well as
spacecraft such as IMP and ACE. The Mt. Washington neutron monitor has operated
continuously from 1954 to the present. The IMP spacecraft near the Earth
provides data from 1972 to the present for &gt;70 MeV particles, and for
selected proton and helium energies. Data from the Milagro detector cover the
energy range of &gt;5 GeV, as well as provide estimates of the cutoff energies
for some cosmic-ray modulation effects and increases associated with solar
flares. These combined extended databases include 11-year and 22-year
variations, as well as solar-flare events that occurred over the last several
decades. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at a better understanding of
the linkages between processes of acceleration and transport of both solar and
galactic cosmic rays in the heliosphere. By integrating data from a variety of
cosmic-ray detectors, including neutron monitors, spacecraft instruments, and
ground-level muon detectors, the PI will investigate the processes associated
with the acceleration of solar cosmic rays by shocks in the heliosphere. Data
from a single instrument can never adequately describe such processes, so the
study of data from all available sources is critical for our understanding of
these mechanisms. During the next two years, the PI plans to upgrade his
software for data processing and analysis to more widely distribute user-
friendly data sets and results. The paired stations in New Hampshire provide
rare anisotropy-independent data for the community, while data from Milagro and
Climax allow similar comparisons that can shed light on higher energy events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two undergraduates and one Ph.D. student already use these
data for research, and the PI plans to utilize other undergraduates in the
proposed study. Being collaborators in the Milagro experiment, the UNH team will
have full access to the data and instrument expertise.