* 0411990
* Relationships between Interfacial Water, Ion Specificity and the Structures of Association Colloids and Antioxidant Distributions in Macroemulsions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Laurence Romsted, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 05/31/2009
* USD 440,260.00

With this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
continues its support of the work of Professor Laurence S. Romsted of the
Department of Chemistry at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, NJ. The research
will extend the PI's investigations in association colloid chemistry. There are
two parts to this project. In the first part, Professor Romsted will investigate
a of variety of association colloid structures which are are formed from the
spontaneous aggregation of ionic surfactants. Using a chemical trapping
technique, developed in the PI's laboratory, specific head group, counter ion,
and hydration interactions that determine the structures and properties of these
colloids will be investigated. The chemical trapping method will provide unique
information concerning the chemical and physical properties of these species and
will increase understanding of the balance of forces controlling their
formation. In the second part of this proposal, the partition constants of
antioxidants between the oil/interfacial and water/interfacial regions of
oil/water/nonionic surfactant based emulsions will be determined. This will be
accomplished by electrochemical monitoring of the reaction of an antioxidant
with an arenediazonium ion along with UV spectroscopic measurements of the
distribution of the antioxidant between the oil and water phases in the absence
of surfactant. The experiments will systematically identify the relationships
between antioxidant distributions and antioxidant structure, oil polarity, pH,
and surfactant structure and charge. These latter experiments will identify
factors affecting antioxidant distribution in emulsions and allow evaluations of
antioxidant efficiency in emulsified foods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
program will provide advanced training for undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral fellows, and will include extensive international collaborations.
The experiments are expected to provide important conceptual basis for soft
materials technologies especially in the areas of nutrition and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;