* 0411070
* Investigative Laboratories for Intermediate Physiology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Taylor Allen, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 44,590.00

Biological Sciences (61) The national educational process is frequently faulted
for leaving its graduates without the deep conceptual understanding necessary to
perceive connections among concepts and identify patterns within complex data.
One effective strategy for promoting deep understanding, as well as appreciation
for the scientific process and engagement with the excitement of research,
involves investigative laboratories, in which students engage in an authentic
research experience, one both "hands-on" and "minds-on." This project is
implementing investigative laboratory experiences in undergraduate animal and
plant physiology courses. Through the use of advanced equipment, these
laboratory enhancements aim to bridge the intellectual gulf between avenues
typically open to students and the type of work reported in journal articles.
The project uses as a model a "Project Lab" paper by Deyrup-Olson and Riddiford
(Physiology Teacher, 1975). The specific objectives, reflective of the project's
intellectual merit, comprise: 1) implementation of the investigative
laboratories; 2) development of students' scientific attitudes and appreciation
of scientific inquiry; and 3) promotion of deep, coherent understanding of
physiological concepts. The desired outcomes are a promotion of students'
expertise and conceptual grasp of physiology and a positive shift in students'
scientific attitudes and appreciation of scientific inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;The
project's design and efficacy in achieving these objectives will be disseminated
through presentations at national scientific meetings and via a manuscript
written for submission to Advances in Physiology Education. The broader impacts
are several-fold. Within Oberlin's Biology Department the proposed activities
further advances efforts to adopt recommendations of the pivotal Bio2010 report
of the National Academy of Science, especially for integration of teaching and
research and involvement of students in meaningful research experiences. The
true impact, however, will likely be greater, given that a high percentage of
Oberlin graduates pursue careers in education, and it is believed that
instructors tend to teach in the manner in which they were taught (Bransford et
al., 2000). &lt;br/&gt;