* 0411723
* Collaborative Research: Numerical Methods for Nonlinear Diffusion Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Michael Holst, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 238,999.00

This proposal is concerned with the approximate solution of systems&lt;br/&gt;of
nonlinear elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations
posed&lt;br/&gt;on complicated domains. Such problems are used to model a wide
variety&lt;br/&gt;of physical phenomena in various fields of engineering,
mathematics, and&lt;br/&gt;science. Particular applications considered in this
project arise in&lt;br/&gt;chemical electrostatics, in the topological
classification of general&lt;br/&gt;surfaces in geometric analysis, and in
semiconductor physics. Common&lt;br/&gt;characteristics of such nonlinear
problems presenting hurdles to&lt;br/&gt;computational science include: multi-
domain and time-dependent domains,&lt;br/&gt;multi-scale and multi-physics, and
potential loss of regularity and blowup.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigator plans to develop some fundamental mathematical &lt;br/&gt;tools for
dealing with these difficulties that will have a wide range
of&lt;br/&gt;applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project
will have a broad impact in mathematics&lt;br/&gt;as well as in science and
engineering. In this project, the investigator is &lt;br/&gt;focused on
applications in geometric analysis that are used to address
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;questions in geometry, and on applications to highly
complex mathematical&lt;br/&gt;models arising in modern biology, chemistry, and
physics. However, the&lt;br/&gt;computational difficulties associated with
complicated, multidimensional&lt;br/&gt;domains and multi-scaled, multi-physics
differential equations that require&lt;br/&gt;new computational approaches arise
in many contexts. The methods developed&lt;br/&gt;here will contribute to the
advancement of numerical methods for complex&lt;br/&gt;three dimensional
nonlinear dynamical simulations. The simulation&lt;br/&gt;technology we produce
will provide exciting and powerful tools for the&lt;br/&gt;exploration of models
in physics, chemistry, and biology, as well as in&lt;br/&gt;some areas of pure
mathematics such as geometric analysis.&lt;br/&gt;