* 0411043
* Building Scalable and Adaptive Garbage Collector for Server Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Matthew Dwyer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2008
* USD 281,000.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research
&lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
NUMBER: 0411043&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Srisa-an,
Witawas&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Building Scalable and Adaptive Garbage Collector
for Server Systems&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE: University of Nebraska-
Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industry observers have predicted that application
servers will become a 21 billion dollars per year business by the end of 2007 as
more companies deploy web services to make applications or information available
across the Internet. Object-oriented languages are currently the choice for the
development of those applications. Object-oriented languages such as Java and
computing platform such Microsoft .NET have adopted garbage collec-tion as the
way to manage dynamic memory. However, this adoption poses at least two
significant challenges: (1) server applications are multithreaded and are
designed for mul-tiprocessor systems and (2) unlike desktop applications, the
workloads and resources available for server systems can vary
tremendously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses these issues by
introducing a novel garbage collection system that can efficiently and
dynamically respond to the specific needs and challenges of server applications.
The proposed garbage collection scheme is fully scalable and thread-safe. It
also discriminates between local and remote objects so that differentiated
collec-tion strategies can be implemented according to locality. In addition,
the garbage collec-tor is resource cognizant, that is, it can adjust the
profiling and garbage collection policy based on the availability of resources
on the server. As a result, the proposed work greatly improves the performance
of application servers, distributed applications, and web services, which are
the foundations of pervasive computing applications that already provide
services for millions of users each day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D.
Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;June 23,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;