* 0411641
* Investigation of Biological Molecules at Interfaces Using Evanescent-Field Spectroscopies
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2007
* USD 409,800.00

This research project is directed toward understanding the behavior of
biological molecules at solid surfaces by extending and refining two techniques
that are based on the interaction of the evanescent electric field of a light
beam with molecules at a reflective interface. These two techniques are
evanescent wave cavity ring-down spectroscopy (EW-CRDS) and surface plasmon
resonance spectroscopy (SPR). An evanescent wave is formed when light undergoes
total internal reflection at the interface between a higher refractive-index
material and a lower refractive-index material; and its amplitude decays
exponentially with distance into the lower index medium. These techniques are
therefore inherently specific to interfaces and the molecules found at
interfaces. EW-CRDS measures absorbance by chromophores within a few hundred
nanometers of the interface, and SPR is sensitive to refractive index changes in
the same region. It is proposed to refine the SPR technique by exploring a range
of potential substrate materials as well, with the goal of developing more
sensitive or more specific new instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
investigation will refine and introduce methods that should be widely applicable
in laboratories worldwide to study the behavior of numerous biologically
relevant systems. The investigation will also have a significant impact on the
education of both graduate and undergraduate students. These interfacial studies
will provide novel course material on cutting-edge research for Stanford's
undergraduate "Theory and Practice of Quantitative Chemistry" and "Light,
Pigments, and Organisms" classes that the PI teaches. The potential exists for
direct undergraduate participation in these research projects as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and by the
Physics Division and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;