* 0411541
* STEM Enhancement Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Kelvin Kirby, Prairie View A & M University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,509,000.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation (NSF) through the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP),
Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU) will implement a Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Enhancement Program. The project will build
upon the infrastructure of a previous HBCU-UP project by extending and
establishing new processes and strategies to move the institution to the next
level of STEM program quality and participation. Activities include: (1)
Increased Undergraduate Research Experiences in STEM Disciplines, (2)
University-wide STEM Scholars Program, (3) Transfer Student Initiative, (4)
Partnerships with Industry and Foundations for Scholarship Endowment, (5)
Bridges from High School to College, (6) High School Mathematics Project, (7)
STEM Tutorial Center, and (8) Serving the Hispanic Student
Population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Proposed Program: The
project will: (1) Establish an undergraduate research component for incoming
freshmen students, which will prepare students for freshman courses and early
internships; (2) Extend the PVAMU STEM-NSF Scholars activities to a university-
wide program to mentor and nurture freshmen and sophomores in maintaining
academic excellence; (3) Offer a clear pathway of academic and professional
development, along with financial resources for transfer students from two-year
and community colleges; (4) Pursue scholarship endowments, which will be
established by the university to support the academic development of STEM
majors; (5) Advance the knowledge and understanding of high school students in
STEM-related fields by providing periodic newsletters with well-defined pathways
from high school to college, from college to graduate school, the workforce and
beyond. The early exposure to such knowledge and experiences will influence a
firm college academic foundation and greater academic success beyond the
undergraduate degree; (6) Extend services to enhance mathematics in high
schools; (7) Integrate smaller tutorial sessions to establish a complete
Tutorial Center for STEM disciplines; (8) Aggressively pursue our increasing
Hispanic population, which illustrates great promise for our intellectual
society and the STEM workforce. The program of new activities will expand the
intellectual merit established under the first five-year endeavor and provide
participants who are better prepared to matriculate through a quality
undergraduate education in STEM disciplines to graduate school or the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed Program: The activities of the
second five-year period will be extended to high schools, community and two-year
colleges, industry and the local Hispanic communities. The broader impacts will
be realized through the following: (1) STEM students will receive research and
professional development training for internships during the freshman year of
college; (2) All PVAMU scholarship students will receive special treatment to
mentor and nurture intellectual talents, which will serve as an incentive for
non-scholarship students to work harder to attain scholarship status; (3)
Partnerships with regional community and two-year colleges will help inform
potential STEM students of opportunities and scholarships at PVAMU to help
continue their undergraduate education; (4) Activities and partnerships will
encourage and engage industry, government programs and foundations to answer the
national charge to enhance educational opportunities for underrepresented
populations in STEM related disciplines; (5) Mail-outs and distance learning
technologies will encourage and engage teachers and students of over two hundred
high schools to improve and update STEM classroom activities and to diligently
work at preparing for college; (6) The investment of developing and maintaining
a quality educational foundation for STEM disciplines through reform and
assessment will be promulgated by establishing a STEM Tutorial Center, which
will provide special assistance to any student needing assistance in
introductory STEM courses; (7) The STEM Enhancement Program will employ a part-
time Hispanic recruiter to help mentor and educate Hispanic high school students
concerning the opportunities and resources available to them for a college
education. The broader impacts are designed to better prepare and inform
candidates for undergraduate education in STEM disciplines, provide resources to
make a college education a reality for any qualified student, and engage
individuals, industry, government agencies and foundations to invest in the
national charge to truly educate the next generation. &lt;br/&gt;