* 0411748
* The Dynamics of Organic Films on Different Time Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Haskell Taub, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2008
* USD 330,000.00

This project is concerned with the structure, phase transitions, and dynamics of
organic films adsorbed on solid surfaces. It focuses on films of alkanes
[CnH2n+2], flexible chain-like molecules that are of general interest in
materials science as prototypes of more complex polymers used in coatings,
adhesives, and electronic devices. Alkanes are also the principal constituents
of commercial lubricants. Thus a microscopic understanding of the structural and
dynamical properties of alkanes near solid interfaces could potentially lead to
significant advances in polymer-based technologies, particularly lubrication.
The proposed research is centered on quasielastic neutron scattering (QNS)
experiments to investigate the molecular diffusive motion that occurs over a
range of time scales (picoseconds to nanoseconds) in films of both linear and
branched alkanes of intermediate length (20 to 40 carbon atoms) adsorbed on
well-characterized graphite substrates. These experiments will be conducted on
state-of-the-art neutron spectrometers at the National Institute of Standards
and Technology. They will be complemented by measurement of the nanoscale alkane
film topography and lateral frictional forces by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM).
We are seeking relations between the frictional forces measured by AFM and the
molecular conformational dynamics as revealed by the high-energy-resolution QNS
spectra. Since interpretation of the dynamical experiments requires knowledge of
the film structure, the project includes structural studies utilizing
synchrotron x-ray scattering at Argonne National Laboratory as well as neutron
diffraction at the University of Missouri Research Reactor. This research will
provide training of graduate students in fundamental aspects of polymer science,
preparing them for careers in industry and academia as well as at our expanding
national facilities for neutron and x-ray scattering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is concerned with the structure and molecular motions that occur within
organic films that are deposited onto to solid surfaces. It focuses on films of
alkanes, flexible chain-like molecules that are of general interest in materials
science as prototypes of more complex polymers used in coatings, adhesives, and
electronic devices. Alkanes are also the principal constituents of commercial
lubricants. A microscopic understanding of the structural and dynamical
properties of alkanes films could contribute to technological advances ranging
from more durable polymer coatings to lubricants that reduce engine wear. The
proposed research is centered on quasielastic neutron scattering experiments to
investigate the molecular motions that occur over a range of time scales
(picoseconds to nanoseconds) in alkane films adsorbed on well-characterized
surfaces. These experiments will be conducted on state-of-the-art neutron
spectrometers at the National Institute of Standards and Technology. They will
be complemented by measurement of the nanoscale alkane film topography and
lateral frictional forces by Atomic Force Microscopy. We are seeking relations
between these nanoscale frictional forces and the molecular motion as revealed
by the high-energy-resolution neutron scattering measurements. Since
interpretation of the dynamical experiments requires knowledge of the film
structure, the project includes structural studies utilizing synchrotron x-ray
scattering at Argonne National Laboratory as well as neutron diffraction at the
University of Missouri Research Reactor. This research will provide training of
graduate students in fundamental aspects of polymer science, preparing them for
careers in industry as well as at our expanding national facilities for neutron
and x-ray scattering.&lt;br/&gt;