* 0411455
* Safe and Stable Narrow Tilting Commuter Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Max Donath, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

Narrow vehicles like motorcycles can promote significantly improved highway
utilization through the use of half-width lanes. However, in order for the
general public to adopt this form of personal transportation, narrow vehicles
should perceptibly provide the same ease of use and the same level of safety as
passenger sedans. This project explores some fundamental technologies that can
make the development of such a prototype narrow vehicle feasible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a concept narrow vehicle that
will be relatively tall compared to its track width so as to provide a travel
height that is comparable to that of other vehicles on the highway. To help the
driver balance a relatively tall, narrow vehicle, it will incorporate an
electronic tilt control system that ensures tilt stability. The tilt control
system will balance the vehicle and improve ease of use, especially on curves
where the vehicle must lean into the curve to ensure tilt stability. The vehicle
will be designed to provide crash protection for its occupants that is
significantly superior to that of a motorcycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several
fundamental challenges are addressed in this exploratory project in order to
make the development of the concept narrow vehicle described above a practical
reality. These include the development of a direct tilt control system that can
operate with a compact motor, synchronization of the tilting of the vehicle with
its turning so as to minimize actuator effort and the development of a steer-by-
wire system in which the front wheel steering angle is used to control tilt
while at the same time perceptibly allowing the driver to use the steering angle
for purposes of lateral control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant matching funds
for the project are provided by the ITS Institute, University of Minnesota.
Successful completion of the exploratory project will enable the research team
to solicit funding from industries for further development as well as to write
regular full proposals to NSF and other funding agencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project promotes cross-disciplinary research by
combining significant activities in controls, dynamics, sensor electronics and
vehicle design. In addition to its direct impact on transportation through the
development of a new personal transportation vehicle, the project is also likely
to contribute to improvement of other highway vehicle systems in
general.&lt;br/&gt;