* 0411730
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Genetic Structure and Phylogeographic History of African Populations of Drosophila melanogaster
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Charles Aquadro, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,939.00

This study will document the geographic structure of genetic diversity in
African populations of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Before expanding
to a nearly worldwide distribution, this species is thought to have originated
in tropical Africa. Yet, very little is known about the evolutionary history and
genetic structure of African populations. This study will use DNA sequence and
repeat length variation to: (1) evaluate genetic relationships among African
populations, (2) identify which populations appear to be the most ancestral, and
(3) infer the most likely geographic route for the expansion of D. melanogaster
from sub-Saharan Africa into north Africa and Eurasia. This work will lead to an
improved understanding of how evolutionary forces like population history and
natural selection shape genetic variation, particularly in species colonizing
new environments.

The history of D. melanogaster is similar to that of many invasive species and
crop plants, so this project has the potential to guide future studies that
examine genetic diversity in ecologically and economically important species. By
improving our evolutionary understanding of a model organism in genetics, this
study will facilitate connections between biological disciplines. This research
will contribute to graduate and undergraduate training. Findings will be
communicated at scientific meetings, in print, online, and in the high school
classroom. New scientific contacts will be made with researchers in Africa, and
new collections of D. melanogaster will be obtained and shared freely.