* 0411591
* Engineering Design in 2030:     A Strategic Planning Workshop; March 26-29, 2004; Arizona
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Jami Shah, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,262.00

The last two decades have seen increased globalization of commerce and flight of
engineering, manufacturing, and IT jobs from the U.S. It is more critical now
than ever to innovate technologies, products and services that provide new fuel
to the engines of our national economy. A workshop is planned to determine how
to best meet industry and educational needs in engineering design through
research in this changing environment. &lt;br/&gt;This award provides support
for a workshop to be held March 26-29, 2004 in North/Central Arizona
(Phoenix/Scottsdale locale). The objectives of the workshop are a) to review the
past 25 years activities in research in design theory and its impact on product
design and engineering education to date, b) to forecast technological
developments and changes in social, business, and environmental factors that may
have profound effects on future product development, and c) to formulate a
strategic plan for engineering design research based upon lessons learned and
expectations of the globalization of product development. The 2-1/2 day workshop
will be organized by a Steering Committee that represents the broad engineering
design community focused on product realization. Potential participants will
submit position papers and 40-45 invitees will be selected based upon their
potential to contribute to one or more of the objectives of the workshop. This
is appropriate to assure that the many different perspectives and threads of
research are represented as the future directions for engineering design
research and education are discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
workshop will be published on a website and on a CD for public dissemination.
The previous workshop, held a decade ago, produced a substantive report that
provided key recommendations to NSF and the community at that time. It is
expected that similar outcomes will be realized from this workshop. This time,
however, the community is being challenged to not only benchmark where we are
now and immediate future needs, but to look out to the 2030 horizon with
vision.&lt;br/&gt;