* 0411331
* Hands-on Introduction to Chemical and Biological Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* James Duffy, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 06/30/2007
* USD 83,443.00

Discipline: Chemical Engineering (53)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The freshman seminar
course has been revised by modeling it after Rowan University's exemplary
Freshman Engineering Clinic course that utilizes a hands-on laboratory approach
to introduce freshman students to engineering. Innovative laboratory modules
developed and published by faculty at Rowan under NSF funding have been adapted
and implemented. These laboratories utilize common activities (such as brewing
coffee, taking blood pressure, and delivery of medication) to teach fundamental
engineering principles, techniques for experimental measurement, data
representation and analysis, and group problem solving and communication skills.
Many of these laboratories are designed to build upon the student's current base
of knowledge and experience. A unique aspect of this laboratory based course is
that many concepts are taught in an inductive learning format. Students are
asked to predict experimental outcomes, perform the experiments, plot and
analyze the data, and compare results to their predictions. All this occurs
prior to exposing the student to the underlying theory and predictive
calculations. By presenting concepts in this manner, the students personalize
the learning thereby leading to improved mastery, retention, and transferability
of fundamental principles to other situations.