* 0411800
* Novel Ordered States of Electrons
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Chetan Nayak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports theoretical research that is devoted to some of the rich and
complex states of matter in which electrons can organize themselves in solids.
The intellectual merits of the work drive from its main goals: a
characterization of the universal properties of these states; an elucidation of
their experimental signatures; and a determination of the particular materials
in which, and the conditions under which, they can occur. This work will focus
on three primary classes of states. (1) Ordered states of the interacting
electron gas in the presence of impurities. The goal is a better understanding
of the phase diagrams of electrons in two- and three-dimensions as a function of
disorder strength and inter-electron spacing. One particularly fascinating
possibility is that random impurities may actually facilitate the development of
electronic ordering. (2) Density-wave states of non-zero angular momentum. The
goal is to elucidate their interplay with superconductivity and magnetism, and
their possible role as 'hidden' orders which lead to puzzling behavior in
correlated electron materials. Considerable experimental and theoretical
interest is focused on determining whether d-density wave order occurs in the
cuprate superconductors. (3) Non-Abelian topological states of quantum magnets,
quantum dot arrays, and Josephson junction arrays. If a system with non-Abelian
braiding statistics were realized in nature, it would be an attractive arena for
quantum computation because the richness of this type of braiding statistics
permits universal computation through braiding operations and because the
quantum information is encoded in topological relations which are automatically
protected against the local effects of decoherence. However, very little is
known about the conditions under which such states occur. The principle aim of
this project is to shed light on this question.

The research will be integrated with teaching and training. The PI also plans to
complete a textbook on quantum condensed matter theory from a modern
perspective. %%% This award supports theoretical research that is devoted to
some of the rich and complex states of matter in which electrons can organize
themselves in solids. The intellectual merits of the work drive from its main
goals: a characterization of the universal properties of these states; an
elucidation of their experimental signatures; and a determination of the
particular materials in which, and the conditions under which, they can occur.
The research will be integrated with teaching and training. The PI also plans to
complete a textbook on quantum condensed matter theory from a modern
perspective. ***