* 0411387
* University of Maryland Eastern Shore Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology ACTION Program
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Kelly Mack, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Continuing grant
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,498,588.00

Through the NSF Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP), the University of Maryland Eastern Shore will implement the
ACTION Program (Advanced Curriculum and Technology-Based Instruction
Opportunities Network). ACTION will address the low numbers of under-represented
minorities completing undergraduate degrees, pursuing advanced degrees, and
entering the workforce in the fields of science, technology engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). The goals of the project include: 1) Develop an effective
recruiting and college bridge program; 2) Improve STEM education infrastructure,
improve retention rates and performance in STEM courses; 3) Develop a complete
STEM undergraduate research infrastructure; and 4) Provide STEM faculty with the
incentives to be first-rate mentors, instructors, and researchers.

Strategies that will be implemented include: 1) Develop a comprehensive web-
site, UMES ACTION program, that disseminates enrollment and course placement
information to science teachers, counselors, and other school officials in order
to help recruit STEM students; 2) Coordinate with LSAMP recruitment efforts via
a faculty visitation program; 3) Increase the preparation of entering students
to increase retention and enrollment; 4) Review and revise gate-keeping and
bottleneck courses, standardize multiple section courses, and implement a
supplemental homework and support laboratory for each course; 5) Develop
research opportunities for students completing their first year of coursework;
6) Develop a faculty and upperclassmen student research program that emphasizes
the scientific method, data collection, and the characterization and
dissemination of results; 7) Establish internships, summer employment, and other
off-campus research related activities; and 8) Provide support for faculty
development through research and technical instruction activities.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The ACTION project is modeled after previously successful
programs including; a Xavier University model on standardized courseware, the
National Science Education Standards, and the UMES LSAMP summer bridge program.
The ACTION project will effectively manage student enrollment resulting in
increasing, retaining, and graduating students in the STEM disciplines. Students
will have access to mentoring, tutoring, revised curricula and pedagogies, and
research opportunities. Faculty of core gate-keeping courses will participate in
systematically improved curricula and pedagogy thereby addressing the importance
of both student preparedness and faculty pedagogy in STEM education.

BROADER IMPACT: The ACTION project impacts African American undergraduates
entering STEM disciplines, prepares students for graduate studies, and provides
a broad range of research experiences. The project has considerable potential to
impact the number of African American undergraduate and graduate students in the
STEM fields. Faculty who benefit from project activities will impact large
numbers of STEM students. The project activities address locally identified
needs, but the prevalence of similar needs nationally implies potential for
duplication.