* 0411289
* Integrating Fluorescence Spectroscopy Throughout the Undergraduate Chemistry and Biochemistry Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Steven Emory, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 35,350.00

Chemistry (12) Spectroscopic methods, such as fluorescence, are used in diverse
areas of chemical sciences to investigate chemical structure, molecular
interactions, optical properties, biomolecular structure and function, kinetics,
bioassays, and many other applications. By implementing the use of a
fluorescence spectrophotometer, the integration of fluorescence spectroscopy
throughout our undergraduate chemistry and biochemistry curricula is
significantly enhancing the students' learning experience by 1) using modern
instrumentation to develop practical skills in acquiring spectroscopic data and
2) using meaningful data to demonstrate the principles of spectroscopy and
thereby helping students comprehend spectroscopic theory and the quantum
mechanical basis of energy transitions. By exposing students to fluorescence and
spectroscopic concepts throughout their college careers, students are expected
to retain their knowledge of spectroscopic concepts, which will enable them to
better apply this knowledge to scientific problems in the future. This project
also is an essential component in Departmental efforts to modernize the
undergraduate laboratories and implement project-based exercises. Fluorescence
spectroscopy is being integrated into the following lower and upper division
courses: general, analytical, instrumental, physical, and bio-chemistry. Our
plans include the adaptation and implementation of fluorescence-based
experiments from the primary research literature or from the Journal of Chemical
Education, along with the development of new laboratory modules that emphasize
basic spectroscopic theory and the complementary nature of many analytical
techniques. The fluorometer also is being used in faculty-directed undergraduate
research projects that students are encouraged to begin as early as their
sophomore year. The fluorometer is centrally located in the Department's
instrument laboratory and is made available to other departments via Western
Washington University's (WWU's) Integrated Laboratory Network (ILN). The ILN is
a computer network that enables remote access to instruments, software, on-line
instrument tutorials, and data files. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;A
fundamental understanding of spectroscopic methods and their applications is
essential for physical scientists. This project addresses this need by
implementing interdisciplinary and project-based laboratory exercises throughout
the chemistry and biochemistry curricula. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the fluorometer significantly enhances the
Department's and WWU's infrastructure for undergraduate research and education.
The incorporation of fluorescence and molecular spectroscopy in the lower-
division chemistry courses is impacting a diverse group of students, many of
whom are not chemistry majors. The implementation of project-based,
interdisciplinary experiments presents a more realistic picture of scientific
discovery to students, and demonstrates the relevance and significance of
scientific research. Experiments and methods developed as part of this project
will be disseminated via the internet and in the chemical education literature.
&lt;br/&gt;