* 0411994
* Strengthening HBCU Engineering Education Research Capacity
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Norman Fortenberry, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 12/31/2008
* USD 1,199,255.00

Through the cooperation and engagement of the Council of HBCU Engineering School
Deans, the Center for the Advancement of Scholarship on Engineering Education
(CASEE) of the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) will build the engineering
education research capacity at eleven HBCUs. Over a three-year period, 99 HBCU
faculty (nine per campus) will participant in an intensive program on developing
or enhancing capacity to engage in rigorous research on engineering education
research that links expertise in engineering content with the theory and
methodological base of social science disciplines. Additionally, they will have
made useful and productive connections outside the HBCU community. This effort
will provide a model for efforts in other disciplinary communities and in other
groups of institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants will engage in six
activities: 1) An orientation meeting of HBCU Deans with prominent engineering
education researchers and social scientists to discuss challenges and
opportunities in engineering education on HBCU campuses; 2) Create three-person
teams drawn from engineering and social science faculty on the HBCU campuses to
lead research and innovation activities (e.g., an engineering department head,
an engineering faculty member, and a social science faculty member); 3) The
three-person teams will attend an intensive one-week training session offered by
the Colorado School of Mines; 4) The three-person teams will attend a Project
Kaleidoscope Annual meeting to develop campus research and implementation
strategies; 5) The three-person team will attend the CASEE Annual meeting to be
held in conjunction with the Frontiers in Education conference (sponsored by the
Education Research and Methods Division of ASEE, the IEEE Education Society, and
the IEEE Computer Society); and 6) The HBCU campuses will develop proposals for
funding to various sources to implement their departmental-plans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project builds knowledge within
HBCU engineering and social science faculty on the conduct, evaluation, and
communication of rigorous education research within engineering disciplines. An
outcome of this activity will be the development of HBCU campus plans to
strengthen curricula and pedagogy at HBCU institutions. It strengthens
connections among leadership faculty at HBCUs and enhances linkages with
national leaders in engineering education research and practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will enhance linkages
between the engineering and social science communities at HBCUs, improve the
quality of education within HBCUs engineering programs, provide HBCU faculty
with an opportunity to assume leadership in the emerging area of education
research, and enhance the cadre of social science professionals experienced in
addressing challenges in engineering education. This project also contributes to
the intellectual infrastructure that will enhance attainment of national human
resource development goals. &lt;br/&gt;