* 0411421
* The Coppin STEM Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Edward Sommerfeldt, Coppin State University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,499,550.00

The goal of the Coppin State College Stem Project (C-STEM) under the NSF
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), is
to broaden minority participation in the national STEM workforce by recruiting,
retaining and graduating increased numbers of STEM students who are prepared for
entry into graduate programs and employment in STEM fields. This will be
accomplished through the implementation of prescriptive objectives and
strategies in faculty and curriculum development and through student outreach
and support in mathematics and the sciences and technologies. Project goals
include: 1) enrolling 300 freshman students interested in STEM; 2) increasing
the number of STEM entering freshman students with high SAT scores; 3)
increasing pass rates by 50% over five years in bottleneck courses; 4)
increasing retention rates of STEM students to 60%; 5) increasing the number of
STEM graduates from 43 to 150 over the five year project period; 6) increasing
the number of STEM graduates admitted to graduate programs; and 7) conducting an
ongoing evaluation of the C-STEM Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four major
strategies will be implemented in order to meet the project goals include: 1)
enhancing, developing, and implementing STEM curricular offerings utilizing
pedagogy that is effective with disadvantaged and minority students; 2)
developing and implementing an aggressive college and community outreach effort
to recruit students into STEM programs and increasing student support services
to increase retention and graduation rates; 3) integrating research-based
teaching and internships throughout the STEM Program, using the successful
McNair Post Baccalaureate Achievement Program at Coppin, and through
partnerships with educational and research institutions; and 4) implementing a
plan for continuing faculty development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the C-STEM activities includes advancing knowledge regarding
curricular, instructional and support strategies effective with minority and/or
disadvantaged undergraduate populations, and measurable strategies that improve
matriculation, retention and graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the C-STEM project activities includes higher graduation and
employment in STEM fields of the target population. C-STEM will integrate
research and education by infusing learning with discovery, and integrate
diversity into faculty and curriculum development, student outreach, and support
activities. &lt;br/&gt;