* 0411682
* Polyborane Syntheses and Reactions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Larry Sneddon, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 06/30/2007
* USD 460,350.00

Dr. Larry Sneddon, Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
Chemistry Division to develop new general methodologies for the systematic,
high-yield syntheses of polyborane compounds and polymers. The proposed work
will result in new ionic-liquid based methods for the synthesis and modification
of polyboranes; metal-catalyzed polyborane hydroboration, dehydrogenative-
borylation, and alkenylpolyborane metathesis reactions; and routes to
poly(organopolyborane) polymers via both early metal catalyzed alkenylpolyborane
polymerization and ruthenium-catalyzed alkenylpolyborane ring opening metathesis
polymerization (ROMP) reactions. The studies will emphasize the discovery of new
reactions and the development of an understanding of their fundamental steps and
controlling factors. The new reactions will enable the systematic synthesis of
important new alkyl- and alkenylpolyborane, carborane and linked-polyborane
molecular compounds, and totally new types of hybrid "polyborane-inorganic" and
"polyborane-organic" polymeric materials that have potential technological uses.
Understanding the nature of metal-polyborane interactions is of fundamental
importance to the discovery and control of new metal catalyzed reactions;
therefore, a further central goal of this project is to achieve a better
understanding of the structures, bonding, reaction mechanisms, and properties of
both polyboranes and metallapolyboranes.

Polyborane compounds have important properties that give rise to applications
ranging from uses as cancer agents, high temperature polymers, burn rate
modifiers, extractants for nuclear wastes, ceramic precursors and weakly
coordinating anions. However, the exploitation of these and other potential
uses, as well as the further scientific development of the field, has been
seriously hampered by the inability to efficiently synthesize and modify such
compounds. There is a clear need for rational, selective, high yield reaction
methods. The project will educate creative and skilled young scientists, which
will include women and under represented minorities.