* 0411367
* Introducing Computerized Data Acquisition Signal Processing and Control to an Advanced Physics Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Joel Fajans, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2006
* USD 29,092.00

Physics (13) Computerized data acquisition, signal processing, and control is
integral to the practice of modern experimental physics, yet the typical physics
curriculum does not teach these modern practices. At U.C. Berkeley, all Physics
and Engineering undergraduate majors take a two or three semester-long course on
experimental practice. Currently, during the first two thirds of the first
semester of this course, the students learn the still-necessary art of analog
electronics. The final third of the first semester is devoted to the now-
obsolete study of gate-level digital electronics. This project replaces the
curriculum on the obsolete material with a study of computer-based experimental
techniques. The required part of the new curriculum (three weeks) introduces
students to programming in LabVIEW, computer-based waveform generation
(including material on Nyquist's Theorem,) signal acquisition (including
material on aliasing, quantization, linearity, and noise,) signal processing
(including material on digital filtering, FFT and Lock-in techniques), and
process control. Students do real laboratory exercises using equipment donated
by National Instruments. During the final two weeks of the course, the students
design and construct a final project of their choice; many of the final projects
employ the student's newly learnt computer techniques.

The new material is based on proven techniques from research. The curriculum is
adapted from material available in several texts, papers, the web, National
Instruments, and from previous Course, Curriculum and Laboratory Improvement
grantees. The project will report on the new curriculum at Association of
Physics Teacher meetings.

Intellectual Merit: The knowledge learnt in the proposed curriculum brings
students much closer to being practicing experimental scientists.

Broader Impact: By improving their laboratory skills, students are better able
to contribute to their chosen field after they graduate, whether it be physics,
some other science, or engineering. Moreover, their new skills make it easier
for them to participate in undergraduate laboratory research.