* 0411527
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Effects of Habitat Structure on Ecological Communities and Processes at the Aboveground-Belowground Interface
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Mary Ann Bruns, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Urban development creates new habitats for soil- and ground-dwelling organisms,
which may move in from surrounding "natural" habitats. Our research focuses on
measuring biodiversity and ecosystem processes in four habitats commonly found
in urban environments: lawns, unmowed fields, and shredded-bark and gravel
mulches. The hypothesis of this study is that different habitats support
different biological communities, which in turn affect nutrient cycling, plant
health, and pollution potential. In 2003, the investigators of this project
established replicated plots of the four habitats from which to sample insects,
spiders, collembolans and other arthropods. They found that the abundances of
these arthropods differ among the habitats. For example, spiders were more
numerous in bark mulch habitat while some collembolans were more abundant in
unmowed habitat. Arthropod sampling will continue in 2004-2005. In addition, the
investigators will measure earthworm populations in each habitat and compare
carbon and several forms of soil nitrogen to quantify differences in nutrient
cycling. Decomposition, or the breakdown of carbon in decaying organic matter,
will be studied by measuring the decrease in weight of leaves in litterbags
through time. Studying the amounts and forms of carbon and nitrogen in soil,
water and the atmosphere are important because these elements play roles in
global climate change and water pollution. In addition, studying the effects of
urban habitats on organisms like arthropods is important for conserving
biodiversity in urban landscapes. Our research will provide information that may
contribute to the conservation of beneficial organisms (such as spiders) through
habitat management, and to the maintenance of proper levels of carbon and
nitrogen in soil to help keep lawn and garden plants healthy.