* 0411978
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Complex Effects of Humans and Piscivores on Fish Assemblages in a Speciose Tropical River
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Kirk Winemiller, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2005
* USD 8,030.00

Much of the world's species diversity is located in tropical and sub-tropical
ecosystems, and a better understanding of the ecology of these systems is
necessary to help stem biodiversity loss and assess community- and ecosystem-
level responses to anthropogenic impacts. In this study, we will examine how the
interaction between two species, the peacock bass and piranha, may render the
peacock bass more susceptible to commercial net fishing. We hypothesize that
piranha restrict peacock bass to near-shore habitats, an area where they can be
readily exploited by netters. In large-scale (~ca. 500m2) experimental areas, we
will examine if peacock bass move into shallower water in the presence of
piranha than they otherwise would. Further, we will examine if the behavioral
response of peacock bass has cascading effects on lower trophic levels, that is,
composition of prey fish assemblages are different when peacock bass are
restricted to shallow water. Experimental manipulations will be combined with
landscape-scale surveys to examine the distribution of peacock bass, piranha,
and the dominant prey of these species. These data will be incorporated with
extensive stomach content and isotope analyses, to provide detailed information
of food web structure in a species-rich tropical river. By describing human
impacts within a food web context, we endeavor to provide predictive power
regarding a specific environmental problem, yet still allowing for generality
that will broaden the theoretical foundations and applications of food web
ecology.