* 0411825
* Laboratory learning: Model-based reasoning in biomedical engineering research and instructional laboratories
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Nancy Nersessian, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,238,607.00

The overall objective of the proposed research is to translate findings from the
investigators' previous research on cognition and learning in biomedical
engineering research (BME) laboratories into prototype designs for instructional
labs. The investigators' previous research was an intensive "in vivo" study of
two BME labs with the aim of understanding: 1) the nature of the
representational and reasoning practices that are used in problem solving, and
2) how student apprentices learn in these labs. The investigators also used
their results to inform the design and refinement of problem content,
scaffolding, and facilitation for undergraduate and graduate classrooms using a
problem-based learning (PBL) pedagogy.

In their new research, the investigators propose to bring their studies of
problem solving practices in labs together in a systematic way with their
studies of student learning in order to design and implement new BME
instructional labs that better approximate the learning environments and model-
based reasoning practices they have found in research labs. In year 1, they will
assess the modified PBL classrooms and carry out in vivo observations of two
existing labs for a baseline. In year 2, they will work with BME faculty to
design, pilot, and assess two instructional labs that capture the cognitive,
social, and cultural aspects of practice that lead to effective learning and
problem solving. In year 3, they will assess the final implementation of the
instructional labs. During these three years they will continue their studies of
cognition and learning in research labs, adding a new lab in the area of
biorobotics in order to assess the generalizability of their findings.