* 0411176
* From Toys to Tools: Broadening the Reach of the Next-Generation Robotics Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Zachary Dodds, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 07/31/2007
* USD 132,252.00

Computer Science (31)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, computational
interaction with the physical world -- intelligent sensing, actuation, and
embodied reasoning -- has required expensive equipment with steep learning
curves. Recently, undergraduate resources available for intelligent systems
courses have expanded rapidly at prices -- and capabilities -- an order of
magnitude lower. What is striking is the lack of options between the extremes of
high cost and capability and low cost and capability. By combining and extending
current trends in curricula, software, and hardware, this project uses off-the-
shelf PCs and the adapts the NSF-supported Python Robotics (Pyro) software
system to create a low-cost integration of research-caliber physical agents with
common computing resources, refocusing undergraduate intelligent systems courses
away from toy problems and platforms toward opportunities for open inquiry. This
curriculum weaves units from the PIs' research subfields into courses serving a
variety of students across the Claremont Colleges and beyond, to the women of
Chatham College and the students of the Community College of Allegheny County.
The software and curricular resources developed will be mainstreamed into their
existing efforts for widespread distribution. An evaluation team of AI/robotics
researchers from Bryn Mawr College, the University of Delaware, and Southern
Illinois University will help adapt existing assessment instruments and will
provide an external perspective on the results. Their feedback will both serve
and measure progress toward the project's fundamental goal: raising the
expectations of the power, flexibility, and cost-effectiveness possible in an
undergraduate robotics laboratory.