* 0411502
* Computing Interior Eigenvalues of Large Matrices by Preconditioned Krylov Subspace Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Qiang Ye, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 134,061.00

The investigator will develop preconditioned Krylov subspace methods with
analysis for computing a few interior eigenvalues of large scale matrix
eigenvalue problems. It will also develop black-box implementations for public
distributions. In a previous work of PI, a method of this type has been
developed for computing some extreme (smallest or largest) eigenvalue of the
symmetric problems, which has also been implemented in a library-quality
software called EIGIFP. The investigator proposes to develop a generalization of
the existing method for computing interior eigenvalues for symmetric and
nonsymmetric matrix problems. The resulting algorithms not only inherit
desirable characteristics of the existing Krylov subspace methods, but also
allow convergence acceleration through the use of a preconditioner (or
approximate inverse) rather than the inverse of a shifted
matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computations of interior eigenvalues for large
matrices arise in many important applications such as electromagnetic field
simulations in cavities for particle accelerator models and the Anderson model
of localization in quantum mechanics. In spite of tremendous progresses made in
developing iterative methods and software packages for large-scale eigenvalue
problems, these applications pose a significant challenge. The proposed work
shall advance the theory, algorithms and software toolboxes for the computation
of interior eigenvalues. It aims to generate maximal impact in applications by
developing an efficient and publicly accessible software package that can be
easily used by non-expert users.&lt;br/&gt;