* 0411931
* Quantum Theory of Competing Orders
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Sudip Chakravarty, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 345,000.00

Quantum mechanics forms the theoretical basis of many novel materials that
continue to be discovered today, such as high temperature superconductors,
ruthenates, manganates, fullerenes, and heavy electron materials. Without
quantum mechanics even the most common metals, insulators, and semiconductors
cannot be understood. Of fundamental interest are those properties that reflect
quantum mechanics on a macroscopic scale, which are continuously challenging us
to extend our perceptions of matter. New concepts, such as quantum phase
transitions between fundamentally distinct states of matter at absolute zero,
driven by Heisenberg's uncertainty relation lead to to spectacular consequences
in observations at temperatures as high as room temperature. The ubiquity of
such transitions in many varied materials of great technological interest
behooves us to approach the theory of quantum phase transitions with the
sophistication of theoretical physics. Control over properties of quantum states
of matter involving strongly interacting, many-body degrees of freedom remains
an engaging intellectual enterprise. We are only beginning to realize that
underlying the materials science, there must be a set of physical principles,
most likely simple in character; however, discovering these principles requires
a genuine shift in thinking. One can no longer think in terms of physics on
single length and energy scales, because the effects are collective.

An emerging idea is the notion of competing order that underlies the complex
systems of interest. It is almost a truism that in a complex system any symmetry
that can be broken must be broken; however, many of the ordered states that
result from these broken symmetries are effectively hidden, but surreptitiously
control the general properties of matter. Thus, the discoveries of new hidden
order are not only intellectually fascinating, but also enormously practical to
tailor materials for our purposes, such as superconductors with the highest
transition temperature. To this day, the roster of states of matter with broken
symmetries is limited despite the limitless symmetries that can be broken in a
strongly correlated electronic system. The difficulty is that it is not always
clear what should be the effective Hamiltonian, nor is it clear how a complex
quantum order fits into the phase diagram of a real material. Here, we address
both of these issues by considering concrete examples from high temperature
superconductors, a variety of quantum phase transitions and dissipative quantum
systems. An aspect of this research consists of developing theoretical tools
from the perspective of field theory, as applied to the theory of matter.
Another aspect concerns the development of phenomenological ideas for direct
applications to experimental systems. Yet another aspect involves computation,
but augmented by sophisticated ideas of scaling and quantum criticality.

The broader impacts of this work will involve educating and training graduate
students to assume leadership roles in academic and industrial environments.
This will be accomplished not only by mentoring students at the home
institution, but also by encouraging them to attend professional meetings, where
they can present results of their research activities and exchange ideas with
others in the field. The existing research group already includes a woman
graduate student and an effort will be made to recruit more women and
minorities. Plans are underway to incorporate research activities into a modern
graduate level textbook in condensed matter physics. The results of the research
will also be broadly disseminated through publications in professional journals
and presentations at national and international conferences. It is hoped that
the research will lead to further understanding of novel materials for the
benefit of society. %%% Quantum mechanics forms the theoretical basis of many
novel materials that continue to be discovered today, such as high temperature
superconductors, ruthenates, manganates, fullerenes, and heavy electron
materials. Without quantum mechanics even the most common metals, insulators,
and semiconductors cannot be understood. Of fundamental interest are those
properties that reflect quantum mechanics on a macroscopic scale, which are
continuously challenging us to extend our perceptions of matter. New concepts,
such as quantum phase transitions between fundamentally distinct states of
matter at absolute zero, driven by Heisenberg's uncertainty relation lead to to
spectacular consequences in observations at temperatures as high as room
temperature. The ubiquity of such transitions in many varied materials of great
technological interest behooves us to approach the theory of quantum phase
transitions with the sophistication of theoretical physics. Control over
properties of quantum states of matter involving strongly interacting, many-body
degrees of freedom remains an engaging intellectual enterprise. We are only
beginning to realize that underlying the materials science, there must be a set
of physical principles, most likely simple in character; however, discovering
these principles requires a genuine shift in thinking. One can no longer think
in terms of physics on single length and energy scales, because the effects are
collective.

An emerging idea is the notion of competing order that underlies the complex
systems of interest. It is almost a truism that in a complex system any symmetry
that can be broken must be broken; however, many of the ordered states that
result from these broken symmetries are effectively hidden, but surreptitiously
control the general properties of matter. Thus, the discoveries of new hidden
order are not only intellectually fascinating, but also enormously practical to
tailor materials for our purposes, such as superconductors with the highest
transition temperature. To this day, the roster of states of matter with broken
symmetries is limited despite the limitless symmetries that can be broken in a
strongly correlated electronic system. The difficulty is that it is not always
clear what should be the effective Hamiltonian, nor is it clear how a complex
quantum order fits into the phase diagram of a real material. Here, we address
both of these issues by considering concrete examples from high temperature
superconductors, a variety of quantum phase transitions and dissipative quantum
systems. An aspect of this research consists of developing theoretical tools
from the perspective of field theory, as applied to the theory of matter.
Another aspect concerns the development of phenomenological ideas for direct
applications to experimental systems. Yet another aspect involves computation,
but augmented by sophisticated ideas of scaling and quantum criticality.

The broader impacts of this work will involve educating and training graduate
students to assume leadership roles in academic and industrial environments.
This will be accomplished not only by mentoring students at the home
institution, but also by encouraging them to attend professional meetings, where
they can present results of their research activities and exchange ideas with
others in the field. The existing research group already includes a woman
graduate student and an effort will be made to recruit more women and
minorities. Plans are underway to incorporate research activities into a modern
graduate level textbook in condensed matter physics. The results of the research
will also be broadly disseminated through publications in professional journals
and presentations at national and international conferences. It is hoped that
the research will lead to further understanding of novel materials for the
benefit of society. ***