* 0411886
* Achieving Motivational and Cognitive Outcomes in Mathematics Using Enhanced Intelligent Tutoring Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Carole Beal, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,217,641.00

Much research in education now points to the importance of both cognitive
and&lt;br/&gt;motivational processes in determining learning outcomes. Yet we do
not yet understand&lt;br/&gt;exactly how these processes interact within the
individual learner over time to produce&lt;br/&gt;specific learning outcomes,
and how different forms of instruction and tutoring can&lt;br/&gt;influence the
interaction of cognition and motivation to facilitate learning.
Advanced&lt;br/&gt;learning technologies such as intelligent tutoring systems
typically focus on cognitive&lt;br/&gt;issues, and do not yet address
motivational issues. Thus there is a major gap between&lt;br/&gt;educational
practice, as supported by learning technologies, and research in cognitive
and&lt;br/&gt;motivational aspects of human learning.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed project is to investigate the relations of
learner&lt;br/&gt;engagement, cognitive processes, and scaffolding strategies in
producing specific&lt;br/&gt;learning outcomes in mathematics. It brings
together an interdisciplinary team of&lt;br/&gt;specialists in psychology,
education, and information technology to pursue this work. The&lt;br/&gt;project
will employ educational software designed to enable us to address and
measure&lt;br/&gt;cognitive and motivational factors in systematic ways. It will
significantly extend&lt;br/&gt;previous work on intelligent tutoring systems and
computer-based learning assistants to&lt;br/&gt;assess in real time the
attention and motivation of individual learners, infer their level
of&lt;br/&gt;engagement, and estimate their domain knowledge. The research
results will be obtained&lt;br/&gt;in realistic learning conditions: public high
school classrooms in Los Angeles, with&lt;br/&gt;student populations reflecting
the ethnic, linguistic and economic diversity of urban&lt;br/&gt;California. The
software will make instructional decisions based on decision rules
used&lt;br/&gt;by expert human tutors who consider motivational and cognitive
goals to optimize&lt;br/&gt;learning outcomes. Instructional strategies will
also be instantiated in the form of a&lt;br/&gt;responsive animated virtual
character, to learn if the presence of a human-like&lt;br/&gt;pedagogical agent
influences the learner.s engagement as well as learning outcomes
in&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. Classroom teachers will be able to customize the
instruction through&lt;br/&gt;innovative tools to view continually updated
assessments and refine pedagogical&lt;br/&gt;decisions made by the software.
Rich learner data sets will be automatically collected as&lt;br/&gt;students
work on mathematics problems, and will provide an integrated evaluation
linked&lt;br/&gt;to specific learning outcomes, including word problem solving
and transfer to novel,&lt;br/&gt;challenging problems embedded in real-world
STEM contexts. To accomplish this goal,&lt;br/&gt;the researchers will build on
the results of two projects developed with prior NSF support:
an&lt;br/&gt;empirically validated focus of attention tracking system, and an
intelligent tutoring&lt;br/&gt;system (ITS) designed specifically to enhance
math skills in students who have been&lt;br/&gt;traditionally under-represented
in STEM fields of study.&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project will have broad
societal impact through providing&lt;br/&gt;individualized, effective web-based
instruction in STEM-related mathematics that will be&lt;br/&gt;freely accessible
to students in any high school with access to the Internet. We
anticipate&lt;br/&gt;that the impact will be greatest among students who
currently have motivational&lt;br/&gt;difficulties with mathematics, including
women and underrepresented groups. The&lt;br/&gt;intellectual merit of the
project will be a deeper understanding of the very nature of&lt;br/&gt;learning
processes through the ability to model in detail and in real time the
interaction of&lt;br/&gt;cognition and engagement in the individual learner, and
to observe changes in the&lt;br/&gt;learner.s knowledge as a function of
instructional history.