* 0411127
* Operating System Strategies for Energy- and Resource-Aware Adaptation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Michael Scott, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2008
* USD 499,338.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research &lt;br/&gt;CI
SE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
NUMBER: 0411127&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dwarkadas,
Sandhya&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Rochester&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE:
Operating System Strategies for Energy- and Re-source-Aware
Adaptation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increases in device capabilities, energy
consumption has emerged as a large and growing concern for both mobile and
server-class computers. Hard-ware designers have responded by developing devices
(e.g. hard disks and net-works) that can be "powered down" (dropped into a non-
operational mode) when inactive, and other devices (e.g. processor components)
that can be "scaled back" (by reducing voltage or reallocating in part to other
threads), to operate below their peak performance and power. To utilize such
devices effectively, the operating system must dynamically "shape" the offered
load. For "power down" devices it should aim for burstiness, to maximize the
length of low-power inter-vals and minimize the number of costly state
transitions. For "scale back" de-vices it should aim for smoothness, to leverage
the nonlinear dependence of power on voltage and to avoid paying for unutilized
resources. For devices with both capabilities it must balance the benefits of
the two approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work is addressing both existing and
emerging architectures, including single-threaded, multi-threaded, and clustered
processors. Expected results include (1) the characterization of server and
mobile workloads in terms of behavior variability and (2) scheduler and device
management strategies that combine run-time instrumentation with profiles of
past behavior to model the needs of all running applications, and to match those
needs to available resources. Dis-semination will be achieved via publications,
students, open source software tools, and/or industry collaboration. Broader
impacts will include the re-source-aware adaptation of future increasingly
complex systems for improved performance and reduced
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D. Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program Director,
CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;June 16, 2004.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;