* 0411432
* HBCU-UP Planning Grant
* EHR,HRD
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Tade Adedokun, Lane College
* Standard Grant
* Camille A. McKayle
* 04/30/2006
* USD 50,000.00

The overall goal of the planning project is to conduct self-assessments and
external research that will result in the development of a full HBCU-UP
implementation proposal, which will include an institutional model and action
plan to improve STEM instruction. The proposed planning grant will: (1) explore
successful methodologies for mastering basic mathematics skills of freshmen who
enter college under-prepared for college-level mathematics; (2) review best
practices in mathematics and other STEM gatekeeper courses among selected HBCUs,
including textbook selection and other learning resources; and (3) prepare a
full HBCU-UP implementation proposal.

In the planning phase, site visits to one or more HBCUs that have received
5-year HBCU-UP awards will be made and student assistants will work with the PI
and Co-PI to distribute and collect a survey instrument to ascertain best
practices among selected HBCUs. A consultant will be utilized to analyze the
data and provide advice with respect to preparation of the full proposal. An
internal Advisory Committee will also provide guidance with respect to the
planning process.

Although Lane College students no longer take developmental courses based on an
evaluation of student success after taking the course, many students are not
ready for college-level reading and mathematics upon entry. Many of these
students are under-prepared for college-level mathematics, and are expected to
bridge their learning gap in the course MAT 135 College Algebra a five-credit
hour course that meets daily. The planning grant will assist the College in
conducting research with respect to best practices for bridging the gap in
mathematics skills of its entering freshmen, while encouraging them to pursue
and persist in STEM majors through graduation at the same time.

Intellectual Merit The intellectual merit of a full HBCU-UP implementation
project on STEM programs at Lane College would include: 1. Bridging the gap in
mathematics skills of its entering freshmen, while encouraging them to pursue
and persist in STEM majors through graduation at the same time; 2. Increasing
the number of STEM majors who have significant research experience at the
undergraduate level, and enter graduate school with stronger portfolios; 3.
Improving participation of STEM faculty in research experiences that involve the
students and other faculty development activities; and 4. Developing a stronger
curriculum in Algebra and all STEM gatekeeper courses.

Broader Impact Enrollment at Lane College for fall 2003 is 952, ninety-eight
percent of whom are African American, and 60% of whom are Tennessee residents.

The broader impact of a full HBCU-UP implementation project on STEM programs at
Lane College would include: 1. Increasing the number of African American
students matriculating at Lane College who complete STEM majors; 3. Increasing
the number of African American students who pursue the 2-3 Engineering program
with Tennessee State University; and 4. Increasing the number of freshman STEM
majors who participate in summer pre-college science programs.

