* 0411765
* Conference: 2004  FASEB Summer Research Conference Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing 2004 FASEB Summer Research Conference, Saxtons River, Vermont, July 2004
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2004
* Marla Feller, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Cole Gilbert
* 09/30/2004
* USD 28,000.00

This proposal requests support for the 2004 FASEB Summer Research Conference on
"Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing". This meeting will be the seventh
biannual conference in this series devoted specifically to the structure and
function of the retina. Retinal research is undergoing an era of unprecedented
growth and achievement. A variety of new imaging, physiological, and molecular
methods are being developed and utilized to address the question of how retinal
neurons are organized into functional neural circuits. Because retinal
processing is key to our understanding of vision, and the retina is at the
forefront of neural circuit analysis, this conference will have far-reaching
effects on the general study of neuroscience. The presentations will cover many
facets of retinal biology including: the cellular molecular mechanisms
underlying development; the basis of neural signaling; the identification of
neural circuits by which the retina processes various aspects of visual input;
the code by which retinal output is conveyed to the brain; and the resulting
abilities and limitations of visual behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-
day conference expects to attract approximately 180 participants from around the
world. Thirty-five internationally recognized experts will present their work in
informal talks, which are organized in nine thematic sessions, chaired by
leaders in each field. Furthermore, emphasis has been placed on the
contributions of younger scientists in the early career stage. In addition,
there will be in informal workshop on a topic selected before the meeting
participants. Finally, all participants are invited to present posters during
poster sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference format is designed to foster
direct scientific exchange among participants. Efforts are being made to
encourage students and postdocs, from underrepresented minority groups to attend
this meeting. Proceedings will not be published, but abstracts of the talks and
posters will be collected into a booklet which will be made available to all
attendees and to others in the field who requested. Because this conference
attracts most of the fields leading investigators, it has been highly successful
in disseminating results, and has significantly affected the course of retinal
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;