* 0411776
* Learning to Teach: The Next Generation of Intelligent Tutor Systems
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Donald Fisher, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,241,545.00

The primary objective of this project is to develop new methods for optimizing
an automated pedagogical agent to improve its teaching efficiency through
customization to individual students based on information about their responses
to individual problems, student individual differences such as level of
cognitive development, spatial ability, memory retrieval speed, long-term
retention, effectiveness of alternative teaching strategies (such as visual vs.
computational solution strategies), and degree of engagement with the tutor. An
emphasis will be placed on using machine learning and computational optimization
methods to automate the process of developing efficient Intelligent Tutoring
Systems (ITS) for new subject domains. The approach is threefold. First, a
methodology based on hierarchical graphical models and machine learning will be
developed and evaluated for automating the creation of student models with rich
representations of student state based on data collected from populations of
students over multiple tutoring episodes. Second, methods will be developed and
evaluated for deriving pedagogical decision strategies that are effective and
efficient not just over the short-term (from one math problem to the next one),
but over the long-term where retention over a period of at least one month is
the objective. Third, a systematic study will be conducted of the role that
known and powerful latent and instructional variables can have on performance
through their inclusion in student models. Research in cognitive and educational
psychology clearly shows the critical role that latent variables such as short-
term memory and engagement play in learning, and that instructional variables
such as over-learning and review, and massed and distributed practice have on
the rate at which material is learned. The investigators jointly have strengths
in the areas of intelligent tutoring, machine learning and optimization, and
cognitive, mathematical and educational psychology, strengths that are needed in
order to make the synergistic advances that are being proposed. Our preliminary
simulations and classroom experiments suggest that we can significantly reduce
the time it takes students to learn new material based on improved pedagogical
decisions. For intellectual merit, he proposed research should advance
fundamental knowledge of the learning and teaching of basic mathematics and more
advanced algebra and geometry. It should add to the set of growing statistical
and computational techniques that are available to estimate the complex hidden
hierarchical structures that govern human behavior. The research should also
significantly broaden the capabilities of machine learning systems by addressing
learning scenarios that are grounded on the real and challenging problem of
mathematics education than the abstract scenarios typically studied at present.
For broader impact, this foundational educational research will lead to the
broadening of participation of underrepresented groups, especially women, in a
variety of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines.
It will advance discovery and understanding of learning and engagement as
predictors of individual differences in learning and will result in intelligent
tutors that are more sensitive to individual differences. It will unveil the
extent to which students of different genders and cognitive abilities learn more
efficiently with different forms of teaching. This research will benefit society
as machine learning methods, which provide a core technology for building
complex systems, will be applicable to a variety of teaching systems.