* 0411526
* Great Plains Operator Theory Symposium (GPOTS - 2004); May 26-30, 2004; College Station, TX
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* David Larson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2005
* USD 13,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Larson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for
partial funding for a Mathematics conference, the Great
Plains&lt;br/&gt;Operator Theory Symposium [GPOTS], to be held at Texas A&amp;M
University on the dates May&lt;br/&gt;26-30, 2004. GPOTS is an annual conference
(24 years old) that is hosted every year in May at&lt;br/&gt;a different
university. Although the name is of a "regional" character, it has evolved into
a&lt;br/&gt;conference of a true international scope. Texas A&amp;M University
has agreed to provide the&lt;br/&gt;needed facilities, and local funding will
cover the expenses of the plenary speakers. Local&lt;br/&gt;arrangements for
lecture rooms and housing have already been made. The funding we seek
from&lt;br/&gt;NSF will be used specifically to provide partial support for the
other participants, with emphasis&lt;br/&gt;on postdocs, graduate students, and
younger faculty who are doing excellent research but may not&lt;br/&gt;have
current grants. The plenary speakers will be world-class researchers and
expositors whose&lt;br/&gt;lectures emphasize break-through areas and
applications of interest to the participants. Eight&lt;br/&gt;plenary speakers
have already accepted our invitation to speak. Many of the regular
participants&lt;br/&gt;will give shorter talks, including a number of graduate
students currently working on their&lt;br/&gt;doctorates. We expect between 100
and 150 participants. The seven members of the GPOTS-&lt;br/&gt;2004 local
organizing committee at Texas A&amp;M University are: Ronald Douglas,
Kenneth&lt;br/&gt;Dykema, David Larson, Carl Pearcy, Gilles Pisier, Roger Smith,
and Nico Spronk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;