* 0411609
* FASEB Conference:  Protein Lipidation, Signaling and Membrane Domains to be held July 24-29, 2004 in Tucson, AZ
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* John Silvius, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 07/31/2005
* USD 9,210.00

The Federation of American Biological Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB)
conference entitled Protein Lipidation, Signaling and Membrane Domains will be
held July 24-29, 2004 at Tucson, AZ. This meeting will highlight exciting recent
progress, and provide a forum for critical discussions, concerning lipid-
modified proteins and membrane microdomains and their roles in processes
including signal transduction, trafficking and sorting of membrane molecules.
The fields of lipid-modified proteins and membrane domains ("rafts", caveolae
and other specialized membrane microenvironments) represent distinct areas of
research that are nonetheless closely intertwined and synergistic. This is the
case in part because many lipidated proteins involved in signaling, trafficking
and other processes are associated with specialized membrane domains, and
because the lipid modifications of such proteins often play important roles in
determining their targeting to specific membrane domains as well as specific
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will be organized around three main
themes. First, it will provide a very timely forum for the exchange and critical
evaluation of information about the nature of membrane microdomains in living
cells and their roles in functions such as cell signaling and membrane
trafficking. Second, it will feature new developments in understanding the
enzymology of protein lipidation, including recent successes in characterizing
the enzymes involved in protein thioacylation, and in coupling of GPI-"anchor"
groups to proteins, using combined genetic and biochemical approaches. Third,
the conference will highlight recent progress in understanding the biological
functions of protein-coupled lipid groups and the recognition of lipid-modified
protein domains by regulatory, effector and other proteins. With its unique dual
focus on the complementary areas of lipid-modified proteins and membrane
microdomains, this meeting will promote important sharing of information and
foster collaborations between researchers from diverse fields. An important
function of the meeting will be to allow junior researchers (including graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows) to interact with established leaders in these
fields, an objective that is promoted by the small size of the conference
(maximum 200 participants) and the requirement that speakers remain present on-
site throughout the course of the meeting. Advertising strategies and criteria
for selection of participants will be chosen to promote participation of junior
researchers, women and underrepresented minority groups. To promote this
objective further, roughly 12 talks will be presented by speakers chosen from
submitted abstracts, with preference to be given to individuals from the groups
noted above.&lt;br/&gt;