* 0411257
* A Laminar Flow Facility with Laser-based Visualization for Enhancing Undergraduate Fluid Mechanics Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* John Crimaldi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 07/31/2007
* USD 62,348.00

Discipline: Engineering-Other (59)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
the development of a laminar flow facility to enhance conceptual understanding
in the undergraduate fluid mechanics curriculum at the University of Colorado.
The facility includes a laser-based flow visualization system, enabling students
to directly visualize basic and complex flow phenomena that are typically
difficult to observe. The flow facility and the visualization system are being
adapted from facilities and techniques that were piloted as educational tools at
Stanford University. Existing facilities in the PI's teaching laboratory enable
students to study turbulent flow; the new flow facility is designed to produce
laminar and transitional flows. Students can visualize and quantify aspects of
laminar and transitional jets, boundary layers, and flows past obstacles
(including unsteady wakes). An Engineering Assessment Specialist at the
University of Colorado is involved with an assessment of the effectiveness of
the facility as a learning tool. Assessment tools include surveys, open-ended
interviews, written tests, and course evaluations. The equipment developed with
this grant is being used to develop multi-media educational content for National
dissemination in two NSF-sponsored activities: the TeachEngineering digital
library (intended for K-12 education) and the Multi-Media Fluid Mechanics CD-ROM
series (intended for undergraduate education).