* 0411769
* Rigidity Phenomena for Higher Rank Abelian Actions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Boris Kalinin, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2006
* USD 34,365.00

Proposal Number: DMS-0140513&lt;br/&gt;PI: Boris
Kalinin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
lies at the area of smooth dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems and ergodic theory. The
main goal of the project is&lt;br/&gt;to investigate "higher rank" dynamical
systems. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, the investigator will study actions of
discrete&lt;br/&gt;and continuous higher rank abelian groups, which are
natural&lt;br/&gt;generalizations of diffeomorphisms and flows on
smooth&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. Higher rank dynamical systems appear naturally
in&lt;br/&gt;the study of various geometric and algebraic objects.
The&lt;br/&gt;prime examples of these systems include hyperbolic
and&lt;br/&gt;partially hyperbolic actions by automorphisms
and&lt;br/&gt;translations on compact cosets of Lie groups. Using
dynamical,&lt;br/&gt;analytic, and group theoretic methods the
investigator&lt;br/&gt;will study rigidity properties of such systems. The
examples&lt;br/&gt;of possible rigidity properties include description
of&lt;br/&gt;invariant measures, regularity of measurable
isomorphisms,&lt;br/&gt;and existence of smooth isomorphisms to the algebraic
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems and ergodic theory is a
relatively new field&lt;br/&gt;of mathematics which studies the evolution of
physical and&lt;br/&gt;mathematical systems over time, for example planet
systems,&lt;br/&gt;air and fluid flows. This field originated from the
classical&lt;br/&gt;studies in differential equations and celestial
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics and ergodic theory introduced new mathematical
tools&lt;br/&gt;into these areas of physics and mechanics, such as the
study&lt;br/&gt;of the qualitative behavior in the long run as well as
various&lt;br/&gt;analytic and probabilistic methods. New ideas and concepts
in&lt;br/&gt;dynamics, such as fractals and chaos, have not only
affected&lt;br/&gt;the field itself dramatically, but also fundamentally
changed&lt;br/&gt;our understanding of the world. The influence of the
studies&lt;br/&gt;in dynamical systems nowadays goes as far as meteorology,
&lt;br/&gt;biology, and computer science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;