* 0411307
* Framework for Designing, Evaluating, and Deploying Global-scale Adaptive Networked Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Amin Vahdat, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2008
* USD 345,636.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research
&lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
0411307&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Vahdat, Amin M&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
University of California, San Diego&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE: Framework for
Designing, Evaluating, and Deploying Global-scale Adaptive Networked
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, designing and building networked and
distributed systems remains fraught with difficulty. Yet, addressing these
challenges is becoming increasingly important as an ever larger fraction of the
world's infrastructure comes to rely upon networked systems. Challenges faced by
networked systems include failures, lack of fate-sharing among sys-tem
components, highly variable communication patterns, race conditions, difficulty
in reproducing bugs, asynchrony, security concerns, etc. While the advent of
higher-level programming languages such as Java has raised the level of
abstraction and eased this burden, most programmers still face the task of
reinventing the appropriate techniques for dealing with asynchronous, failure-
prone network environments known by a handful of elite
programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is exploring the design and
implementation of a high-level language and runtime environment for building and
operating robust, high-performance, and highly-available global-scale
distributed systems. Target applications include Internet-scale routing
protocols, planetary-scale network testbeds, and computational Grids. This work
aims to holistically support the entire distributed system life-cycle from
design to de-ployment and operation. The overall goals of this work are to
effect a qualitative shift in: i) the time required to build, debug, and deploy
robust distributed systems, ii) the ease and accuracy of translating high-level
policy to low-level system specifications and con-figurations, and iii) the
ability to compare the utility of competing systems architectures in a fair and
consistent manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D. Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program
Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;June 29,
2004&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;