* 0411254
* Discontinuous Galerkin and Hybridized Methods for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Bernardo Cockburn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 262,314.00

This project is devoted to devising and studying, theoretically as well as
computationally, efficient methods for numerically solving problems modeled by
partial differential equations. We focus our efforts on the different
difficulties raised by the application of the so-called discontinuous Galerkin
method and the hybridized mixed methods to a variety of problems of practical
interest. The applications are to the evolution of surfaces and to navigation of
robots in arbitrary terrains (Hamilton-Jacobi equations), incompressible fluid
flow (Navier-Stokes equations), structural mechanics with special emphasis on
shells (elasticity equations), to electromagnetic wave propagation (Maxwell
equations), and to Darcy flow in porous media (second-order elliptic
equations).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For all of the above problems, we consider the
problem of how to obtain highly accurate computer simulations. In many of these
problems, the emphasis will be put on the suitable devising of the discontinuous
Galerkin and hybridized methods so that they become more robust and efficient
than previously known methods. In others, the effort will be concentrated in the
efficient control of the quality of the simulation. Indeed, since the exact
solution of these complex problems is not known, to guarantee a given accuracy
of the simulation, special techniques have to be devised in order to assess its
quality. Moreover, these techniques can be employed to automatically let the
computer know when and where to increase or decrease the computational effort to
obtain the simulation; in this way, the efficiency of its computation is
significantly enhanced. Discontinuous Galerkin methods are particularly well
suited for this approach.