* 0411875
* Dissertation Research: Population Genetics and Historical Biogeography of Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Barbara Schaal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2006
* USD 14,000.00

As human beings continue to disturb their environments, they impact not only the
distribution of plant and animal species, but also the distribution of
individuals (and thus their genomes) within these species. Many "weedy" species
can frequently be moved long distances intentionally or unintentionally by
humans, and it is important to understand the extent to which human activity can
shuffle the gene pool of a given species. Earlier studies have shown that
genomes in the plant model organism thale cress (Arabidopsis thaliana) may be
geographically shuffled in Europe, an area experiencing relatively high levels
of human activity, but geographically structured in central Asia, with
relatively low levels of human activity. This study will identify different
Arabidopsis thaliana genomes by typing genetic variation, and will examine the
geographic location of these genomes in order to understand both natural and
human impacts on its gene pool. Natural impacts include the contraction and
expansion of Arabidopsis thaliana's range during the advance and retreat of
Pleistocene glaciers; human impacts include the human caused movement described
above.

Broader impacts of this study will include highlighting the extent to which
human activities can affect other species, a critical issue as we continue to
profoundly alter environments. This study will also enhance Arabidopsis thaliana
as a model organism by identifying geographic areas in which its gene pool has
been minimally impacted by humans, and providing seed from these areas to the
global research community.