* 0411760
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecosystem Drivers of Disease Emergence: Linking Aquatic Eutrophication and Amphibian malformations
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Stephen Carpenter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Parasites and pathogens are among the most common members of most ecosystems and
influence community structure, food webs, and even evolution. In recent decades,
however, numerous diseases have emerged or re-emerged, frequently owing to
changes in the environment of hosts and their parasites. In this study, I
explore the direct and indirect causes of one such disease - widespread
observations of severe limb deformities in North American amphibian populations.
Many of these malformations are caused by a parasite (Ribeiroia ondatrae) that
burrows into the developing limbs of larval amphibians. However, reasons for the
apparent increase in infection remain unclear. I test the hypothesis that
nutrient runoff into aquatic systems associated with agriculture and cattle
production is responsible for promoting parasite infection. Ribeiroia has a
complex life cycle involving passage among snails, amphibians, and birds. Excess
nutrients (eutrophication) are expected to increase the numbers of snails that
support the parasite, leading to more parasites in amphibians and therefore more
deformities. By studying these relationships in the field, conducting ecological
experiments, and using mathematical models, I investigate how increased nutrient
inputs - a global problem in lakes, ponds, and rivers - affect the parasite, its
hosts, and the level of deformities. Taken together, these approaches may offer
new insights into the drivers of amphibian malformations while helping to
advance an ecosystem-level approach to the study of disease.