* 0411935
* Acquisition of an integrated scanning probe, scanning laser, optical microscope
* GEO,EAR
* 11/20/2003,02/28/2006
* Steven Lower, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2006
* USD 44,813.00

0132433&lt;br/&gt;Lower&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides partial support
for a state-of-the-art instrument that integrates optical micros-copy, confocal
laser scanning microscopy, scanning probe microscopy, and optical tweezers. It
will be housed in the P.I.'s laboratory at the Ohio State University, where it
will be a primary tool for the P.I.'s research programs in geomicrobiology,
biogeochemistry, and nanoscale sci-ence. This instrument will be capable of
collecting force measurements concurrent with optical observations as well as
fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Further, it will allow the simultaneous
collection of atomic force microscopy (or scanning near-field optical
microscopy) and laser scanning microscopy images. The applications of this
instrument include for example: the study of fundamental intra- and inter-
molecular forces between biomolecules on living cells and material surfaces (or
other cells); identification of cell wall biomolecules which interact
specifically with particular minerals or cells; the study of the properties and
localization of biomolecules on microbial surfaces; the study of mineral
dissolution and growth including biomineralization; investigations of metal (or
organic acid) sorption to mineral surfaces; the development of nanolithography
techniques; and educational outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;