* 0411235
* Hands-on Haptics:  Critical Infrastructure for Mechanical Engineering Curriculum Enhancement
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Marcia O'Malley, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen A. Alfano
* 06/30/2007
* USD 100,000.00

Engineering-Mechanical (56) This Adaptation and Implementation project is
improving the effectiveness of laboratory exercises by adapting the use of a
haptic paddle (a device that allows users to interact via a sense of touch with
virtual environments) in a mechanical engineering modeling dynamic systems
course. The project is using the successful Haptic Paddle Laboratory series
developed at Stanford University and currently used in undergraduate courses at
John Hopkins University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is: (1) Improving
cohesiveness of course and lab content to deepen student conceptual
understanding of system dynamics concepts; (2) Demonstrating that haptic virtual
learning increases student's ability to apply conceptual knowledge to real-world
systems, and (3) Improving understanding of critical system dynamics topics in a
cost-effective way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are investigating how the
haptic paddle can serve as a real electromechanical system with known parameters
and how to use the haptic paddle as a tool to interact with virtual mechanical
systems using LabView, Matlab simulations, and system interfacing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is demonstrating how the materials can be
applied to a required course that is present in most undergraduate mechanical
engineering curricula. Collaboration with colleagues, including faculty at a
neighboring institution at the University of Houston that serves a substantial
number of Hispanic students, is demonstrating the effectiveness of the lab
series in teaching system modeling and system dynamics concepts to
underrepresented classes of students. The dissemination plan includes
presentation of a method that demonstrates how to adapt and improve the Haptic
Paddle Laboratory series. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These multi-sensory labs are
closely tied to course concepts. Assessment of student learning, and the
effectiveness of the outreach activities to the University of Houston and
prospective Rice students are embedded throughout the project. &lt;br/&gt;