* 0411920
* Integral Equation Methods for Variable Coefficient Elliptic Problems and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Jingfang Huang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2008
* USD 172,000.00

The focus of this proposal is on the mathematical analysis and efficient
implementation of integral equation based methods (IEM) for the solution of
physically important, spatially inhomogeneous or "variable coefficient" elliptic
equations. These arise in applications which require the modeling of complex
fluid flows, such as combustion or ground water pollution. They also arise in
the design of novel fluidic Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS), as well as
solid-state semiconductor devices. Over the last decade, IEMs have proven to be
very successful and are now widely used in electromagnetic, elastic, and fluid
dynamic modeling when the governing equation is of "constant coefficient" type.
In order to address more general, variable coefficient problems, we represent
the solution as a volume integral using the Green's function for a simple,
nearby problem convolved with an unknown density. Inserting this representation
into the original elliptic equation leads to a linear integral equation. A
principal advantage of this approach is that it avoids solving the sparse but
poorly conditioned linear systems that result from direct discretization of the
differential equation. Discretization of the linear integral equation leads,
instead, to a well conditioned dense linear system, for which Krylov subspace
methods converge quickly. Historically, the disadvantage of using iterative
methods with integral equations was the cost of computing the dense matrix-
vector multiplications which are needed at every step. With the advent of the
fast multipole method (FMM), however, these can be evaluated in optimal time.
Nevertheless, in order for the method to be robust and practical, several issues
remain. In particular, effective preconditioning strategies for problems with
strong gradients in the material properties are not well developed. Preliminary
analysis of some multilevel approaches for model problems are
promising.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our planned research program combines classical
mathematics (PDEs, integral equations, potential theory) with scientific
computing research (fast summation, iterative solvers, adaptive mesh refinement,
domain decomposition) and important applications (porous media and variable
density flows). The interdisciplinary nature of the work provides fertile ground
for training graduate students as computational scientists. Experience gained in
the application areas mentioned will have broad impact, since the techniques
created can be transferred to many other application areas in the environmental,
geophysical, biological, and engineering sciences.