* 0411826
* Facilitating Group Scientific Inquiry Using Science Museum Exhibits
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Kathleen McLean, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,256,847.00

This study (1) creates a genre of exhibit-based, group scientific inquiry
programs for general and low-income museum visitors, (2) determines key program
characteristics that lead to learning, (3) conducts a controlled experiment to
assess the levels and nature of actual transfer of such skills to other exhibits
and to visitors' lives beyond the museum visit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of
researchers and educators creates, revises, and studies Exhibit Investigations
for general and underserved visitors at the Exploratorium. During
Investigations, educators coach visitors in inquiry skills that are heuristics
for engaging with exhibits or physical phenomena beyond the museum. Pre- and
post-assessments of learner interactions with a novel exhibit are recorded and
analyzed for evidence of transfer of the inquiry skills introduced during the
Investigations. Exit and follow-up interviews determine long-term impact. Two
versions of the Investigations-with and without mnemonic cards summarizing
inquiry skills-are compared with two control conditions in a randomized block
design with four conditions and 50 groups per condition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The project broadens the
focus of current research on the learning of scientific inquiry skills beyond
the school setting. A science museum with engaging and interactive exhibits
constitutes an ideal and understudied setting for research on inquiry learning
by groups. This project&lt;br/&gt;. describes the nature of inquiry learning in
an informal learning environment &lt;br/&gt;. generates principles for using
audience diversity to enhance learning identifies specific inquiry skills that
are relevant and effective in this environment&lt;br/&gt;. assesses levels of
transfer of such skills by visitors&lt;br/&gt;. compares such transfer to
control groups receiving no mediation or content-based
mediation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exhibit-based, group inquiries adapt best
practices from formal education for use in the multigenerational, free-choice
learning environment of a museum. The research yields a series of effective
programs and a set of theoretical principles that account for their
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Project results and
learning principles will be disseminated to academic, museum, and lay audiences.
In total, the project serves approximately 1,000 Exploratorium visitors. The
project will is presented at national and local conferences such as AERA, ASTC,
VSA, and AAM, reaching museum researchers, practitioners, and a broad
educational research community. Articles are submitted to peer-review journals
in the fields of museum studies and science education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project updates and the final report are posted on the
Exploratorium Web site (visited by 15 million annually). Outcomes are
disseminated to the Center for Informal Learning and Schools (CILS), an
initiative of the Exploratorium, Kings College London, and UC Santa Cruz. A non-
technical publication, distributed through the Association of Science-Technology
Centers (ASTC), informs science centers around the world.&lt;br/&gt;