* 0411468
* Pull-Strengthen-Push Undergraduate Program
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Connie Leggett, Albany State University
* Continuing Grant
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 07/31/2009
* USD 2,499,469.00

Through the NSF Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP), Albany State University (ASU), will implement a comprehensive
project to strengthen the STEM programs based on a Pull-Strengthen-Push model.
The goal of the Pull-Strengthen-Push project is to significantly increase the
number of minority students enrolling in, and successfully completing STEM
programs that will prepare them to pursue post baccalaureate experiences in STEM
disciplines. This project aims for a 15 percent increase in the number of
minority students who enter STEM disciplines, a reduction of the attrition rate
of students in the gateway courses by 10 percent, and an increase in STEM
graduate school enrollment.

The Pull-Strengthen-Push model will address the needs of minority students
through early intervention and excellence in teaching and learning project.
Students will be pulled from the four high schools in the Dougherty County
School System through activities targeting potential STEM majors as early as the
9th grade. An extensive move to totally embrace the science and mathematics
departments of these high schools will involve working with teachers to enhance
the STEM curriculum, especially the Advanced Placement (AP) courses and
providing the resources to offer AP courses where not available. Academic
assistance, career counseling, and research experiences will be afforded these
students during both the academic year and the summers. A similar effort will be
made for two-year colleges to encourage transfer to the STEM programs at ASU.
Efforts to strengthen the STEM curriculum will build on past success. A new
strategy, student oriented comprehensive knowledge enhancement technique
(SOCKET), will be employed. Finally, the project will incorporate a new approach
to push STEM students into graduate school. Activities include collaborative
agreements with graduate institutions, and graduate school preparation plans for
students at the start of their junior year. All STEM students will benefit from
these collaborations through seminars, graduate school visitations, and GRE
preparation workshops.

The intellectual merit of this project includes: the infusion of scientific
research into the learning process in grade levels 9-16, improved preparation
for Calculus and General Chemistry/Physics of students entering the university,
inquiry based STEM curriculum at the university, and an enhanced STEM culture
within the university and the local high school district.

The broader impact of the project includes: the enhanced STEM programs at the
local high schools and the high school science teacher and ASU collaborations,
an increased number of underrepresented minorities with STEM degrees seeking
terminal and professional degrees, and the higher educational level of the
community will result in a greater economic power within the community.

