* 0411078
* Problem-based Learning through Coordinated Laboratory Experiences in Biochemistry and Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Natalie Coe, Green Mountain College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 39,841.00

Biology (61) This CCLI A&I project creates a capstone experience for biology
majors that reinforces the institution's goal of preparing biology students with
the knowledge, skills, and courage needed to act responsibly as global citizens.
The project consists of a two-semester sequence of courses that builds research
skills and stimulates independent research, with student initiatives having the
potential of being transformed into workable, community-backed conservation
plans. Biochemistry is the first course in the sequence. Adapted from a
laboratory directed by Janet Anderson at the University of Minnesota, it targets
hypothesis development, primary literature synthesis and comprehension, and
acquisition of commonly used molecular laboratory techniques and procedures. In
the second course, Evolution, students are guided through a semester-long
research project in which students apply their biochemistry skills to questions
regarding the population genetics of mammals such as the fisher (Martes
pennanti). An adaptation of a project-based, cooperative, student-directed
course in cell biology at the University of Washington, the course also
emphasizes leadership and collaborative research skills. Students apply
knowledge across these courses and synthesize their understanding of molecular
and cellular level processes upwards to population and evolutionary processes.
The sequence involves a fundamental re-organization of the courses' laboratory
experiences, connecting a more traditional lecture with non-traditional
laboratory, and tying the two courses into a coherent sequence of learning
goals. These modifications are designed to increase students' active engagement
in learning and to better prepare students for independent undergraduate and
graduate research.