* 0411464
* Enhanced Communication and Collaboration among STEM Disciplines through Undergraduate Curriculum Development and Research Opportunities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Adriane Ludwick, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,498,843.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation (NSF) through the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP),
Tuskegee University will implement the project called Enhanced Communication and
Collaboration among STEM Disciplines through Undergraduate Curriculum
Development and Research Opportunities. The project builds on the successes of
the previous Tuskegee HBCU-UP award. The project focuses on curriculum
development across disciplines. Faculty teams will address how to blend aspects
of two or more related disciplines into courses of each curriculum or into joint
courses. To serve as examples of successfully working across disciplines, these
faculty teams will develop a series of projects to provide very specific goals
to be achieved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teams of the project will focus on the
following. &lt;br/&gt;- A pilot seminar, initially for introductory-level
biology students, whose goals are increased mathematical problem-solving skills
and exposure to computer tools and strategies crucial to modern biosciences;
&lt;br/&gt;- A bioinformatics program to bring together students from various
disciplines; &lt;br/&gt;- Development of an aerospace science engineering flight
simulation environment to teach STEM concepts and offer opportunities to build
upon current student interdisciplinary research in engineering and psychology;
&lt;br/&gt;- Enhancement of the computer science curriculum in the areas of
security concepts, ethical questions relating to computer security, and real-
world training with the Campus Technology Department; &lt;br/&gt;- An honors
research/curriculum program in organic chemistry (ROCKETS); and &lt;br/&gt;- A
transition program (Bridge Program), a precollege program for promising high
school graduates, using computer simulations and modeling as a means to enhance
critical thinking through visual applications and to practice problem-solving in
a specific STEM area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research by undergraduates is an
integral part of this approach. Research will be designed into the
interdisciplinary curriculum enhancements being developed by each of the teams.
Additionally, academic year and summer research by undergraduates will become an
expected part of the program at Tuskegee University. To assure the coordination
of this internal and external research, a Director of Undergraduate Research
position will be established. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
these proposed activities is the development of realistic models for teaching
across disciplines. The approach for this development includes the use of
interdisciplinary critical thinking modules, using simulation and modeling
environments. The introductory-level pilot seminar in biology provides a model
for the initiation of interdisciplinary programs at the undergraduate level.
This seminar establishes the foundation for the focus on bioinformatics at the
undergraduate level. The disciplines of biology, chemistry, computer science,
and mathematics will be involved in the development of the bioinformatics
program. Similarly, the enhancement of the computer science curriculum with
information security concepts and the interaction between the Aerospace Science
Engineering and Psychology Departments will provide new learning environments
for undergraduate students. The research aspect of the project will be inclusive
and provide a model for involving undergraduates in research at relatively small
institutions. The involvement will be internal and external and will be
coordinated by a Director of Undergraduate Research. All these aspects can be
used as models for other Tuskegee University STEM courses not considered in this
project, as well as for STEM programs at all universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is designed to provide significant impact on
students in the freshman and sophomore years. The foundation courses in
mathematics for the Bridge Program will be applied to the academic year courses
in first year college mathematics. This action will impact all STEM students at
Tuskegee University. The pilot seminar in biology impacts all biology majors.
The intent is for the interdisciplinary approach to impact all STEM students at
Tuskegee University. The research focus, from ROCKETS to the activities of the
Director of Undergraduate Research, is intended, also, to impact all Tuskegee
STEM students. The upper level courses in computer science, aerospace science
engineering, and psychology will impact the advanced students in the respective
majors and their view of their major. Additionally, the activities of the teams
will be presented to the STEM faculty of Tuskegee University, presented at
professional meetings, and published in refereed journals.