* 0411449
* HBCU-UP: STEM Academy at University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Charles Colen, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Continuing Grant
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,552,700.00

Through the NSF Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP), the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff (UAPB) will
implement a project called STEM Academy. The project will focus on four areas:
recruitment and retention; faculty development; curriculum redesign and
technology infusion; and research infrastructure. The target student population
includes University students as well as high school students. The proposed STEM
Academy is a comprehensive program that builds on the mission of the University.
As part of an HBCU-UP planning grant, a multidisciplinary University team
including STEM faculty and administrators as well as University STEM students,
high school students and teachers, and professionals working in STEM areas
guided planning for this comprehensive HBCU-UP program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Research is an essential part of the
STEM Academy and will be a central focus on the development of STEM curricula,
the recruitment and retention of students in STEM areas, and the continuity of
infrastructure support for STEM Academy activities. Faculty professional
development is seamlessly linked to the success of students in the STEM Academy.
Workshops, seminars, and professional development opportunities will be provided
to all STEM faculty. Faculty will engage in pedagogy that will engage students
with multiple learning styles in order to retain students in STEM areas.
Pedagogical training will be provided to the STEM faculty with STEM Academy
faculty serving as mentors to junior faculty and as mentors and tutors to STEM
undergraduates. Each STEM area will have a Team Faculty Leader that will offer
support to students in different disciplines and facilitate mentor-student
relationship development. Faculty will be trained in the development of web-
based courses, mentoring and tutoring students, e-mail listserv for
dissemination of information and showcasing successes, and will be linked to
research projects at partnering institutions. The STEM Academy research
activities will be a collaborative effort with institutions such as the National
Center for Toxicological Research at Jefferson, AR; the National Rice Research
Center at Stuttgart, AR; Jackson State University, Arkansas State University,
and the University of Arkansas Medical Sciences. First-year students will
participate in a 10-week summer program that will prepare them for their major
courses. STEM courses will be infused with technology and research activities
providing new opportunities for both faculty and students to benefit from STEM
Academy activities. New courses will also be established (e.g., Introduction to
Research). Each year, STEM faculty will receive competitive research funding
from the STEM Academy serving as research seed funds to stimulate the
development of sustainable research programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The STEM Academy will increase the number of students admitted to the
University and majoring in STEM areas by 10% annually. In addition the STEM
Academy will increase the number of STEM undergraduates who complete their
degrees by 50% over the duration of the five-year funding period. By integrating
research and education and infusing research funds to stimulate faculty research
the STEM Academy will also involve 75% of the University STEM faculty and all
STEM students in research activities over the duration of the five-year program.
While focused on a delineated population, this project will have a broader
impact by refining the STEM curricula through the addition of review and
practice sessions, laboratory upgrades, and the addition of a mathematics lab
for teaching and research along with the infusion of technology, cooperative
learning, and writing in the STEM disciplines. These interventions will improve
the science research, teaching and learning environment, not only for STEM
majors but also for all University students who take STEM courses as major or
general education requirements. Unique to the STEM Academy is outreach to
regional high school students. The transition from high school to college will
be specifically addressed by STEM Academy programs to ensure that students are
integrated into the University community prior to starting their first year thus
ensuring that these important and often under-served students are not lost but
are provided every opportunity to gain entry into STEM careers. The successful
participation of undergraduate, and even high school students, in the STEM
Academy will help to reduce the national under-representation of minorities,
especially African Americans, in STEM careers.