* 0411844
* SGER:       Weibull Failure Criterion for MEMS Component with Stress Singularity
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Stephen Ekwaro-Osire, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;0411844&lt;br/&gt;PI - Okwaro-Osire, Texas Tech
University&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;SGER: Weibull Failure Criterion
for MEMS Component with Stress Singularity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivation and
Objectives&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is concerned with the probabilistic analysis
and design of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), specifically with the
application of the Weibull failure criterion to components with stress
singularities or high stress gradients. The proposed research addresses a
critical aspect of MEMS reliability. This is an important issue since MEMS are
finding extensive use in the critical areas where reliability is paramount: the
medical field and homeland security. MEMS materials have been shown to behave in
a brittle manner and to exhibit the size effect , thus the choice of the Weibull
theory, which is based on the size effect of brittle materials. Additionally,
the etching process and the nature of MEMS materials often result in sharp
notches in the manufactured components. Furthermore, many MEMS components
consist of multi-layers. Both the sharp notches and multi-layer interfaces
create stress singularities thus the singularity problem. Separately, each of
these Mechanics problems has been researched extensively, but sparse work has
been conducted on the combined problem of Weibull theory and singularity. In
fact, it has been noted that applying the traditional Weibull theory in
situations of high stress gradients can underestimate the critical flaw size
(consequently the strength) in the component. Thus, the motivation of the
proposed research is the need for a useable (for an engineer) approach anchored
in the Weibull theory to address singularity that occurs in a whole class of
engineering problems. Thus the objective of the proposed work is twofold;
namely, develop preliminary theoretical results (that will be a basis for a
robust Weibull failure criterion for MEMS component with stress singularity) and
to present a preliminary design of a novel testing apparatus (to be used in
verifying the theoretical results at a later phase of
research).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will advance knowledge by developing a robust Weibull theory to
describe the probability of failure of brittle components with stress
singularities due to material interfaces and sharp notches. The results obtained
in the proposed research will be preliminary work in a largely untested idea.
This makes the proposed work an ideal candidate for an SGER grant. Furthermore,
the PI intends to use the results obtained from the SGER grant as a catalyst for
a more extensive project, which will involve verifying the developed theory
using a novel testing instrumentation on MEMS
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
fully integrates research activities into the teaching of probabilistic aspects
of engineering to undergraduate and graduate students. The plan provides for the
active research participation of both undergraduate and graduate students
(particularly those from underrepresented groups) at the various stages and the
level of the research activities. The students will be encouraged to present
their results at professional meetings. The PI introduced and coined the
pedagogic approach "Pan-mentoring" which relates to engineering instruction at
college level. He will continue developing and adopting effective pedagogic
techniques for teaching engineering. This research plan provides for the
strengthening of collaboration with students and/or faculty who are members of
underrepresented groups at Texas Tech University. Furthermore, contacts have
been initiated with faculty at Prairie View A&amp;M University (one of
Historically Black Colleges &amp; Universities) and at the University of Texas
at San Antonio (one of Hispanic Serving Institutions). In regard to
collaboration with the government, the proposed research activity is of immense
interest to NASA Glenn Research Center, specifically the Life Prediction
Branch.&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed research activity will not be
limited to MEMS applications, but could extend to&lt;br/&gt;applications in
ceramic-to-metal bonds, thin-film coatings, and thermal loading of ceramic
turbines.&lt;br/&gt;