* 0411293
* Introduction of GC/MS throughout the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Garon Smith, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 40,280.00

Chemistry (12) The Department of Chemistry is acquiring a gas chromatograph/mass
spectrometer that is dedicated to hands-on learning experiences for students at
all levels. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Introductory general
education students are observing demonstrations and collecting and analyzing
data. The instrument is incorporated into the chemistry major in a spiral
curriculum: chemistry majors use the instrument in ever more sophisticated
experiments as courses progress from lower division organic chemistry to senior
research projects. In a systematic sequence of experiments, students use the
instrument to identify reaction products, quantify contaminant levels, elucidate
reaction mechanisms, assay product purity and determine isotopic abundances of
heavy metals. Experiments are being adapted from the educational literature in
order to design a careful progression of experiences that expose students to the
wide range of types of problems that can be investigated with the help of
results obtained from a GC/MS. The instrument also is supporting development of
undergraduate programs in environmental chemistry and forensic science and is
enhancing outreach activities to local high schools and to tribal colleges in
Montana, again by adapting experiments from the educational literature and from
EPA protocols. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This project involves
curricular improvements for non-science majors, chemistry majors, and other
science majors, and includes components directed at student recruitment and
outreach to high school students and teachers. A significant part of our
recruitment of new majors dovetails with our outreach to regional high school
teachers who supervise student research projects utilizing GC/MS. Many of the
high school projects deal with local issues and help portray the service role of
the university to the community. Use of the instrument in an REU program is
enhancing research experiences for Native Americans and underrepresented
students. The instrument is important to the development of undergraduate
concentrations in environmental and forensic science within the chemistry major.
The forensic science program is addressing national and regional needs for
trained forensic scientists. Experiments and experiences with the introductory
programs, outreach programs, spiral curriculum and new concentrations will be
widely disseminated, enabling adaptation and implementation of project results
in other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;