* 0411144
* Shocker Mindstorms:  Engineering for Undergraduate Non-Engineers using Lego Mindstorms
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Larry Paarmann, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 99,743.00

Engineering - Other (59)

This project is working to enhance the understanding of engineering methods and
concepts by non-engineering undergraduates with a special emphasis on
undergraduates that are future K-12 teachers. The project is adapting existing
Lego materials to develop and teach a course presenting cross-disciplinary
engineering concepts and practices. Modules are being developed for six
engineering disciplines, and student teams are using the LEGO Mindstorms product
to learn and practice the engineering design process. Efforts are underway to
establish the course as an approved General Education course and also get it
included in the Teacher Education Program. The evaluation effort, involving both
formative and summative assessment, is being conducted by a separate research
and evaluation center at the PI's institution. Student surveys and logs, special
rubrics, and classroom observations are being used to evaluate changes in the
students' knowledge and attitudes. Dissemination plans include journal and
conference papers, a website, and a CD. The PIs also are planning a workshop for
faculty members at other institutions and have commitments for involvement from
four national leaders in the use of the LEGO materials in teaching engineering
concepts.