* 0411180
* Implementation of the Learning Factory Model in the Montana Tech General Engineering Program (Butte MT)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Richard Donovan,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

The Department of General Engineering at Montana Tech of the University of
Montana in partnership with the Rocky Mountain Agile Virtual Enterprises
Technical Development Center (RAVE TDC) are adapting and implementing the
Product and Process Realization curricula associated with the Learning Factory
Model. This educational model was originally developed by the University of
Pennsylvania, the University of Puerto Rico and the University of Washington.
This project is designed to enhance the economic well being of the state of
Montana by supporting its light manufacturing industry with innovative
educational programs; improve STEM education by developing experiential learning
programs; and overcome engineering education competency gaps that have been
identified by the Society of Manufacturing Engineers and others. The overall
program of study is directed at and supported by a wide range of constituencies
including undergraduate engineering students, technology students, manufacturing
professionals, high school students and high school math, science and technology
teachers. The program has a robust outreach program that is connecting the
educational enterprise of Montana with national as well as local technology
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is that it
is developing effective and innovative educational programs in design and
manufacturing. These programs emphasize multi-disciplinary team building and
hands on learning within a modern fabrication facility. The project team has a
broad range of competencies and experiences in manufacturing, design, business
management and developing complex collaborations. The proposed work is building
upon two years worth of effort by the principal investigator to develop a
flexible manufacturing research facility within the state of
Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is having a broader impact not only
at Montana Tech but also the entire Montana University System. The proposed
program is designed to establish a curriculum in which students learn and
discover fundamental science and engineering concepts through active learning
models that involve extensive development of new products. RAVE
Manufacturing/Prototyping Center (RAVE MPC) supports the project by providing a
precision fabrication facility. The proposed educational programs will support
the RAVE MPC by developing students capable of effectively working in a modern,
precision fabrication facility. This combination will allow the RAVE MPC to
become the premier fabricator of scientific and educational instrumentation in
the state of Montana and therefore support statewide research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;