* 0411344
* Re-Modeling for Algebra-based Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Eric Brewe, Hawaii Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2007
* USD 50,000.00

Physics (13) Hawaii Pacific University is in the initial stages of reform of the
algebra-based physics course. During the first year of reform, algebra-based
physics has been converted from separate lab and lecture classes to a studio
format, with lab and lecture integrated into one course. Modeling Instruction,
as described by Hestenes (see for example, Am. J. Phys. 55(5),
&lt;br/&gt;440-454, (1987)), applies a studio-based approach to a model-centered
curriculum where the focus is on the process of building and using models.
Introduction of Modeling Instruction in the algebra-based curriculum is an on-
going effort. Accordingly, this project is supporting adaptation of studio
physics and Modeling Instruction with the assistance of the technological
capabilities of the physics department. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
existing university modeling curricula, which is written for calculus-based
physics, is being adapted to algebra-based physics and to the particular needs
of students at Hawaii Pacific University. This project includes funds for
technological and curricular development and is providing compelling data about
the differences between low-tech and high-tech studio physics classes. These
data are useful to physics instructors considering the development of high-tech
classrooms. The project is also providing evidence of the applicability of
modeling instruction to algebra-based physics classes. Often, algebra-based
physics affects a greater number of students than the calculus-based course;
this effort extends benefits of modeling instruction to a greater number of
students. Finally, this combination of Studio-based instruction with the
Modeling curriculum provides a template for developing algebra-based
instruction.