* 0411486
* STEM Connections HBCU-UP
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Richard Miller, Benedict College
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,109,674.00

Through the NSF Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP), Benedict College will implement a comprehensive project
called STEM Connections which includes: Support for enrichment and extension of
STEM student experiences; Acquisition of instrumentation for curriculum design
and delivery; and Faculty development activities that encourage research and the
use of technology and other creative methodologies. The project activities were
developed during an HBCU-UP planning grant. STEM Connections overall goal is to
increase the number and highlight connectivity between scientists,
technologists, engineers and mathematicians to strengthen the National STEM
workforce. This program recruits, develops, and connects participants locally
and nationally - both students and faculty, beginning as early as high school
and through the undergraduate years and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: STEM Connections activities
include: (1) exposure for high school students to STEM with an opportunity to
earn dual college credit in their junior and senior high school years; (2)
sustainable tracking, monitoring, incentive and intervention activities
targeting STEM undergraduate class attendance, satisfactory academic progress,
and participation in performance enhancement offerings; (3) early and continuous
involvement in activities that facilitate successful graduate school application
and matriculation; (4) the establishment of a new discipline-integrated
instructional team and student cohort approach to undergraduate studies in
computer and electrical engineering, adapting concepts from SC ATE, a NSF funded
engineering technology initiative; and (5) faculty/student collaborations on
research that enriches the undergraduate experience, provides professional
development opportunities for junior and senior faculty, and connects
faculty/students in a manner that promotes networking with renown scientists for
collaboration beyond the undergraduate years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: STEM Connections activities will: (1) significantly increase the number
of undergraduates entering the STEM majors; (2) retain STEM majors through the
completion of their bachelor of science degree - thereby reversing the current
low retention trend with emphasis on success in gate-keeping courses; (3)
improve preparation of STEM students for graduate studies as measured by
performance on standardized examinations, increase the number of STEM students
participating in internships, summer research and other enhancement programs,
and increase in the number of successful Benedict applicants to STEM graduate
programs; (4) increase the number of computer and electrical engineers in the
Nations workforce, with the implementation of a discipline- integrated
curriculum which infuses laboratory technology directly in the lecture
environment; and (5) increase the number of undergraduate STEM majors that enter
the professional arena and graduate school with recognized participation and
exposure to ground-breaking research, as measured by laboratory assistance and
investigative work resulting in national publications and presentations under
the mentorship and as apprentice collaborators with STEM faculty. &lt;br/&gt;