* 0411394
* Student Research Initiative with Modeling and Computational Science
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Doyle Temple, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 02/28/2010
* USD 3,016,141.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation (NSF) through the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP),
Hampton University will implement a comprehensive program that will: 1) enhance
curricula in modeling and computational science; 2) provide a summer program for
entering freshmen; 3) provide research opportunities for undergraduate students;
4) provide professional development for faculty in the areas of mentoring,
technology, and modeling; 5) support student scholars. Hampton University will
continue to support the Integrated Learning Environment that was established
during their first HBCU-UP project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
project will ensure that undergraduate students have the tools to be
academically and professionally competitive. As highlighted in a 1999 National
Academy of Science report, undergraduate students must possess (1) contemporary
skills that allow them to use computer applications, (2) foundational concepts
that enable them to demonstrate a basic understanding of the principles and
concepts of computing, and (3) demonstrate intellectual skills including the
ability to apply information technology to particular situations, and to use
this technology to solve new problems. The implementation of the Student
Research Initiative with Modeling and Computational Science will address these
academic challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The HBCU-UP project
targets biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering, mathematics, physics,
and psychology, where women and minorities are underrepresented. By providing
students with training and tools in modeling and computational science, and
providing research opportunities that will supplement their selected program of
study, students will be better equipped to succeed in graduate school and the
workforce. The HBCU-UP project will enhance undergraduate research in the
sciences and engineering and increase the number of women and African-Americans
who pursue advanced degrees and careers in STEM fields. The Student Research
Initiative with Modeling and Computational Science project can serve as a model
for other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;