* 0411149
* Bringing Low Power Reconfigurable Analog Signal Processing to Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Sung Lim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

Modern advances in reconfigurable analog technologies are allowing field-
programmable analog arrays (FPAAs) to dramatically reduce the power consumption
while growing in size, flexibility and usefulness. The goal of this project is
to develop the first mapping algorithm for floating-gate-based large-scale
FPAAs. The target FPAA device consists of floating-gate transistors, which are
standard pFET devices whose gate terminals are not connected to signals except
through capacitors. Because the gate terminal is well insulated from external
signals, the floating gate can maintain a permanent charge. The computational
logic in the FPAA is organized in a compact computational analog block (CAB)
that consists of op-amps, transistors, multiplier, programmable capacitors, and
filters. CABs are tiled across the chip in a regular mesh-type architecture with
busses and local interconnects between them. The major parasitic effects on FPAA
chips are due to parasitic resistance and capacitance on FPAA interconnects.
Therefore, the primary objective during mapping is to minimize the total number
of wireless and switches involved in each interconnect. The mapping process is
divided into three: CAP clustering, CAP placement, and FPAA routing. The CAB
clustering algorithm tries to group analog components in the given circuit into
CAB clusters under the device and wire constraints. During CAP placement, each
CAB cluster is assigned to a unique CAB slot in the given FPAA architecture so
that the wirelength, congestion, and performance degradation are minimized
simultaneously. The FPAA router initially routes each interconnect by the
shortest path while ignoring any overuse of routing resources. Then it
sequentially performs ripping-up and re-routing every connection to minimize
overuse of routing resources in the routing solution. The proposed mapping
technology is being transferred to a startup company, and tools and training
materials are made widely available through an on-line streaming video course.
Graduate students involved are gaining experience in digital/analog signal
processing, mixed-signal system design, and physical layout automation
algorithms.