* 0411227
* Search for Constitutive Relations for Micromechanics Modeling of Model Nanocrystalline Materials: A Multiscale Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Mo Li, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/2006
* USD 160,000.00

===========================ABSTRACT=============================&lt;br/&gt;Nanoc
rystalline materials with characteristic grain size of 1-100 nanometers
&lt;br/&gt;have been synthesized and investigated extensively in the last
decade. Small &lt;br/&gt;sized grains and large volume fraction of atoms sitting
on grain or interface &lt;br/&gt;boundaries characterize these materials. They
exhibit many unusual mechanical &lt;br/&gt;properties, making them by far one of
only a few nanoscale material systems &lt;br/&gt;that have potential to be used
as large-scale structural material in civil, &lt;br/&gt;mechanical, transport,
and industrial applications. However, as the dimensions &lt;br/&gt;of the grain
size are pushed down to nanometer scale, the degrees of difficulty
&lt;br/&gt;multiply in determining and understanding the mechanical properties
and their &lt;br/&gt;relations with microstructures. As a result, quantitative
constitutive &lt;br/&gt;relations for various mechanical properties and their
relation with &lt;br/&gt;microstructures have not been fully established. This
work aims at filling this &lt;br/&gt;gap by searching for micromechanical
constitutive relations in nanocrystalline &lt;br/&gt;materials using large-scale
atomistic simulations. To achieve this goal, we &lt;br/&gt;plan to perform
large-scale atomistic modeling of various detailed &lt;br/&gt;microstructures
and their contributions to constitutive relations in nanoscale
&lt;br/&gt;environment. And to perform continuum modeling of deformation process
in model &lt;br/&gt;nanocrystalline samples. The detailed constitutive relation
and microstructure-&lt;br/&gt;property relation obtained from atomistic
simulations will be used in corse-&lt;br/&gt;grained modeling. The proposed
topics are timely and answers to these questions &lt;br/&gt;are urgently needed
for materials and mechanics community. Successful execution &lt;br/&gt;of this
proposed work is expected to contribute to establishing systematic
&lt;br/&gt;approaches for modeling microstructures and laying a solid foundation
for &lt;br/&gt;constitutive modeling of mechanical deformation in nanoscale
polycrystalline &lt;br/&gt;materials.&lt;br/&gt;