* 0411653
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Efficient Scheduling Strategies for Real-time Applications in Cluster Environments with Possible Processors' Failure
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Reda Ammar, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 30,304.00

0411653&lt;br/&gt;Ammar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research between Dr. Reda Ammar, Department of Computer
Science &amp; Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut and
Dr. Ayman El-Dessouki, President, Electronics Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt.
They plan to investigate, develop, and evaluate scheduling strategies of
satisfying the performance and reliability requirements of real-time
applications. They expect to significantly improve scheduling strategies for
computationally intensive real-time applications in cluster computing
environments with possible processors' failure. The scheduling methods involve
three related models: the Cluster Reference Model, the Application Model, and
scheduling algorithms. First, the PIs will define the specific cluster structure
and relevant expected behavior in order to establish a firm basis for the study.
Then the application performance model is presented. This model contains
information about the expected behavior of the computation from both a
structural and &lt;br/&gt;performance perspective. Third, using the above two
models as basis, they plan a cluster scheduling scenario which can integrate the
use of the application model to better achieve high performance and an
acceptable reliability level in case of failure. Within this scenario, they will
investigate, specify, and evaluate appropriate scheduling algorithms. They will
apply these results to case studies of selected applications to be executed
within the clusters currently available at both of participating institutes.
These algorithms should also provide higher reliability, reduce the
communication cost among sequential tasks, minimize fragmentation introduced by
scheduling several tasks into processors, and maximize the overall admission
rate. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
scheduling real-time task graphs while optimizing the available processing power
utilization in the cluster environment, achieving a required level of
reliability, reducing communication overhead, and minimizing processing power
fragmentation. Dr Ammar is a leading expert in the field and has published
extensively in this field. Dr El-Dessouki is leading the research activities at
the ERI in Egypt, and they have been cooperating for several years including
building a computing grid between the two institutes. Using and developing
expertise in the Grid technology will provide the Egyptian scientific community
with a local high performance computing power at low cost. The grid -along with
the proposed techniques will provide a new powerful facility that can be used to
solve problems with extensive computation needs. The PIs plan to build a
simulator for comparing their approach with the existing approaches, and this
could be used for educational purposes. The project involves training of
graduate students. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;