* 0411035
* The Response of Composites and Quasiconvexity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Graeme Milton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 312,634.00

Proposal: DMS-041103&lt;br/&gt;PI: Graeme W. Milton&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Utah&lt;br/&gt;Title: The Response of Composites and
Quasiconvexity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
improve our understanding of creep in composite materials, through establishing
bounds on the total creep and identifying microstructures that exhibit the
maximum or minimum possible creep. It will also identify microstructures which
are best for guiding stress in linear elasticity. These composites should be
useful for distributing or concentrating the force in a structure. Additionally,
microstructures will be identified with an anomalous Hall coefficient, which
could potentially be useful in reducing stray electric fields in circuit design
when there is a magnetic field present. In a second part of the work three
fundamental problems will be studied: characterizing the surfaces in tensor
space associated with sets of effective tensors of hierarchical laminate
geometries; exploring the connection between rank-one convexity and
quasiconvexity; and developing new tools for bounding the effective moduli of
composites and for bounding the quasiconvexification of a function. These
problems are important for making progress on the question of what responses of
composites are or are not possible. Their solution could, in a wide variety of
cases, make numerically tractable the search for the possible macroscopic
responses of composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of the
macroscopic response of materials is of central technological importance. This
importance stretches across the board, from understanding the macroscopic
response of engineered materials (of critical importance to the defence,
automative, and aerospace industries), to understanding the macroscopic response
of polycrystalline and porous rocks (relevant to earthquake prediction and to
the oil industry), to understanding the macroscopic response of sea ice
(important to climate modelling), to understanding the macroscopic response of
biological materials (such as tissues, bones, shells and tendons). In the past
many useful composites were obtained by trial and error, or by mimicking
composites found in nature, or by using intuition. In this century we will have
greater flexibility to produce designer composites tailor made to meet specific
needs. Improving our understanding of the response of composites will facilitate
the construction of these designer composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;