* 0411529
* Initiative for Transforming and Sustaining Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics at North Carolina Central University
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Sandra White, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,497,342.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation (NSF) through the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP),
North Carolina Central University will enhance their STEM programs through a
project entitled, Initiative for Transforming Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics at North Carolina Central University. The goal of the program is
to develop, implement, evaluate, and institutionalize a program that will
achieve, and sustain, a high quality and competitive science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics program at North Carolina Central University
(NCCU). The project will increase in the number of students successfully
completing gatekeeper science courses, completing baccalaureate degrees, and
going on to graduate and professional schools in the STEM areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will consist of four major components: 1) The
Undergraduate Training and Research Experience - A six-week residential summer
enrichment program for 20 pre-freshmen post high school students each year.
Participants in the program must have already sent in an intent to enroll form
and declared a major in one of the STEM areas. The program curriculum will
consist of modules from the science odyssey and mathematics core courses,
reading and writing classes and field trips. Students who complete the program
will join the Undergraduate Research Program, where they will be paired with
faculty researchers and a research scientist. Students in the Undergraduate
Research Program are encouraged to develop research skills, and present their
results for publication in local, state, and national undergraduate research
journals; 2) Curriculum Enhancement - The development of new courses in
electronics, bioinformatics, mathematics, and environmental and earth sciences,
will infuse research and technology in STEM courses, and align curricula across
the STEM areas. A critical thinking model will be developed for involving
students in strengthening their ability to transfer and apply knowledge from
lectures to laboratory experiences, and from first year gatekeeper courses to
upper level STEM courses; 3) Faculty Development - The future will require
employees that are accomplished in moving easily among the many disciplines that
will be applied in life-sciences companies and cutting-edge research
laboratories. The faculty development component will focus on faculty exchanges,
visiting scientists, an e-mentoring network, and a series of professional
development workshops designed to promote scientific and intellectual exchanges
between NCCU STEM faculty and their peers. The goals of this project are to
enhance faculty research competitiveness and support innovations in teaching
with emphasis on the transfer applications of knowledge across scientific
disciplines; and 4) Partnerships - In order to assist students in developing
research experiences partnerships for internships, fellowships and scholarships
will be developed. These partnerships will better prepare students to navigate
their way seamlessly from the university to the career markets of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project includes better
prepared students competitive for a biotechnology, bioinformatics workforce and
establishing a pipeline of students into graduate and professional programs. The
curriculum enhancements are based on the mission and strategic plan of the
University and will have long-term impact for the institution. NCCU will become
a producer of knowledge and best practices as part of the development of a model
on transferring knowledge and skills. Science research support programs such as
Minority Access to Research Careers (MARC), Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation in Science and Math (LSAMP), and Minority Biomedical Research
Sciences (MBRS) will be coordinated to provide a greater benefit to
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project will be
the increased depth of knowledge students in bioinformatics and biotechnology as
a result of exposure to state of the art scientific equipment and visiting
scientists, and research internships and cooperatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results and progress of the program will be regularly
disseminated through newsletters, area newspapers, radio and television media,
professional journals, and other student and faculty publications. Best
practices will be shared with local universities at seminars and conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;