* 0411938
* SGER: Mixing in a Tidally Modulated Boundary Layer over Rough Topography
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Sutanu Sarkar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

0411938&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tidally generated internal waves at long-wavelength
bottom topography that are radiated into the interior to subsequently breakdown
into small scales may be a significant contributor to diapycnal mixing. The
interaction of the tide with smaller-scale topography is also relevant to near-
field mixing as exemplified by recent data from moored instruments taken as part
of the Hawaii Ocean Mixing Experiment (HOME) near-field survey that indicate
increased levels of dissipation and variability in a rather thick bottom region,
O(250)m, depending on the tidal phase. The mixing characteristics of a
stratified current oscillating on a rough slope with M2 tidal period are poorly
understood. High-accuracy, numerical simulations with a non-hydrostatic model
will be conducted to understand the relevant processes underlying the observed
behavior of the bottom boundary layer. The modulation by a M2 tide of a current
in the deep ocean over rough topography is considered. In the model problem, a
shallow slope represents the large-scale topography while Gaussian roughness
elements of specified height and pitch represent the small-scale topography. The
value of the Brunt-Vaisala frequency, near the bottom changes in response to the
tidal modulation, and the interaction of the time-dependent stratification with
the current as it accelerates, decelerates or potentially separates over the
small-scale roughness is of interest. The physics relevant to this problem is
fundamentally different from the internal wave generation problem and, although
important, has been much less studied than the latter. The Large Eddy Simulation
will be performed with advanced numerical methods for the unsteady, three-
dimensional, Navier-Stokes equations in primitive form without any hydrostatic
assumption. The subgrid model to be used is a dynamic mixed model with wall-
layer modeling. A generalized coordinate formulation allows the grid to track
the bottom topography, helpful for maintaining accuracy. Parameters relevant to
the HOME situation will be chosen in conjunction with HOME PI's. The scaling of
the effective boundary layer thickness and profiles of the Vaisala frequency,
buoyancy flux, fluctuation intensities and eddy diffusivities as a function of
important nondimensional parameters will be obtained.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results of the proposed research will
help understand the link between the mixing observed in an unexpectedly thick
region near the bottom and the M2 tidal modulation and thus impact physical
oceanography. Given our lack of knowledge about mixing in an oscillating
boundary layer over rough topography in a stratified, rotating medium, it is
expected that this study will result in a substantive contribution to
geophysical fluid dynamics as well.&lt;br/&gt;