* 0411955
* Efficient Algorithms for Large Scale Convex Programming
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Osman Guler, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

The goal of this project is to analyze and develop algorithms for large scale
&lt;br/&gt;convex programming problems. The principal investigator will extend
the scope &lt;br/&gt;of interior point methods by developing invariant, primal
and dual interior point &lt;br/&gt;methods over homogeneous cones, which form a
large class of problems including &lt;br/&gt;linear programming, semidefinite
programming, and second order cone programming. &lt;br/&gt;Homogeneous cones
have rich symmetry properties and a classification theory, which &lt;br/&gt;make
them an ideal candidate for extending the theory of structured interior point
&lt;br/&gt;methods beyond semidefinite programming. The investigation of the
modeling power &lt;br/&gt;of homogeneous cone programming will be an important
part of the project, and &lt;br/&gt;several related topics in semidefinite
programming and hyperbolic cone programming &lt;br/&gt;will also be
investigated. A second, but related component of this project will be
&lt;br/&gt;the development of provably efficient first order methods for large
scale convex &lt;br/&gt;programming. These methods have low memory requirements
and global convergence rates &lt;br/&gt;which are (nearly) independent of the
dimension of the underlying optimization problem. &lt;br/&gt;Hence, they are
attractive for solving very large scale problems for which interior
&lt;br/&gt;point methods may be ineffective because of their extensive memory
requirements. &lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator and his graduate students
will seek answers to these and &lt;br/&gt;related problems in convex
programming. The resulting algorithms will be numerically &lt;br/&gt;tested in
order to confirm their effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous problems
from industry, engineering, and science (designs of VLSI, antenna
&lt;br/&gt;arrays, truss structures, and control systems in engineering,
portfolio analysis in &lt;br/&gt;finance, structure of molecules in quantum
chemistry, combinatorial optimization, &lt;br/&gt;and many others) depend on
efficient optimization algorithms for their resolution. &lt;br/&gt;Semidefinite
programming (SDP) has proved to be an excellent framework in which to
&lt;br/&gt;model most of these large scale problems, and interior point methods
for SDP have &lt;br/&gt;been very successful in solving them numerically. Very
large scale problems arising &lt;br/&gt;from medical imaging and quantum
chemistry provide good incentives for developing &lt;br/&gt;first order methods
for convex programming. The theoretical insights gained from &lt;br/&gt;this
research will lead to a deeper understanding of interior point methods for
&lt;br/&gt;semidefinite programming and beyond. These insights will enable the
principal &lt;br/&gt;investigator, his students, and other researchers to
develop faster, more reliable &lt;br/&gt;algorithms which will make it possible
to model and solve larger problems. These &lt;br/&gt;advances will directly
benefit researchers in diverse scientific fields, who rely &lt;br/&gt;on modern
optimization techniques to solve their problems, by providing them with a
&lt;br/&gt;set of state of the art algorithms. The research of this project will
help advance &lt;br/&gt;the frontiers of scientific research in convex
programming, and will be incorporated &lt;br/&gt;into undergraduate and graduate
teaching whenever possible.