* 0411116
* Access Control for Information in Pervasive Computing Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Peter Steenkiste, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2008
* USD 285,000.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research
&lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
NUMBER: 0411116 &lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Peter
Steenkiste&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Carnegie-Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
TITLE: Access Control for Information in Pervasive Computing
Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pervasive computing environments
collect and use a variety of personal information, such as location and activity
information. However, existing access control mechanisms do not apply because of
the unique nature of the information: it is often obtained on-demand from
sensors, is dynamic, comes in different levels of precision, and is inherently
collected in a distributed fashion. This project is developing access control
mechanisms that give users control over who can access information about them.
Users specify poli-cies at the level of information without having to be
concerned about how that informa-tion is derived. The access control mechanisms
support several features that are critical in pervasive computing environments,
such as the ability to specify and exploit informa-tion relationships, the use
of context-sensitive constraints, and support for specifying ser-vice trust. The
system will be implemented and evaluated in the context of the Aura per-vasive
computing system. While the focus of the project is on pervasive computing envi-
ronments, the results should also apply to other environments that handle
dynamic, highly distributed information such as sensor networks. Today, privacy
concerns make deploy-ment of pervasive computing technology difficult if not
impossible - the proposed re-search will make the deployment of pervasive
computing applications feasible. Project results will be disseminated through
publications, the release of our prototype system, and educational activities
such as undergraduate and graduate course projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Brett D. Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;June 21,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;