* 0411796
* Which Bets Paid Off?: Estimating the Effects on Middle Grades Achievement of More Than a Decade of Ambitious Reform in Philadelphia
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Douglas MacIver, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 06/30/2007
* USD 999,595.00

The researchers propose to analyze a large series of data sets collected for the
city of Philadelphia during several years of reform efforts for its middle
mathematics and science classes. Some of the reform efforts were implemented
with NSF funding, some of the schools used NSF funded mathematics curriculum
(Mathematics in Context), and some of the time alternative models were
implemented in the city. The researchers propose to make some sense out of the
turmoil of change in the cities policies by examining variations in the student
performance changes over the period of time that the various reforms were in
place. The methods of analysis will require statistical manipulation of large
data sets using multilevel models of change and growth curves to estimate the
impact of each of the major reforms on student achievement growth during the
middle grades. The study will also include analysis of interviews with
educational leaders of the city. The unique aspect of this study is that the
researchers have access to individual student performance data over time for
each student. They will be able to use an interrupted time series approach to
compare with the multilevel growth analysis and they will also employ
qualitative data collection and analysis for in-depth contextual information
about systemic reform efforts in Philadelphia. The study examines reform of
schools in a large urban city in a comprehensive way.