* 0411392
* Thin Ionization Layer of the Enhanced Aurora
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Jay Johnson, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/2009
* USD 324,000.00

Nearly half of the time, auroral displays exhibit thin, bright layers known as
"enhanced aurora." These displays are associated with thin, dense, heavy ion
layers in the E-region. They result when wave-particle interactions heat ambient
electrons to energies at or just above the 17 eV ionization energy of diatomic
nitrogen. There are several possible plasma instabilities that could produce
suprathermal electrons in thin layers, but there has been no detailed
theoretical investigation of how instabilities in the thin ionization layers
develop. This project will examine instabilities which would occur in thin,
dense, heavy ion layers. It will use extensive analytical analysis combined with
particle simulations. A preliminary analysis of a cross field current
instability has been found to be strongly unstable in the heavy ion layers.
Initial electrostatic simulations show that substantial heating of the ambient
electrons occurs with energization at or above the nitrogen ionization energy.
Further improvements in the model will lead to precise comparisons with
observations, using a variety of data including ground based optics, radar
measurements, and in situ rocket measurements. The model will also be used to
examine other competing instabilities, so that the mechanism for the enhanced
aurora can be established. The theoretical work and simulation code described in
this proposal is also likely to have applications to instabilities associated
with impurities in fusion devices where heavy ion species originating from the
wall and limiter materials are known to contaminate the core hydrogen plasma.