* 0411413
* Numerical Modeling of Coupled Ground &amp; Surface Water Flow &amp; Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mary Wheeler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop advanced numerical
methods&lt;br/&gt;for modeling flow and transport processes in coupled
surface&lt;br/&gt;water/ground water systems. As the relevant processes, and
spatial&lt;br/&gt;and temporal scales, can strongly differ in the various
subdomains of&lt;br/&gt;a coupled hydrosystem, different modeling concepts must
be chosen for&lt;br/&gt;these subdomains. The PIs will investigate appropriate
mechanisms for&lt;br/&gt;coupling mass, momentum and species transport in ground
water and surface&lt;br/&gt;water regions. This will include mathematical
formulation and&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic and software tool development between
different domains&lt;br/&gt;and models. Efficient discretization techniques,
based on finite&lt;br/&gt;element technology developed by the PIs and adapted to
the dominant&lt;br/&gt;processes in each region, will be developed. The
stability of&lt;br/&gt;these methods will be analyzed, and a priori and a
posteriori error&lt;br/&gt;estimates will be derived. Time-stepping strategies
for accurately&lt;br/&gt;handling the different temporal scales within these
flow and transport&lt;br/&gt;domains will be studied, and fast and robust
solution methods for the&lt;br/&gt;resulting linear and nonlinear systems of
equations will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;Representative benchmark problems based
on laboratory and field&lt;br/&gt;experiments will be formulated and will be
used to validate the&lt;br/&gt;numerical methods. The resulting methodology will
be implemented&lt;br/&gt;within a parallel computing framework for distributed
and grid&lt;br/&gt;computing platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable
management and protection of water resources is one of the&lt;br/&gt;key
problems of the 21st century. Comprehensive, long-range water&lt;br/&gt;resource
management requires a careful study of the interaction of&lt;br/&gt;ground water
and surface water. Historically, ground water aquifers&lt;br/&gt;and surface
water bodies, such as streams, lakes and wetlands, have&lt;br/&gt;been studied
in isolation, without properly accounting for the&lt;br/&gt;interactions between
them. Recent data, however, collected in the&lt;br/&gt;United States and abroad,
give startling evidence of the effect&lt;br/&gt;surface water and ground water
systems have on each other. These&lt;br/&gt;studies indicate, for example, that
water contamination can easily be&lt;br/&gt;transmitted from ground to surface
water and vice versa. In many&lt;br/&gt;cases, the precise location of initial
contamination is irrelevant,&lt;br/&gt;because the close proximity of ground and
surface water can result in&lt;br/&gt;both being contaminated. Advanced computer
simulators are needed to&lt;br/&gt;study and predict the movement of potentially
harmful chemical species&lt;br/&gt;within these complex environments. In this
project, the PIs will&lt;br/&gt;develop mathematical models and state-of-the-art
computational&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and technologies for simulating large-scale
ground and&lt;br/&gt;surface water systems. The project will involve the
collaboration of&lt;br/&gt;the PIs with researchers at government laboratories
and state&lt;br/&gt;agencies, and will include the training of graduate and
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students. The technology to be developed has potential
application to&lt;br/&gt;other areas, including thermal and chemical processing,
biomedicine,&lt;br/&gt;and sequestration of carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;