* 0411406
* SGER: Preliminary Investigations of the Factors Impacting the Acquisition of Evolutionary Concepts
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Evelyn Evans, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 11/30/2005
* USD 91,418.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) proposal examining
children's acquisition of an understanding of evolution. The main goal of the
proposal is to carry out the exploratory studies necessary to help articulate a
developmental framework for understanding the relationship between children's
early conceptual development and their acquisition of evolutionary concepts. The
hypothesis underlying this work is that people have difficulty grasping certain
evolutionary concepts because these concepts may conflict with people's
intuitive concepts and beliefs about adaptation and selection. Evolutionary
concepts imply the notion that all species are, in a sense, related. This
challenges what may be an intuitive bias in people to think about species as
being qualitatively distinct. The investigators propose to conduct three
exploratory studies. The studies will be conducted on participants in age-groups
of 3-4 years, 5-7 years, 8-9 years, 10-12 years, and lay adults. Using a series
of open-ended as well as closed-ended questions, the investigators will explore
children's understandings of, for example, how animals of different species
appeared on Earth and the extent to which their reasons are in accord with such
explanations as Intelligent-Design, Evolutionist, and Spontaneous-Generationist.
The studies will also probe other aspects of children's reasoning, such as their
tendency to think of species as having a fixed essence, in order to determine
what role such reasoning might have in supporting or constraining children's
understanding of evolution. This innovative and intellectually risky work
promises to begin to lay the groundwork, based on current cognitive theory, upon
which a novel approach to the teaching of evolution could be built. &lt;br/&gt;