* 0411403
* Goal Oriented Mesh Adaptivity for Constrained Optimal Control and Optimization Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Ronald Hoppe, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 162,930.00

The investigator proposes to develop concepts of goal oriented mesh adaptivity
for the numerical solution of constrained optimal control and structural
optimization problems for partial differential equations. In case of pure
simulation, i.e., without optimization, mesh adaptivity on the basis of
efficient and reliable a posteriori error estimators for finite element
discretized partial differential equations is a well-established tool. Residual
type a posteriori error estimators rely on the appropriate evaluation of the
residual with respect to an approximate solution of the problem and lead to
cheaply computable, local error terms by means of element and face or edge
residuals. The error is typically estimated in norms associated with the
underlying function space. The dual approach involves the adjoint problem and
allows one to derive sharp upper bounds for the error with respect to various
error functionals ranging from global norms to local, even pointwise,
quantities. The idea is to consider the target functional as the right hand side
in the adjoint of the given differential equation which provides a
multiplicative relation between the error in the original and the adjoint
equation. The investigator will systematically study goal oriented mesh
adaptivity for control and state constrained optimal control problems and
structural optimization problems such as shape and topology optimization with
equality and inequality constraints on the state and design variables. In
particular, he will consider different target quantities, including the
objective functional and constraint satisfaction/violation, and investigate
their impact on mesh adaptation and accuracy of the approximate solution. On
this basis, he will develop, analyze and implement goal oriented a posteriori
error estimators. This will be complemented by extensive numerical studies to
document the efficiency and reliability of the developed tools for selected
optimal control and optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optimal
control and structural optimization of systems described by partial differential
equations has a deep impact on the cost effective development of technologically
relevant devices and systems. Adaptive mesh refinement and coarsening on the
basis of efficient and reliable goal oriented a posteriori error estimators is a
significant algorithmic tool for numerical design studies which contribute to
improve the functionality of the devices and systems without resorting to the
cost intensive production of prototypes. The project will introduce graduate
students to both state-of-the-art optimization and numerical simulation methods.
The material will be used in graduate and undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;