* 0411725
* Cognitive Style: Individual Differences in Object and Spatial Imagery
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Stephen Kosslyn, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,263,430.00

The proposed research program will explore a series of questions concerning
spatial imagery abilities in the context of cognitive styles. A cognitive style
is a psychological dimension that specifies consistencies in how an individual
acquires and processes information. Although research suggests that cognitive
styles have important implications for educational theory and practice, many
previous studies were not motivated by a theory or general framework that
species the dimensions along which cognitive processing may vary, and as a
consequence suffered from arbitrary distinctions and overlapping dimensions. For
instance, although a number of studies have found that the verbal subscale of
standard visualizer/verbalizer questionnaires does indeed correlate with verbal
ability, the visual subscale is generally only weakly correlated with results on
visual/spatial aptitude tests. However, current research on visual information
processing suggests that there are actually two kinds of visualizers-those who
construct vivid, concrete shape-based images of individual objects (object
visualizers), and those who construct images that represent spatial relations
among objects and transformations of objects (spatial visualizers). These two
types of visualizers display very different patterns of performance on visual-
spatial tasks, including tests of practical knowledge, such as the ability to
interpret graphs or solve geometry pr9blems. This distinction is rooted in the
brain: Neuropsychological findings have revealed that higher-level visual areas
of the brain are divided into two functionally and anatomically distinct
pathways, the object and spatial relations pathways. This proposal. has three
major objectives. First, the investigators plan to examine the development of
imagery skills as children age. They will explore the possibility that spatial
and object imagery have different courses and rates of development. Second, they
will conduct behavioral and fMRI studies to examine how practice using imagery
changes performance as well as neural activity in the brain. Finally, they will
examine how people in different professions differ in their mental imagery
abilities and cognitive styles.