* 0411027
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Ecology of Omnivory in Peromyscus Leucopus(Rodentia: Muridae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* T'ai Roulston, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2007
* USD 11,513.00

Omnivory, defined as feeding on more than one trophic level (e.g., a diet that
includes both animals and plants), is suggested to contribute to the stability
of natural communities following natural and man-made disturbances or changes in
resource availability. However, the mechanisms determining omnivory in nature
are not well-understood. This research examines how the combination of food
availability and population density may regulate omnivory in the white-footed
mouse (Peromyscus leucopus). We predict that as food abundance increases, the
white-footed mouse will become more specialized in its diet. However, population
density of the mice will increase as well, which may result in decreased food
availability at a later time. As food availability decreases, we predict that
the mice will become more generalized in its diet. We have used observational
and experimental approaches, based on isotopic analysis of marked individuals,
to examine dietary patterns among different populations. Here, two additional
projects are proposed: 1) an experiment that simultaneously increases food
abundance at two trophic levels to distinguish between how overall and relative
food abundance affects omnivory; 2) a survey on background isotopic signals in
local food webs to provide high-quality estimates of omnivory. This research
will contribute to our understanding of mechanisms driving omnivory, with the
potential to help us predict whether omnivory will increase or decrease when
natural habitats experience fluctuations in available resources. The broader
impacts of this research include the training of graduate and undergraduate
students, the potential of the results to be incorporated in local educational
programs, and the stimulation of interdisciplinary approaches in scientific
studies. &lt;br/&gt;