* 0411382
* Araucanian Polity Formation in the Southern Cone, South America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Tom Dillehay, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2004
* USD 202,309.00

Far from being a footnote in Latin American history, Native Americans form the
structure upon which Latin American history is based. Several million indigenous
peoples were organized into many complex cultures and societies thousands of
years before Europeans reached their hemisphere. Some of these people stopped
Spanish colonial expansion at the outset of contact. The most acclaimed and
least studied of these cases of successful resistance is that of the Araucanians
of Chile. The Araucanians maintained control over large parts of the southern
third of South America between the early 1600s and the late 1800s. In fact, the
resistance to the Spanish was so successful that the first conquistadors called
the Araucanians "el Estado" or the state, implying that this native population
had achieved a level of socio-political organization equal to the Aztec and
Inca.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To continue as a politically autonomous people after
the arrival of the Spanish, however, the Araucanians had to make profound social
and ideological changes in their way of life, even in their religion, diet, and
patterns of settlement. A number of Spanish deserters, including clerics, lived
among the natives, and there was continuous contact between the Spanish and
Araucanians during this period, which provides richly detailed written texts
about the latter. This new lifeway also entailed an increase in the construction
of temples and pyramids, agricultural fields and canals, and fortresses, all of
which are still visible across the Araucaina landscape today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this study is to carry out a three-year
archeological and ethnohistorical investigation of the rise of the Araucanian
state or polity just before the arrival of the Spanish and how it stopped
Spanish colonialism during the 16th to 19th centuries. The study is concentrated
in the Puren and Lumaco Valley in south-central Chile, which was known to the
Spanish as the center of resistance and the "unconquerable valley." This valley
also is the place where the densest native settlements and the largest temple
pyramids are located. Today, more than 800,000 Araucanian (or Mapuche) people
live in Chile. They still take great pride in their unique achievement and in
the archeology of the pyramids and settlements that reflect their rich past and
fame in Latin American history. The project is the first time this history has
been examined from an archeological and ethnohistorical perspective. &lt;br/&gt;