* 0411320
* Adapting Multiple Intelligence Principles to Increase the Number of Quality Hispanic Engineering Graduates
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Louis Everett, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 07/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

UTEP is increasing the success rates of undergraduate engineering students by
adapting methods from the New Mexico State University. The methods address
multiple intelligences and are implemented in a peer facilitator environment.
The project integrates hands on demonstrations, computer simulations, and other
learning aids into a collaborative undergraduate engineering classroom to
produce deeper understanding of the basics of engineering. Expectations include
higher pass rates and better longitudinal performance as compared to historic
data.

Consider for example, the scenario in which a group of students studying
dynamics are shown a vibratory feeder in which screws seem to magically walk
themselves up a ramp into a predetermined location where they are picked up by a
robot. The phenomenon is a simple application of stick/slip friction. The
students experiment with the device to discover how it works, use a simulation
to determine the effect of changing parameters, then design a new vibratory
input to move the screws as quickly as possible.

Formative assessment measures are being used to direct the curriculum
development. Summative assessments are being used to test the efficacy of the
interventions in both the short and long term.