* 0411703
* Molecular Electroanalytical Chemistry: New Directions in Structures and Reactions of Organometallic Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* William Geiger, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2008
* USD 618,000.00

Professor William E. Geiger of the University of Vermont is supported by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry program to investigate electron transfer
processes of organometallic compounds. Molecular structural rearrangements that
accompany electron transfer reactions are being studied focusing on reversible
making and breaking of metal-ligand and metal-metal bonds in transition metal
organometallic complexes and geometric changes in highly electron rich,
hypervalent metal-cyclopentadienyl compounds. The use of the non-coordinating
fluoroarylborate (FAB) type anions as electrolyte is enabling the study of
radical cation dimerizations. Metal-metal bond formation and complexities of
ruthenocene chemistry are being targeted. The feasibility of replacing
ferrocenyl tags with more thermally robust ruthenocenyl tags in sensors and
other devices is under study. Following on the development of FAB-type anions,
the preparation of large, highly lipophilic cations based on bicyclic and
tricyclic tetraamines is being undertaken with the goal of advancing synthetic
and mechanistic work that relies on reductive electrochemistry. Also being
addressed is the use of cations of Rh and Ir compounds containing the
hydrotris(pyrazolyl)borate ligand to probe the reversible cleavage of metal-
ligand sigma bonds, a process which has important implications for
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron transfer reactions are ubiquitous in
nature and play an important role in processes such as photosynthesis,
metabolism, the production of energy from hydrogen and fossil fuels, the
synthesis of drugs and specialty chemicals, and the operation of batteries and
sensors. This project is providing fundamental understanding of the relationship
between electron transfer and molecular level structural changes to guide
developments in these areas. &lt;br/&gt;