* 0411961
* Secure Context-Aware Distributed Collaboration Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Anand Tripathi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2008
* USD 399,966.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Distributed Systems Research
&lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL
NUMBER: 0411961&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Tripathi,
Anand&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TITLE: Secure Context-Aware Distributed Collaboration
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important need in today's computing
environments is to support ubiquitous collabora-tive activities involving mobile
users working across different autonomous organiza-tions. In such activities,
the security policies for resource access and user interactions are generally
required to be context-based. A user context may be based on various aspects
such as physical location, network domain, roles in activities, user interface
devices, and any temporal constraints. A mobile user needs to be given access to
local and remote re-sources based on the current context. Moreover, it is
desired that resource discovery and binding functions are executed transparently
and proactively by the application environ-ment and the underlying
infrastructure services. Such ubiquitous collaboration environ-ments need
decentralized mechanisms for managing and enforcing policies for resource
discovery, binding, and protection. The primary focus of this project is on
developing system level mechanisms for constructing secure context-aware
ubiquitous collaboration environments from their high level specifications. The
specification model will support expression of context-based dynamic security
policies for users, applications, as well as service/resource providers. This
project will result in a middleware framework to realize from specifications a
desired environment with context-based policies. This framework will include
mechanisms for proactive discovery and transparent binding of resources for an
application. It will support construction of context-aware smart environments by
mod-eling infrastructure services as autonomous agents interacting with mobile
users. Mecha-nisms based on distributed trust and delegation will be included
for decentralized policy enforcement. The infrastructure resulting from this
work will be made available for re-search and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Brett D. Fleisch&lt;br/&gt;Program Director,
CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;May 26, 2004.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;