* 0411555
* Recruit and Retain Through Enriched Educational Programs
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Deidre Labat, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,582,252.00

With the support of the National Science Foundation (NSF) through the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP),
Xavier University of Louisiana will implement a comprehensive program to Recruit
and Retain qualified minority high school students through Enriched Educational
Programs (RREEP). Studies have confirmed that, nationally, less than 10% of the
African Americans receive their bachelors degrees in STEM disciplines. Compared
to the 28% minority representation in the entire population less than 5% percent
are in the science and technical work force. These small percentages can be
attributed to a number of factors that include a lack of faculty mentoring,
inadequate advising and, most of all, inadequacies in science and mathematics
education in K-12 schools. Xavier proposes a solution to this problem with
support from NSF by following targeted goals and objectives through RREEP. The
goals of this proposal are to: i) increase the retention rate of minorities in
the STEM disciplines and ii) increase the number of African American students at
Xavier who major in chemistry, computer science, engineering, mathematics, or
physics, and contribute towards increasing the number of African Americans
entering to the work force in these disciplines. In support of these goals,
Xavier has identified specific objectives. These objectives are to: i) increase
the successful completion rate of STEM students in developmental mathematics
courses from 50% to 75%; ii) increase the successful completion rate of STEM
students in gate keeping courses from 60% to 75%; and iii) increase the overall
enrollment in selected STEM disciplines by 60% over the next five years.

Xavier University has a long tradition of success in science education
(especially in the preparation of students for medical school) places it in a
unique position to achieve these goals and to make a significant impact on the
STEM workforce. This proposal outlines a comprehensive program that will assist
the University in achieving the above-stated goals as it adapts and enhances the
successful programs already in place. This project includes activities to: a)
develop a new summer bridge program for under-prepared students b) restructure a
current summer bridge program, c) collaborate with local middle and high schools
through summer/Saturday workshops for science and mathematics teachers, and d)
enhance/improve the pedagogy used in developmental mathematics and gate keeping
courses in the STEM disciplines.

Intellectual Merit: The improved instructional structure proposed will result in
a higher retention rate and higher achievement levels of the students at Xavier
University. This can serve as a model for other institutions.

Broader impact: The proposed Saturday workshops for in-service teachers will i)
increase the knowledge and skills of the math and science teachers and ii)
improve the collaborations between New Orleans area schools and Xavier
University. Furthermore, the proposed high school visitations will enhance the
understanding of the career opportunities in STEM disciplines by high school
students. Additionally, this project will result in an increase in the number of
minorities participating in the work force in the US in the STEM disciplines.

