* 0411656
* Scale and Scaling Across the Science Domains
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Melissa Jones, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 06/30/2009
* USD 703,305.00

This project will research the relationship of proportional reasoning abilities
to the development of scale concepts and will develop an instructional framework
for learning about scale and scaling effects that builds on students' prior
knowledge. How students and professionals in a variety of fields develop
understandings of scale and scaling effects in science will be investigated. The
first year will utilize written assessments and interviews to investigate
students' existing conceptual ecologies with respect to scale conceptualizations
and will involve students from elementary, middle, and high school as well as
graduate students. The goal of this aspect of the research is to document the
trajectory of scaling ideas that students hold as they mature. The second year
will elaborate on this knowledge by researching conceptualizations of novice and
experienced teachers as well as other adults in a variety of professions.
Written assessments and interviews with adults will document concepts and
experiences with scale and scaling effects and these results will allow the
identification of applications of scaling, explore how different people develop
scaling concepts, and identify sub-constructs inherent to scaling applications.
The third will focus on applying knowledge gained from the first two years of
research in regular science classes. Through pre- and post-instruction
assessments the various webs of constructs students hold with respect to the
unifying theme of scale and the relationship of mathematics to understandings of
scale will be investigated and the influences guided educational practices in a
natural setting have on these constructs will be identified. This research also
seeks to identify how learning about scale concepts can be generalized and will
research the transfer of such learning across domains. A strong foundation in
understandings of scale as a scientific theme has the potential anchor science
concepts and help students make cross-curricular connections. In addition,
understanding how minorities and women learn scale and scaling concepts can
potentially broaden the involvement of these underserved populations in science.