* 0411484
* Classrooms as Integrated Learning Communities (CILC)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* John Wilson, Dillard University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,864,116.00

With NSF support, Dillard University will implement the project "Classrooms
as&lt;br/&gt;Integrated Learning Communities (CILC)", a comprehensive action
plan to address the continued under-representation of minorities receiving
baccalaureate and graduate degrees in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. This strategy is designed to provide a
comprehensive approach to improve STEM students' performance in gate-keeping
courses, institutionalize and expand an undergraduate research framework, and
ultimately increase the number of minority students receiving degrees in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project outcomes are driven by three major
objectives and corresponding activities: (1) develop and maintain a vigorous and
systemic recruitment infrastructure within the University and the STEM
disciplines that identify, motivate, attract and enroll minority students within
these disciplines; (2) strengthen curricula and courses through a model
Integrated Research Laboratory (IRL) for targeted STEM disciplines; and (3)
develop capacity to provide students advanced research opportunities, through
completion of a molecular biology core facility for molecular-level research in
STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of CILC is
captured in the first of the two guiding principles of this initiative: (1)
improvement of success rates among minority students in STEM disciplines will
promote increased evaluation and contribution toward the limited research
available on minority STEM students in contexts where they are most successful.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of CILC is captured in the second of
these guiding&lt;br/&gt;principles: (2) by strengthening students' performance
in STEM gate-keeping courses, thereby allowing them to make seamless transitions
into more rigorous STEM studies, and making mentored research an expectation of
the learning experience, undergraduate students will complete STEM disciplines
at increased rates and be better prepared to pursue and complete graduate
studies.&lt;br/&gt;