* 0411363
* EHS:    Constraint-based Static Analysis of Embedded and Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Zohar Manna, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Manna - Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Static analysis methods play two vital
roles in the design of embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems: validation and optimization.
A static analysis technique&lt;br/&gt;deduces properties of a given system by
analyzing its description.&lt;br/&gt;Its applicability to a particular system
hinges upon its ability to&lt;br/&gt;deduce interesting properties while
balancing the computational cost.&lt;br/&gt;This research studies a novel class
of techniques for&lt;br/&gt;static analysis that has the potential to
significantly increase the&lt;br/&gt;scope of static analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology, called constraint-based static analysis,
diverges&lt;br/&gt;from previous work on static analysis. Whereas
traditional&lt;br/&gt;propagation-based static analysis methods concentrate on
iteratively&lt;br/&gt;constructing better approximations to the desired
properties, the&lt;br/&gt;proposed approach directly solves for the properties.
Given a class&lt;br/&gt;of assertions represented parametrically by a template
property, a&lt;br/&gt;constraint-based method generates and solves constraints
on the&lt;br/&gt;unknown parameters. This shift in strategy seeks the
following&lt;br/&gt;advantages:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* It replaces heuristic
guesses with a precise and predictable&lt;br/&gt; approach to approximation.
Traditional approaches frequently &lt;br/&gt; require the use of heuristic
guesses via widening and narrowing&lt;br/&gt; operators, which has limited their
applicability.&lt;br/&gt;* In contrast to propagation-based methods, the new
methods can be &lt;br/&gt; readily optimized to handle special cases
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;* It enables a natural extension to the analysis of
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt; discrete and hybrid systems. &lt;br/&gt;* The constraint-
based methods for real-time and hybrid systems avoid &lt;br/&gt; explicitly
solving differential equations, making them applicable&lt;br/&gt; to a larger
class of systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected benefits of this research
are many. Static analysis has not seen a major breakthrough in a decade. The
project hopes to revive interest in static analysis and encourage the use of
mathematical techniques such as Groebner bases. This research also links
constraint solving technology to verification, thus
opening&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for involvement of the constraint solving
community&lt;br/&gt;in problems pertinent to the design of embedded systems.
Finally, the&lt;br/&gt;results of this research bring closer the feasibility of
using formal proof of safety properties in certifying software for safety-
critical devices.&lt;br/&gt;