* 0411321
* Adaptive Radiolocation for Mobile Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Hua Lee, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 415,106.00

Advances in radios, sensors, actuators and embedded computing technology have
enabled a proliferation of wireless sensing networks. These networks offer an
affordable way of performing distributed sensing for a seemingly unbounded set
of applications. Accurate positioning is a key enabler for many sensor
applications including surveillance networks, robotic sensors, location-based
routing in wireless ad-hoc sensor networks, smart spaces and environmental
monitoring by mobile sensors. Although GPS can potentially provide accurate
positioning, the complexity of the required receivers may be too costly for
inexpensive sensor nodes. Furthermore, the GPS signal is extremely weak and
positioning can be unreliable inside buildings or under dense foliage. These
drawbacks to GPS positioning have led to increasing interest in GPS-less
distributed radiolocation methods for wireless sensor systems. This project
focuses on techniques GPS-less cooperative radiolocation using time-of-arrival
over ISM-band radios (e.g. 802.11b)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are numerous
problems that must be solved for adaptive radiolocation in sensor networks.
Multiaccess interference occurs if multiple sensors transmit acknowledgements at
the same time. The presence of multipath can obscure and interfere with correct
estimation of the time-of-arrival causing range errors. The RF power amplifier
is a major energy consumer; therefore positioning estimates must be made with
minimal communication. The project addresses these problems through: 1) Analysis
and development of multiuser estimation algorithms that can jointly estimate
times of arrival (TOAs) from multiple sensors. 2) Creation of a reconfigurable
computational core, which enables an adaptive radiolocation platform for
embedded systems. The core will be designed to enable tradeoffs between
different system parameters, including power/energy, latency and accuracy of the
positioning algorithms. 3) Development of new distributed estimation algorithms
for sensor networks. 4) Implementation of cooperative radiolocation algorithms
in a testbed operating in the 2.4 GHz ISM band. 5) Design of antenna arrays and
sensing algorithms for the radiolocation network&lt;br/&gt;