* 0411076
* An Integrated Core Curriculum of Cell Biology, Genetics, and Ecology Using the Desert Tree Lizard as a Thematic Organism
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Charles Deutch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 156,000.00

Biological Science (61). This CCLI Adaptation and Implementation type II project
supports the implementation of an integrated core curriculum, linking cell
biology, genetics and ecology via a focal organism, the tree lizard, Urosaurus
ornatus. This abundant lizard, which is native to Arizona, provides a scaffold
for multidisciplinary investigative studies that thread their way through a
five-course biology core (Introductory Biology I &amp; II, Genetics, Cell
Biology, and Ecology), thereby demonstrating the interrelatedness of the various
subdisciplines, as well as their dependence on mathematics, chemistry and
physics. Based on a curriculum taught at Davidson College, students are
introduced to scientific method, the tree lizard and its habitat in the
introductory course. Subsequently, students explore a variety of topics, such as
the microbial flora of the lizard's nasal passage, the detailed chemical and
biological analyses of its habitat, analyses of population flow within the urban
Phoenix, Arizona ecosystem, observation of courtship and aggression, and
analysis of heat shock protein expression. All modules are being conducted in an
active-learning manner and students are expected to contribute to experimental
design. The culmination of the project is a detailed analysis (done by students
in the Ecology course) of the tree lizard and its habitat, using data gathered
in each of the classes during a given semester. In addition to the thematic
animal focus, research-based lab modules (both in the laboratory and the field)
and learning communities are employed as strategies to improve learning. The
project also evaluates the effectiveness of this new approach compared to the
traditional format used previously.