* 0411493
* SMART-UP (Strengthening Minority Access to Research Training through Undergraduate Programs)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Barbara Frankle, Le Moyne-Owen College
* Continuing Grant
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,375,222.00

LeMoyne-Owen College will implement comprehensive approaches to strengthen the
institution's undergraduate science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) education and research infrastructure. With NSF support, LeMoyne-Owen
College will (1) improve student skills in mathematics, communication, and the
physical sciences by offering pre-freshman summer programs and tutoring
associated with STEM gatekeeper courses; (2) revise the STEM curriculum to
promote active learning; (3) provide on-site and off-site undergraduate research
experiences as well as industry internships; (3) provide faculty professional
development opportunities; and (4) provide other student-centered academic
enrichment activities to prepare students for graduate study and success in the
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed efforts build on and will
coordinate with academic enhancement strategies developed as part of the NSF
supported Mid-South Alliance for Minority Participation Program. Proven
effective practices are also incorporated from the Environmental Protection
Agency funded Storm Water Environmental Education Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
proposed STEM infrastructure enhancements and their potential to result in
significant and sustainable improvements in the overall quality of STEM
instruction at the institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the proposed
efforts is to broaden the participation of under-represented minorities in STEM
disciplines and the national STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;