* 0411559
* Science and Technology Access to Research and Graduate Education
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Velvelyn Foster, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,516,577.00

Building on the successful outcomes of the previous Historically Black Colleges
and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) project from the National
Science Foundation (NSF), Jackson State University (JSU) College of Science,
Engineering and Technology will implement a project entitled - Science and
Technology Access to Research and Graduate Education (STARGE). The overall goal
of the project is to enhance the achievement of minority students in STEM and
increase the number of minority students pursuing graduate degrees in these
disciplines. The JSU plan is designed to implement a set of integrated
activities (especially in engineering and technology) to further increase the
enrollment, retention, and graduation rate of STEM students; increase the
research participation of the STEM students and increase the diversity of
courses, programs, and curricula for STEM majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
College of Science, Engineering and Technology (CSET) has distinguished itself
with an outstanding record of achievement in research productivity, graduation
of STEM majors, and attracting and sustaining outstanding faculty. The success
of CSET in attracting and retaining excellent students is a result of its
creation of a unique Education Continuum Program (ECP). ECP focuses on
activities that impact the pipeline from pre-college science and mathematics
awareness/preparation through collegiate discipline-specific research/training
careers. The plan, which is the centerpiece of the CSET strategic plan, fosters
communication and collaboration among universities, government, industry, pre-
college educational entities and professional/community organizations to achieve
excellence throughout our educational environments. The programs make science
and mathematics interesting and relevant to the lives of all pre-college as well
collegiate students. Some of the ECP activities include role modeling, exposure
to a variety of career opportunities in scientific, engineering, and other
technical fields. Diverse laboratory settings at the university and national
laboratories offer real-time, priceless, hands-on research experiences to pre-
college through collegiate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The project will focus on: further increasing the enrollment, retention, and
graduation rate of STEM students; increasing the research participation of the
STEM students especially in the area of engineering; increasing the diversity of
courses, program, and curriculum for STEM majors especially in the areas of
technology and engineering; and providing a structure of support for STEM
faculty professional development at JSU. A major component of the new CSET
project is to establish BS degree programs in Mechanical Engineering, Electrical
Engineering. CSET will also seek ABET accreditation during this period for the
engineering program. The proposed objectives will be obtained by implementing a
developed strategic plan by a highly qualified support groups and strong
participation of CSET faculty members. Each of the components of the strategic
plan will be seamlessly integrated through student-faculty interactions in
classroom, research laboratories on and off campus, interaction with role models
and peers, and exposure to diverse groups of scientists. Demographic and
Institutional Research Services will implement a comprehensive formative and
summative evaluation plan to measure the outcome-based indicators of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: JSU is well positioned to be the
leading producer of minority STEM graduates at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels in areas like, biology, chemistry, computer science,
environmental science, physics, engineering and technology. The HBCU-UP project
and other projects will continue to transform the research and instructional
enterprise at JSU. The University has moved from a teaching institution to a
designation of doctoral research-intensive institution. The successful ECP model
will be shared with the broader community of colleges and universities who are
working to increase the numbers of minorities entering the scientific and
technological workforce. The results will be disseminated via website, mass
media and at professional presentations.