* 0411694
* Numerical Modeling of Multiphysics Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ivan Yotov, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 192,421.00

The main objectives of the proposed research are to design,
analyze,&lt;br/&gt;and implement accurate, robust, and efficient numerical
methods for&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations which model complex
multiscale&lt;br/&gt;multiphysics systems arising in science and
engineering&lt;br/&gt;applications. In particular, the research will focus on
several&lt;br/&gt;critical components of the mathematical and numerical modeling
of&lt;br/&gt;coupled free fluid and porous media flows: identification of a
correct&lt;br/&gt;mathematical model, especially appropriate interface
conditions,&lt;br/&gt;analysis of the well-posedness of the model, design and
analysis of&lt;br/&gt;stable and accurate numerical discretization methods,
including finite&lt;br/&gt;element methods on non-matching grids, interior
convergence and&lt;br/&gt;postprocessing, and a posteriori error estimation and
adaptivity, and&lt;br/&gt;development of efficient solution algorithms such as
parallel domain&lt;br/&gt;decomposition and Newton-Krylov-multigrid solvers and
preconditioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The numerical techniques to be developed
in this research are general&lt;br/&gt;and address fundamental questions of
numerical analysis of partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations. Applications to
coupling of groundwater and&lt;br/&gt;surface water flows, as well as modeling
of the cardiovascular system&lt;br/&gt;will be emphasized. Computer modeling of
subsurface and surface flow&lt;br/&gt;and transport can provide reliable and
cost-effective solutions to&lt;br/&gt;environmental and energy problems such as
contaminant surface water&lt;br/&gt;and groundwater remediation and enhanced oil
recovery. Current&lt;br/&gt;simulators do not take into account the complex
multiscale interaction&lt;br/&gt;between subsurface and surface geosystems. This
research will model&lt;br/&gt;this interaction, which is crucial for the
accurate prediction of&lt;br/&gt;fluid behavior. The research will result in the
development of robust&lt;br/&gt;and flexible software tools for performing
accurate realistic&lt;br/&gt;multiprocessor simulations of contaminant
remediation of wetlands,&lt;br/&gt;lakes and estuaries. Mathematical and
computational modeling of the&lt;br/&gt;cardiovascular system is a relatively
new but rapidly growing area of&lt;br/&gt;research. This application has a vast
importance to society. For&lt;br/&gt;example, the heart attacks and strokes that
result from&lt;br/&gt;atherosclerosis are the major cause of death in
industrial&lt;br/&gt;nations. The aim of the proposed research in this area is
to model&lt;br/&gt;computationally atherosclerosis taking into account the
recently&lt;br/&gt;discovered, but critical effect of inflammation. Coupled
macroscopic&lt;br/&gt;models of blood flow within the artery and its wall will
be combined&lt;br/&gt;with cellular level models of acute inflammatory response.
The&lt;br/&gt;research will lead to the development of optimized simulation
tools&lt;br/&gt;which will advance prevention, detection, and therapy
of&lt;br/&gt;atherosclerosis.&lt;br/&gt;