* 0411625
* The Pachacamac Project: Excavations at Pilgrims' Plaza, 2004-05
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Izumi Shimada, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2008
* USD 169,347.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Izumi Shimada and his team
of&lt;br/&gt;specialists and students will conduct two seasons (2004 and 2005)
of&lt;br/&gt;archaeological fieldwork at the famed pre-Hispanic religious center
of&lt;br/&gt;Pachacamac just south of the city of Lima on the central coast of
Peru.&lt;br/&gt;Pachacamac was one of the most revered and durable
prehistoric&lt;br/&gt;religious/pilgrimage centers in the Andean region,
arguably the Mecca of&lt;br/&gt;the Americas. Today, along with Macchu Picchu,
it is one of the best-known&lt;br/&gt;and oft-visited monuments of Peru. The
powerful patron deity of this center&lt;br/&gt;was much feared even by the
mighty Inkas, who often consulted its oracle.&lt;br/&gt;Following Spanish
conquest of the Andean world and the imposition of&lt;br/&gt;Catholicism, the
deity was transformed into the Purple Christ and&lt;br/&gt;continues today to
command the fervent devotion of millions of modern&lt;br/&gt;residents of Lima
and surrounding areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the participation of
archaeologists, botanists, chemist, historian, and zoologist from
Germany,&lt;br/&gt;Japan, Peru and the U.S., this research aims to clarify the
(1) identity,&lt;br/&gt;organization, and roles of the residents of this center,
and (2) the role&lt;br/&gt;environmental conditions played in its remarkable
longevity, resilience and&lt;br/&gt;power. To attain the first goal, we will
excavate three areas near the base&lt;br/&gt;of the sacred Temple of Pachacamac.
The 2003 survey of this area using&lt;br/&gt;ground-penetrating radar (GPR)
revealed the presence of superimposed remains&lt;br/&gt;of what are thought to
have been residences and workshops down to depths of&lt;br/&gt;6 to 7 m below
surface that were built over the 1500 plus years of nearly&lt;br/&gt;continuous
prehistoric occupation. In 2004, the team will conduct a
supplementary&lt;br/&gt;GPR survey to improve understanding of buried
architecture. The second&lt;br/&gt;aim will be achieved through analysis of
sediment cores to be extracted from&lt;br/&gt;the two small ponds situated
within and just outside of Pachacamac.&lt;br/&gt;Composition and relative
frequencies of pollens, diatoms, sediments, and&lt;br/&gt;animal and plant
remains in the superimposed layers of sediments should&lt;br/&gt;allow
reconstruction of local climate and ecology, including the effects
of&lt;br/&gt;droughts and El Nino events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
important for a number of&lt;br/&gt;reasons: It will (1) advance our
understanding of the role of ancient&lt;br/&gt;religious centers in social
integration and political centralization, (2)&lt;br/&gt;refine approaches to
understanding their operation and maintenance, and (3)&lt;br/&gt;elucidate the
relationship between the ebb and flow of religious centers
and&lt;br/&gt;associated ideology, on the one hand, and environmental
conditions, on the&lt;br/&gt;other. The research is also critical in promoting
international and&lt;br/&gt;inter-disciplinary collaboration, as well as the
training of American and&lt;br/&gt;foreign students.&lt;br/&gt;