* 0411448
* Analysis and Applications of the Discontinuous Galerkin Method
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Ohannes Karakashian, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 115,231.00

In its broader outlines, this research program aims at the
development,&lt;br/&gt;analysis and computer implementation of numerical methods
designed to&lt;br/&gt;approximate the solutions of some partial differential
equations that have&lt;br/&gt;important applications in the fields of
engineering and physics. Indeed,&lt;br/&gt;elliptic equations, the Navier-Stokes
equations and nonlinear wave&lt;br/&gt;equations despite having been cultivated
for decades, still offer fertile&lt;br/&gt;ground for further exploration, for
there are still a plethora of&lt;br/&gt;unanswered questions and a pressing need
for more efficient and faster&lt;br/&gt;algorithms. The discontinuous Galerkin
method will constitute the core methodology of&lt;br/&gt;this effort. While
going back to 1973, major interest did not focus on it&lt;br/&gt;until the
nineties. Today it constitutes one of the most active areas&lt;br/&gt;within
finite elements if not the whole range of methods for the
numerical&lt;br/&gt;treatment of partial differential equations. It has not been
as&lt;br/&gt;extensively explored as the standard Galerkin version, yet what is
known&lt;br/&gt;so far offers a tantalizing glimpse of its potential. The
project will&lt;br/&gt;involve various areas at the cutting edge of numerical
analysis and&lt;br/&gt;scientific computing, in particular, the development of
convergent and&lt;br/&gt;efficient adaptive methods designed to reduce the run
time of the&lt;br/&gt;algorithms by finding optimal or quasi-optimal meshes.
These adaptive&lt;br/&gt;methods will require continuing the work on the
development of sharp&lt;br/&gt;a-posteriori error estimators designed to
identify regions where the&lt;br/&gt;solution is varying rapidly. Major efforts
will be directed towards&lt;br/&gt;pursuing a recently identified strategy for
reducing the number of&lt;br/&gt;iterations that current adaptive algorithms
require in achieving a&lt;br/&gt;prescribed level of
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific computing is recognized as
crucial to the advancement of&lt;br/&gt;science. As such, the development of
state of the art algorithms and codes&lt;br/&gt;is important for the progress of
technology. Specifically, improved&lt;br/&gt;adaptive codes resulting from this
project will have impact on a wide&lt;br/&gt;range of problems and applications
involving fluid flow phenomena, the&lt;br/&gt;elucidation of extremely fast
chemical reactions by femtosecond lasers,&lt;br/&gt;and numerical simulations of
supernova explosions. &lt;br/&gt;