* 0411634
* Micro-Level and Macro-Level Flow Mechanics of Wet Granular Media
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Christine Hrenya, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 05/31/2008
* USD 86,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT - 0411634&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. Processes involving the flow of solid particles are ubiquitous in
both&lt;br/&gt;nature (landslides, planetary rings, etc.) and industry
(pharmaceuticals, food products, chemical process industries), though a
predictive understanding of their behavior remains an elusive goal. Of
particular interest in the proposed effort are systems involving particles
coated with a thin layer of viscous fluid - i.e., wet solids. Such particulate
systems are found in a wide range of applications, including fluidized-bed
granulation, mixing of pharmaceuticals, pollen transport, filtration, etc. Such
systems are known to display characteristics that are typically not exhibited by
their dry counterparts, namely the presence of particle agglomerates. A
predictive knowledge of agglomeration formation, rearrangement, growth, and
break-up is a key element in the rational design of wet-solid processes, though
such a predictive tool is not currently available. The current effort aims to
address the aforementioned need, with a particular focus on viscous (dynamic)
effects occurring between wetted particles, which are relatively unexplored as
compared to the capillary (static) effects of wetted systems and viscous effects
of fully-immersed systems. A combination of theory, experiments, and discrete-
particle simulations will be used to answer the following critical questions
associated with wet solids: (i) Will an agglomerate form when two "free"
particles collide? (ii) If an agglomerate is not formed, what is the impact of
the liquid layer on the post-collisional particle motion? (iii) If an
agglomerate does form, what is the result of a collision with a third particle?
(iv) How do these micro-level physics impact the macro-level (continuum)
behavior of both granular and gas-solid systems? More specifically, a
combination of experiments and fundamental theory based on lubrication,
capillary forces, and solid mechanics will be used to develop stick/bounce and
breakup criteria for small agglomerates. The theory will require only measurable
solid and liquid properties for solution. To bridge this micro-level physics
with macro-level behavior, the microphysical theory will be incorporated into
discrete-particle simulations. The effect of the liquid layer on continuum
quantities like stress will be assessed via an examination of simple shear flow
of a granular material. Furthermore, discrete-particle simulations will also be
carried out for a specific gassolid operation, namely fluidized-bed granulation
(or enlargement), in an effort to describe some non-intuitive behavior observed
in such systems. This work will be a collaboration between the PI (Prof.
Christine Hrenya) and the co-PI (Prof. Rob Davis), who have extensive background
in the theoretical, experimental, and simulation aspects associated with
particulate flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The broader impacts of
the work include the following: (i) a more&lt;br/&gt;fundamental understanding
of wetted particulate system, (ii) training of graduate students in the area of
particle technology, which has been identified as a national need [1-3], and
(iii) sharing of learned information with both the technical community (via
presentations and peer-reveiwed publications) and the student community (via
incorporation into coursework, training programs, and
outreach).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;