* 0411942
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Impact of Specialist Insect Herbivores on Plant Community Composition.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Gregory Dwyer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2006
* USD 5,353.00

The relative abundances of different species in natural plant communities is
influenced by the outcome of competition among plant species and by herbivory,
yet we lack a general understanding of how these forces interact in natural
systems. In recent years, it has become increasingly clear that the spatial
organization of species has a profound impact on how those species interact. The
immobile nature of terrestrial plants makes plant competition a highly localized
process. Damage by mobile herbivores, however, occurs over a regional scale. I
will use spatially-explicit mathematical models, in conjunction with field
experiments, to investigate the interplay between these local and regional
processes in determining the composition and relative abundances of plant
species in their natural habitats. The goldenrod beetle (genus Trirhabda) is
known to reach extremely high population densities and to decimate its host
plant, tall goldenrod (Solidago altissima). S. altissima is a competitive
dominant, so this intense herbivory substantially reduces the competitive stress
on other plant species, leading to dramatic changes in their abundances. I will
use data on the Trirhabda-Solidago system to test the ability of my spatial
models to explain patterns of abundances in natural plant populations. This work
will comprise a unique examination of the role of spatial scale in shaping
species interactions. By bringing together spatial ecological models and field
data, my research will foster the development of mathematical methods that can
be widely applied in the environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;