* 0411536
* Seventh German-American Frontiers of Engineering Symposium, Washington, DC, April 29, 2004 - May 1, 2004
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Marshall M. Lih
* 03/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

0411536&lt;br/&gt;Hunziker&lt;br/&gt;The National Academy of Engineering (NAE)
will host a joint German-American Frontiers of Engineering (FoE) Symposium to
which a total of 60 participants, 30 from each country, will be invited. The
basic idea is to engage promising engineering researchers from both countries,
with emphasis on the younger generation in the community, to explore and discuss
important areas of research at the cutting edge of technology. The German
counterpart sponsor is the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (AvH)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A bipartite organizing committee has identified the
Internet, Bioengineering and the Food Industry, Process Quality Measurement, and
Engineering and Art/New Media as the areas of concentration. In each of these
areas both American and German experts will be speakers reporting on the latest
developments in these areas The program consists of four formal sessions and a
technical tour over a three-day period. Each session entails talks by speakers
on advances and opportunities in their engineering fields followed by
discussion. To foster cross-fertilization among disciplines, the talks on
cutting-edge research and innovation will be aimed at the technically
sophisticated but nonspecialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The event is scheduled to
take place at the NAE Headquarters in Washington, DC, April 29-May 1,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;