* 0411404
* SGER: New Insights into Calcium Cycling in Forests through Coupled Ca and Sr Isotopic Measurements
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Erik Hobbie, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 09/30/2006
* USD 52,741.00

Calcium (Ca) is an essential forest nutrient that is sensitive to leaching
caused by acid rain and nitrogen deposition. Symbiotic fungi may provide plants
access to calcium bound in soil minerals, but they too are sensitive to acid
rain. Whether leached calcium can be replaced by calcium weathered from soil
minerals may accordingly determine how plants adapt to polluted conditions. This
issue has not been satisfactorily resolved because researchers have relied on
imperfect analogs to study Ca cycling in forest ecosystems, namely
strontium/calcium (Sr/Ca) values and Sr isotopic ratios (87Sr/86Sr). Although
measurements of isotope ratios often provide powerful insights into internal
cycling of elements, we lack basic baseline data on calcium isotope patterns. To
examine how Ca and Sr cycling in forest ecosystems are coupled, we will test the
partitioning of Ca and Sr elements and isotopes in: 1) cultured pine and birch
seedlings with known calcium and strontium sources, and 2) samples carefully
selected from field sites across natural and experimental nitrogen deposition
gradients. We will specifically address 1) whether Ca isotopes fractionate
between parts of trees (e.g., foliage vs. branches), 2) the links between other
chemical signatures and Ca isotopic fractionation, 3) how symbiotic fungi affect
plant calcium supply and plant calcium isotopes, and 4) how closely Sr/Ca and
87Sr/86Sr document Ca cycling. Seedling results will be compared with similar
measurements from long-running nitrogen deposition experiments in hardwood and
pine plots at the Harvard Forest Long-Term Ecological Research site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will serve the larger scientific community
and the health of the nation's forests by evaluating a promising isotopic system
for studying a key forest nutrient that is strongly affected by the
anthropogenic acid rain prevalent in the northeast, southeast, and California.
The project will also serve as the principal project for a female graduate
student in biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;