* 0411686
* Collaborative Research: Constructing Mental Images of Geologic Structures from Field Observations
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2011
* Lynn Liben, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2011
* USD 234,944.00

The investigators propose to conduct a series of studies concerning how it is
that people visualize and comprehend large-scale geologic structures and how it
is that instructors in Geoscience ought best to teach about them. This project
will contribute to basic knowledge of spatial cognition. The investigators will
conduct a series of behavioral experiments, using artificial geologic outcrops
constructed on the La11:lont-Doherty campus and using tabletop architectural
models of the campus. The outcrops, each about a meter across, would together
form a buried geologic structure, such as a basin, a symmetric syncline, or an
asymmetric plunging syncline, at a realistic scale (i.e;,hundreds of meters
across). The outcrops will not be visible from each &lt;br/&gt;other, so the
participants will need to integrate what can be seen to construct a mental image
of the entire structure. !Participants will be guided around the outcrops and
then be tested on their representations (e.g., askedtb choose accurate models of
the structure). They will also take standard tests of spatial ability and
verbal-spatial.learning style. The investigators will examine (a) the
development of skill on the outcrop task among novices through practice and
repetition in the absence ofinst~ction; (b) the relationship among spatial
abilities, learning style, and performance on the outcrop task; and (c)
strategies used by experts, low-performing noyices,and high-performing novices
in doing the outcrop task. &lt;br/&gt;