* 0411504
* High Order and Efficient Numerical Schemes for Multi-Dimensional Hyperbolic Systems of Conservation Laws and for Simulations of Multi-Phase Fluids in Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Xu-Dong Liu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 172,970.00

In a series of research works we have introduced and established
the&lt;br/&gt;positivity principle for schemes for solving hyperbolic systems of
conservation &lt;br/&gt;laws. The rationale of the positivity principle is
stability, which is a very &lt;br/&gt;important requirement for numerical
schemes. The positivity principle is the &lt;br/&gt;1st stability principle for
schemes for solving multi-dimensional hyperbolic &lt;br/&gt;systems. In this
proposal we have shown that the central scheme studied by Kurganov and Tadmor is
positive. By mixing upwind scheme and Lax-Wendroff scheme, we have made a
positive scheme which costs only 30% of the original positive scheme. We have
developed a scheme called Convex Essentially Non-Oscillatory (ENO) scheme. The
Convex ENO scheme is a high order accurate central scheme. We have developed a
new multigrid method to solve hyperbolic systems of conservation laws. By doing
multigrid, the cost of calculations is reduced significantly. In the proposal we
also develop several schemes for solving elliptic problems with multi-fluids
separated by the interfaces. Such problems arise from many real world
applications. For example, incompressible multi-fluids Navier-Stokes equation. A
new uniform 2nd order accurate scheme on non-body-fitting grids is developed for
that. We have proposed a uniform 2nd order accurate level-set method using
finite element method for solving elliptic problems with mixing boundary
conditions. Such problems emerge from in simulating epitaxial thin film growth
using the island dynamics model. We have used some of those methods to do Direct
Numerical Simulation on multi-phase turbulent flows. We have developed a
geometric multigrid method for such elliptic problems based on the Ghost Fluid
Method, and plan to do more with the other methods. The PI and his collaborators
are pursuing further development of positive schemes. In a series of research
works they have introduced and established the positivity principle for schemes
for solving hyperbolic systems of conservation laws. The rationale of the
positivity principle is stability. 1) They prove that the central scheme
developed by Kurganov and Tadmor is positive scheme. 2) They continue to develop
a new positive scheme, which is a mixture of upwind and Lax-Wendroff schemes.
Hence two-stage Runge-Kutta is not required and for two-dimensions the
computation cost could be cut by as much as 70%.&lt;br/&gt;3) They continue to
work on a new scheme called weighted component-wise positive&lt;br/&gt;scheme.
It is a mixture of Weighted ENO schemes and 2nd order component-wise version of
Convex ENO scheme or high-resolution central scheme. They use a convex
combination of all candidates to do reconstruction, but use a new measurement
called accurateness instead of smoothness to assign proper weights. The convex
combination achieves almost optimal (one order lower than the optimal) order
accuracy. This scheme can be also extended to solve Hamilton-Jacobi equations in
multi-dimensions. 4) They are going to introduce a multigrid method for solving
multi-dimensional hyperbolic systems of conservation laws. The novelty is to
calculate the fluxes on coarse grid, then interpolates the differences of the
fluxes or the fluxes to the finest grid. Such multigrid method is not only
faster than a base scheme in each iteration, but also allows larger time step
than that of the base scheme. Hence the multigrid method requires much less CPU
time to advance solutions to the same stopping time compared to the base scheme.
In other words, for the same CPU time, the multigrid method advances solutions
much further in time. This is particularly useful for computing stationary
solutions. In the recent years, the PI and his collaborators have been pursuing
further development of Ghost Fluid Method (GFM) for multi-phase fluids. 1) They
propose a geometric multigrid method to solving linear systems arising from
irregular boundary problems involving multiple interfaces in 2D and 3D. In this
method, they adopt a matrix-free approach i.e. they do not form the fine grid
matrix explicitly and they never form nor store the coarse grid matrices. The
main idea is to construct an accurate interpolation which captures the correct
boundary conditions at the interfaces via a level set function. 2) They propose
a 2nd order accurate level-set method using finite element method for solving
elliptic equations with Robin interface conditions. They first study a weak
formulation of it, and then prove that&lt;br/&gt;there exists a unique weak
solution. At last, a finite element method on non-body-fitting uniform or
arbitrary triangulations is used to solve such weak formulation. The novelty of
this work is the incorporation of finite element methods and non-body-fitting
triangulations. 3) They develop a new 2nd order accurate numerical method on
non-body-fitting grids for solving the elliptic equations with interfaces.
Instead of smooth, the boundary and the subdomains'&lt;br/&gt;boundaries and
hence the interfaces, are only required to be Lipschitz continuous as
submanifold. A weak formulation is developed and the numerical method is derived
by discretizing the weak formulation by piece-wise linear functions. The method
is 2nd order accurate in maximum norm if the interface is smooth or its
discontinuities are proper handled, and convergent in maximum norm otherwise. 4)
They use the boundary condition capturing method&lt;br/&gt;to do Direct
Numerical Simulations on multi-phase turbulent&lt;br/&gt;flows. This is the
first successful DNS of such problems.&lt;br/&gt;Because turbulence happens
through a large range of scales, and hence very efficient methods are needed to
capture all meaningful scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focus on the
real world applications. For example, hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;systems of
conservation laws, incompressible Navier-Stokes equations with interfaces,
epitaxial thin film growth using the island dynamics model, Direct Numerical
Simulation on multi-phase turbulent flows. The proposed numerical methods
possess high order accuracy and high resolutions, hence they are very efficient.
Two multigrid methods are proposed to couple with those methods to further
speeded up numerical simulations. The proposal should have broad impact, since
the methods created can be easily adopted to many other application areas in the
environmental, geophysical, biological, material science, and engineering
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;