* 0411630
* Shape Engineering of Organic Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Michael Doherty, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 277,031.00

Proposal Number: CTS-0411630

Principal Investigator: Michael Doherty

Institution: University of California-Santa Barbara

The goal of the proposed research is to develop a new generation of modeling
tools for the growth and dissolution of organic crystals. The models will allow
quantitative predictions to be made for solution-mediated polymorphism and the
simultaneous prediction of particle size and shape of organic crystals grown
from solution. The specific tasks include the development of a dynamic model to
predict the evolution of crystal shape during growth and dissolution, the
development of fundamental growth and dissolution models for crystal faces that
account for the influence of solvent on the face growth/dissolution rates, and
the integration of these models with population balance models to simultaneously
predict size and shape of organic crystals grown from solution. Crystallizer
experiments are proposed to validate the key predictive aspects of the approach.
Model systems will include carboxylic acids and amino acids grown from aqueous
and organic solvents. One aspect of this research will be to provide the
necessary coupling between crystal chemistry and crystallizer engineering
design. The broader impact of this work will be to show that solid-state
chemistry can be coupled with engineering principles. This project will have an
impact on chemical engineering education through the potential for new course
offerings and textbooks. This work could have a large impact on the
pharmaceutical industry, where most products are formulated in particulate,
crystalline form. Reviewers recognized the importance of the work and the
ability of the PI to perform the research. The PI has the ability to integrate
solid-state chemistry, interface structure, and modeling algorithms. The
research will address the important problem of polymorphism. This will be
challenging, as polymorphism is sensitive to heterogeneous nucleation, solvent,
temperature, super saturation, and impurities. The connection of the modeling
with a laboratory crystallizer is a plus and will ensure the proper feedback
between modeling and experiment. Successful completion of the project would have
broad impacts on the way crystal growth is viewed. It could represent a
significant advance in the ability to predict crystal shape and the effects of
additives and solvents on morphology.