* 0412377
* International Conference of Continuous Optimizatio; August 2-4, 2004; RPI, Troy, NY
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Jong-Shi Pang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 03/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

This grant requests funds to support the inaugural International Conference on
Continuous Optimization, to be held on the campus of Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute from Monday August 2, 2004 through Wednesday August 4, 2004. The
Conference will be preceded by a two-day Summer School, in which several
distinguished scholars will offer tutorials on contemporary topics in continuous
optimization. The School will be attended by advanced graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows on the recommendation of their supervisors. The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity is that it will provide a stimulus
for sustained research in continuous optimization, which is a fertile
scientific/engineering discipline with immense practical applications. Among its
broader impacts, the proposed activity will have a significant affect on cyber
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Continuous optimization has played, and
continues to play, a major role in advancing and impacting the contemporary
developments of many scientific and engineering disciplines, and provides a
fundamental set of mathematical and computational tools that are key for many
real-world decision support systems and modeling applications, which in turn are
vital for the sustained growth of the economy and for the well being of society.
The goal of the Conference is threefold: (a) to provide a focused forum for US
and international researchers and practitioners to meet in order to facilitate
the rapid exchange of state-of-the-art results and promising ideas to ensure the
healthy advancement of continuous optimization, (b) to offer educational
opportunities to graduate students and junior researchers to learn about the
latest developments in continuous optimization, and (c) to encourage women and
minority researchers to work in this important area of Operations Research and
Computational Science. The Conference will facilitate the discussion and
dissimilation of the latest results in continuous optimization, will inspire new
ideas and sharpen existing ones, will advance scientific knowledge and increase
the general population's awareness of optimization, and will attract new talents
to work in the discipline. The end benefits to society are that complex
scientific, engineering, financial, and economic problems can be better modeled
and solved, and human resources can be gainfully utilized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;