* 0412046
* International Workshop:  U.S.-Latin American Caribbean Environmental Problems and Sustainable Solutions, Cartagena, Colombia, May 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2005
* Pedro Alvarez, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 03/31/2005
* USD 28,464.00

In this project funded by the Americas Program of the Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Environmental Engineering Program in the
Division of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems, Dr. Pedro J. Alvarez of
Rice University will organize a workshop on the theme of "Emerging Solutions to
Environmental Problems in the Caribbean" held the week of May 17, 2004 in
Cartagena, Colombia. Foreign organizers of the workshop include Henry Mauri of
Corporacion Universitaria de la Costa, Barranquilla, Colombia. The workshop aims
to facillitate interaction of U.S. researchers with environmental engineers in
Latin American countries and focuses on topics of considerable importance to
solving environmental problems in the Caribbean. Among these topics are water
quality issues and ecological engineering, eutrophication control and nutrient
removal, alternative drinking water and wastewater treatment approaches, and
hazardous waste management and site cleanup. This meeting will take place after
CONCARIBE-2004, which is an international conference that joins technologies,
methods and ideas to solve environmental problems in South American
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. and neighboring Latin American
countries in the Caribbean face a large and growing number of environmental
problems that threaten public health and biodiversity. This workshop will help
build bridges for collaborations with Latin American scientists and engineers
working on sustainable solutions to environmental problems in the Caribbean.
Although some approaches appropriate for the Caribbean may not be implementable
in the U.S. due to constraints associated with a higher degree of development,
many solutions will point the way to solving similar environmental problems in
the U.S. itself. The interactions among participants of this workshop are also
likely to result in improved technology transfer and in opportunities for
research and international experience for U.S. students and young researchers
who will also attend.&lt;br/&gt;