* 0412720
* Dissertation Research:  Household Ecology of Family Ranchers in the Eastern Sierras
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Eugene Anderson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,910.00

The deterioration of the range, including desertification, non-source water
pollution, and loss of biodiversity, is one of the most urgent environmental
issues in the western United States. While significant numbers of ranches
contribute to environmental degradation, many ranchers work to ensure
conservation. Under the right conditions, family ranchers can serve as effective
range managers, preserving open space and the working agricultural landscape.
Currently, the conditions that lead to conservation rather than mismanagement
are not well understood and little is known about how policy is implemented
through the actions of households on family ranches. This dissertation project,
conducted by a graduate student of cultural anthropology, will seek to
understand current processes of land management in which multiple economic
variables and ranchers' traditional knowledge of the land are transformed into
household actions. The project will provide a model of household decision-making
processes that produce the observed range management strategies that impact
environmental sustainability in the Eastern Sierra corridor of California. Each
year, family ranchers in the Eastern Sierra must use their knowledge of the
land, economy, politics, and livestock to devise range management strategies
that will provide for the household economically and yet also ensure stability
and continuity of the ranch. Using a combination of participant observation in
ranching communities, structured in-depth and family history interviews,
environmental status surveys, decision-making process modeling and the
development of simple models of alternative range management strategies, the
student will determine how multiple economic and ecological constraints are
understood by family ranchers and negotiated through range management practices,
contributing a multifaceted understanding of range management and its
environmental and social effects.&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact: Aside from
contributing to the education of a doctoral student, this research will provide
a model of the necessary factors promoting family ranch economic stability and
environmental sustainability, as well as a model of how family ranches implement
government policy on-the-ground through resource management practices. This new
knowledge will be important to planners seeking more effective policies
concerning range land management and conservation.&lt;br/&gt;