* 0412137
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Comparative Analysis of In vivo and In vitro Transcripts (ESTs) of Beauveria bassiana
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Nemat Keyhani, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2006
* USD 173,179.00

Beauveria bassiana is an opportunistic fungal pathogen that has evolved a
spectrum of strategies for the successful infection and degradation of a broad
range of arthropod hosts. Entomopathogenic fungi are able to infect living
insects, and scientists since Pasteur have suggested their use for controlling a
variety of agricultural, invasive, and nuisance pests. Aside from their use in
biocontrol regimes, Beauveria sp are the second most widely used whole cell
eukaryotic biocatalysts, and are responsible for a range of biological
transformations and remediations that remain elusive to chemical and synthetic
methods. Nonetheless, the molecular mechanisms of fungal entomopathogenicity are
largely unknown. The project objectives are to isolate and annotate B. bassiana
expressed sequence tags (ESTs). Research derived from the project will yield in
depth analyses of gene expression in B. bassiana, providing a substantial
sequence database for molecular characterization and gene discovery. This
information will be made available to the scientific community from a source
(NCBI) website. The project includes curriculum development in order to present
students, at both the graduate and undergraduate levels, theoretical and
practical lessons in bioinformatics. Data generated from the research mission
will be used to provide a hands-on learning tool for students in bioinformatics
and genomics. The laboratory is dedicated to actively providing opportunities
for underrepresented groups, and has integrated these aims in hosting students
at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels.