* 0412169
* IMR-MIP Series Connected Hybrid
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Jack Crow, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,803,092.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research-Major Instrumentation
Projects program provides support to the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
(NHMFL) to undertake the conceptual and engineering design of a revolutionary
magnet system called the Series-Connected Hybrid. The term Hybrid derives from
using both resistive and superconducting technologies in the same magnet system,
while Series-Connected refers to the fact that individual coils in the system
will be powered electrically in series, a feature that both mitigates important
magnet-design issues as well as offers significant performance advantages to
scientists using the facility. This concept will allow substantially improved
field quality relative to other powered systems while simultaneously allowing
important reductions of both operating and total lifetime costs. Since the
system will be designed to operate on a single unit of the NHMFL power system
(typically two to four are used on other magnets), it will permit simultaneous
service to multiple users as well as reduce the specific electricity demand.
These attributes make the proposed system particularly attractive to areas of
scientific research where experiments require exposure for long periods of time
to very high-quality magnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research - Major Instrumentation Project program
supports the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) to undertake the
conceptual and engineering design of a revolutionary magnet system called the
Series-Connected Hybrid. The term Hybrid relates that both superconducting
technology (in the form of Nb3Sn-based cable-in-conduit conductor) and resistive
technology (in the form of the "Florida Poly-Bitter" technology pioneered at the
NHMFL) will be used in the same magnet system, while Series-Connected refers to
the fact that individual coils in the system will be powered electrically in
series, a feature that both mitigates important engineering issues related to
normal, off-normal, and faulted operations as well as offers significant
performance advantages related to magnetic field stability, field quality, and
cost of operation. The 35Tesla design field of the Series-Connected Hybrid will
exceed presently available all-superconducting fields by 63% and fields in
existing all-resistive magnets with similar bore and uniformity by 40%. Compared
to standard all-resistive or hybrid magnets, the Series-Connected Hybrid will
offer nearly three orders of magnitude improvement in field uniformity. As a
result, the Series-Connected Hybrid will enable experiments in condensed-matter
physics, materials chemistry, spin physics, EMR, and solution-NMR spectroscopy
to be conducted in a previously unexplored parameter space of field and
uniformity. Since the system will be designed to operate on a single 10MW unit
of the NHMFL power system (typically two to four are used on other magnets), it
will permit simultaneous service to multiple users as well as reduce the
specific electricity demand. The project will open doors to a new generation of
high-field magnets that consume less power, cost less over their operating
lifetime, and facilitate substantially more magnet time for users.&lt;br/&gt;