* 0412101
* Discovery Corps Senior Fellowship:     Science Enrichment using Retired Volunteer Educators (SERVE)
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Dominick Casadonte, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 12/31/2005
* USD 200,000.00

Dominick Casadonte, Texas Tech University, is a Discovery Corps Senior Fellow
for the 2004-2005 academic year. Casadonte will lead an intergenerational
chemistry education study involving senior citizens and students in the Lubbock
public schools. He will train a group of senior citizens in both pedagogy and
general chemistry principals. The senior citizens will then volunteer as
teacher's aides, mentors or resource persons in the Lubbock Texas school system.
Many aspects of the program will be evaluated, including the classroom
effectiveness of the senior volunteer, the educational outcomes for the
students, the attitudinal, physical and cognitive outcomes for the seniors, and
the overall efficacy from the perspective of the classroom teacher . This
Discovery Corps Senior Fellowship is supported by the Division of Chemistry and
the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Corps Fellowship Program is a pilot program seeking new postdoctoral
and professional development models that combine research expertise with
professional service. Discovery Corps Fellows leverage their research expertise
through projects that address areas of national need. Their projects enhance
research capacity and infrastructure and contribute to workforce development and
job creation. The Discovery Corps Program supports both Postdoctoral Fellows and
Senior Fellows.&lt;br/&gt;