* 0412884
* Robots on the Edge:  Enabling Non-Specific Mulit-Limbed Robots with Autonomous Free-Climbing Capabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Stephen Rock, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 12/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

Robots on the Edge:&lt;br/&gt;Enabling Non-Specific Multi-Limbed Robots with
Autonomous Free-Climbing Capabilities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
program is to develop a fundamental understanding of the problem-solving
activity underlying climbing, then to create new technologies based on this
understanding that will enable non-specific multi-limbed robots to free-climb
natural, unstructured, vertical terrain. Climbing is regarded by human climbers
to be a physical problem-solving activity in a highly unstructured environment.
Overall, climbing involves a tight combination of fast but insightful reasoning,
goal-directed sensing, and reactive execution. Sophisticated planning is
required to handle hard constraints (e.g., equilibrium, torque limits,
collision) on the agent's motion, as well as softer ones (e.g., uncertainties,
risk level, energy consumption). Precise sensing (e.g., tactile, vision) is used
to search and detect potential holds in the unstructured rock face, estimate the
location and characteristics of contact points, and anticipate or detect slip.
Fine control is needed to maintain balance through careful distribution of
contact forces. A solution to the climbing problem requires that these
activities be fused into a seamless process. This program will seek advances in
the specific areas of terrain modeling, multi-constraint trajectory planning and
robust motion strategies with an initial emphasis on multi-constraint trajectory
planning and control. The LEMUR II robot of JPL will be used to validate
experimentally the results of the program. It will be used to demonstrate multi-
step climbing in an unknown environment. The goal is to have it climb
autonomously an indoor rock wall (similar to a climbing gym). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;