* 0412181
* Discovery Corps Postdoctoral Fellowship:    Musical Science:    Chemistry of Historical Organ Pipe Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Catherine Oertel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 06/30/2006
* USD 200,000.00

Catherine M. Oertel, Cornell University, is a Discovery Corps Postdoctoral
Fellow for the 2004-2005 and 2005-2006 academic years. Oertel will integrate her
talents and experiences in music, materials chemistry and education in a project
on the chemistry of historical pipe organs. Centuries-old pipe organs provide
unique opportunities to study long-term corrosion, specifically how tin alloy
composition, microstructure and environmental factors contribute to corrosion.
In complementary efforts, Oertel will develop learning activites for students
that use music and musical instruments to teach concepts of physics, chemistry
and materials science. She will also participate in an international and
interdisciplinary partnership between the Goteborg Organ Art Center and Chalmers
University of Technology in Sweden and Cornell University that will result in a
new, historically informed pipe organ at Cornell. This Discovery Corps
Postdoctoral Fellowship is supported by the Division of Chemistry and the MPS
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Corps
Fellowship Program is a pilot program seeking new postdoctoral and professional
development models that combine research expertise with professional service.
Discovery Corps Fellows leverage their research expertise through projects that
address areas of national need. Their projects enhance research capacity and
infrastructure and contribute to workforce development and job creation. The
Discovery Corps Program supports both Postdoctoral Fellows and Senior
Fellows.&lt;br/&gt;