* 0412456
* The Fulcrum Institute for Education in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2012
* Judah Schwartz, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 08/31/2012
* USD 5,889,975.00

FULCRUM INSTITUTE FOR EDUCATION IN SCIENCE &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tufts
University, in partnership with TERC, Malden Public Schools, and Boston's
Mission Hill School, develops the Fulcrum Institute for Education in Science, a
graduate program for producing leaders in science education. This innovative
initiative launches a series of two-year graduate programs for 130 K-8 teachers
producing a pivotal group of Educators in Science qualified to implement and
lead science and classroom research in their teaching. The Institute offers
graduate work focusing on physics, including online courses, summer workshops,
online discussions and data sharing, and intensive work in each participant's
respective school. &lt;br/&gt;Participants include teachers, science
coordinators, and principals from the Malden and Mission Hill Schools, teacher
teams from Tufts' other partner districts, and graduate students from Tufts
M.A.T. program and its M.S. and Ph.D. program in Mathematics, Science,
Technology, and Engineering Education. The careful selection of partnering
schools develops challenging science learning for diverse classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute engages participants in how learners'
understanding of scientific phenomena evolves. Its extensive curricula includes
observing and making sense of scientific phenomena, learning how scientists and
students grasp the same phenomena, sharing and gaining insights with Institute
participants, and learning how to plan and support inquiry-based learning
experiences in classroom settings. The teachers' personal experiences, enriched
by the reflections of practicing scientists, enables them to better comprehend
the science and understand that students perceive phenomena from diverse
perspectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging the advances made by the
successful Lesley/TERC Online Master's in Science Education project, core
Institute curricula and interactions occur online. This cost-effective strategy
ensures the strongest learning opportunities, the greatest flexibility for in-
service teachers, affordability, and widespread scalability. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The partnership offers unique advantages. Tufts delivers highly-
qualified science faculty, its Teacher Preparation programs, and its graduate
programs in Science Education, the only such doctoral program in the Boston
area. TERC brings extensive experience with K-12 science education, research,
and online inquiry-based learning. The Malden and Mission Hills Schools provide
diverse student population and high interest in improving science learning.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The Fulcrum Institute advances the
vision created by the successful NSF Summer Institute Program. It recruits
accomplished teachers, substantially deepens their subject-matter knowledge and
teaching skills, and helps them assume leadership positions in their classrooms,
schools, and professional communities. The project creates an established and
sustainable, leadership program designed to meet the need for leaders in science
education throughout our country. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
Fulcrum Institute becomes an established part of Tuft's programs in science
education, developing into an established part of the university's program
offerings and serves as a gateway for teachers to pursue Masters and Ph.D.
degrees in science education. &lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the Institute introduces a
radical restructuring in the way pre-service teachers are inducted into schools
and supervised by mentoring teachers. The economies offered by online course
delivery result in future Fulcrum Institutes being sustainable via tuitions,
scholarships, vouchers, and district professional development funds. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;