* 0412727
* BE-GenEn: Genomics of Adaptation to the Biotic and Abiotic Environment in Aquilegia
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2011
* Justin Borevitz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 09/30/2011
* USD 1,999,996.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Scott Hodges, Elena Kramer, Magnus Nordborg,
Jeff Tomkins and Justin Borevitz (of the University of California, Santa
Barbara, Harvard University, University of Southern California, Clemson
University and University of Chicago respectively) to study adaptation to the
environment in the columbine genus, Aquilegia. The evolution of life on earth
has been punctuated by numerous examples of adaptive radiation. These dramatic
events quickly create a large amount of biodiversity and are evidenced by rapid
speciation along with morphological and physiological adaptations to numerous
ecological niches. Species in the flowering plant genus Aquilegia have undergone
a very recent adaptive radiation and present a unique opportunity to investigate
the molecular genetic changes underlying adaptations. Species in this genus have
spectacularly different floral morphologies with specializations to different
pollinators. In addition, species differ radically in their habitats ranging
from coastal forests to desert springs to the high alpine. Because any two
species in the genus can be successfully crossed it is possible to dissect the
genetic basis for essentially any trait in any species. By developing an array
of molecular genetic resources for this genus, this project will provide the
infrastructure for a host of studies by a broad community of scientists.
Comparative genomic studies will be particularly amenable because Aquilegia is a
member of the basal eudicot family Ranunculaceae, which is nearly equidistant
between the eudicot model systems such as Arabidopsis and the monocot model
systems such as rice. All of these studies will be facilitated by the fact that
the genome of Aquilegia is among the smallest for a flowering plant at about 350
Mbp.

The specific goals of this project are to evaluate the genetic basis of three
important traits, morphological adaptation to a specific pollinator,
physiological adaptation for flowering time and adaptation to different
soil/habitats. These goals will be accomplished by developing a physical map of
the genome of one species of Aquilegia, A. formosa, along with a large-scale EST
sequence database and a transformation system. The EST sequences will be
localized to the physical map and used to construct oligonucleotide arrays for
expression studies and array-based mapping of traits. Fine-mapping and cloning
of a locus affecting flower orientation will be accomplished with array-based
mapping along with association mapping and expression studies. To investigate
the evolution of flowering time in Aquilegia, candidate genes will be cloned and
their expression patterns and evolution will be characterized. To determine the
genetic architecture for adaptations to different habitats, recombinant inbred
lines from a cross between A. formosa and A. pubescens will be created, their
breakpoints finely mapped and their fitness determined in each parental species'
habitat.

