* 0412956
* Non-Perturbative Approaches to Condensed-Matter Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Paul Fendley, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 324,000.00

Theoretical research will be conducted on condensed matter systems with strong
correlations. The research is awarded under the umbrella of the NSF-wide
Mathematical Sciences Priority Area. Merits of the research include
understanding systems with qualitatively new behavior, such as have arisen in
studies of magnets with frustrating interactions, high-temperature
superconductors, and topological quantum computation. This work will utilize
field-theoretic techniques, especially non-perturbative methods useful for
understanding novel phases which cannot be approached by conventional methods.
The research will include: continuing to derive exact results for topological
phases, where quasiparticle excitations do not have the quantum numbers of the
electron, i.e., are fractionalized; discovering and describing quantum critical
points which separate novel phases from phases with conventional order; probing
more deeply the symmetry structure of one-and two-dimensional models of strongly
correlated electrons; using integrable field theory in quantum impurity
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle investigator has extensive
experience in developing and utilizing modern techniques. Successful
applications of these techniques in current research include: deriving many
exact results for the widely-studied classical and quantum dimmer models;
exploring in depth the phase diagrams of models with topological phases;
utilizing supersymmetry to describe the ground state of strongly correlated
electron systems; describing different kinds of density-wave order in models
with competing interactions, such as in a model of bosons in a one-dimensional
optical lattice; deriving exact results for models with disorder; deriving
correlation functions and other exact results for Haldane-gap spin chains;
understanding Fano resonances in quantum dots and atomic systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context, this type of research is pushing
condensed matter theory into brand new arenas. In these systems, the traditional
Landau paradigm of treating quasiparticles as electron-like does not give even a
good qualitative description of the physics, much less an accurate quantitative
prediction. It is important that the field broaden and develop new ideas and
methods to attack these problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An even broader impact
will come from a book being written entitled Up Against the Infinite. This book
will explain to general audiences the new sorts of theories used to probe
physics in extreme conditions, e.g., ultra-low temperature, code-cracking
quantum computers, the early universe, and how the renormalization group links
physics at vastly different length scales.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical
research will be conducted on condensed matter systems with strong correlations.
The research is awarded under the umbrella of the NSF-wide Mathematical Sciences
Priority Area. Merits of the research include understanding systems with
qualitatively new behavior, such as have arisen in studies of magnets with
frustrating interactions, high-temperature superconductors, and topological
quantum computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broader impact of the grant will
come from a book being written entitled Up Against the Infinite. This book will
explain to general audiences the new sorts of theories used to probe physics in
extreme conditions, e.g., ultra-low temperature, code-cracking quantum
computers, the early universe, and how the renormalization group links physics
at vastly different length scales.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;