* 0412343
* Rocky Mountain Middle School Math Science Partnership: 15 Months to Highly Qualified
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2013
* Doris Kimbrough, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2013
* USD 13,547,195.00

The Rocky Mountain Middle School Math Science Partnership: 15 Months to Highly
Qualified is a Partnership comprised of three core partner Colorado school
districts, Jefferson County, Brighton, and Mapleton, and the University of
Colorado at Denver (CU-Denver) as the lead institution. Supporting partners
include the University of Denver (DU), the Metropolitan State College of Denver
(MSCD), and the Colorado State University (CSU) with affiliations to Ft. Lewis
College, the Front Range Board of Cooperative Educational Services, and four
school districts: Adams County 14, Englewood, Elizabeth, and Gilpin County. Over
the five years of the project, approximately 600 teachers will be involved and
26,400 students in grades 6-8 will be impacted. The Rocky Mountain Middle School
Math Science Partnership (RM-MSP) will increase student achievement in high
quality mathematics and science coursework and reduce the achievement gap
between minority and non-minority middle school students by focusing the
combined expertise of seven school districts and four higher education
institutions on implementation of challenging curriculum taught by highly
qualified and diverse teachers in grades 6-8. Invoking the motto, "15 Months to
HQ" (highly qualified), this project will institutionalize the development,
adaptation, and implementation of university coursework, which will boost the
content and pedagogical knowledge of middle school mathematics and science
teachers. The RM-MSP goals are to:&lt;br/&gt;--Enhance Teacher Quality through
intensive professional development that is grounded in scientifically-based
research and tightly linked to quality instructional materials, and which
results in certification for teaching mathematics or science in the middle
grades and a corresponding endorsement in mathematics and science at the state
level;&lt;br/&gt;--Enhance Access to Challenging Curriculum ensuring that all
middle school students in the partner districts will have equitable access to
challenging curriculum by supporting teachers and their districts in the
implementation of challenging, research-based curriculum and providing outreach,
intervention and research in "differentiated instruction," particularly as it
relates to Native American and Hispanic students; and&lt;br/&gt;--Enhance the
Teacher Pipeline through institutionalized improvements in pre-service
preparation and recruitment focusing on expanding the supply and diversity of
highly qualified middle grades teachers of mathematics and science.&lt;br/&gt;In
order to obtain these ends, the RM-MSP is characterized by the weaving together
of the following:&lt;br/&gt;--Summer Academies for teachers utilizing RM-MSP
grant-developed university credit courses taught by science and mathematics
disciplinary faculty;&lt;br/&gt;--Structured Follow-up to support teachers in
translating enhanced content knowledge into instructional
practice;&lt;br/&gt;--State Endorsements for middle grades teachers of science
and mathematics;&lt;br/&gt;--Dissemination of summer academy courses on-line via
a content delivery system integrating video/audio/lecture content to allow for
access beyond the partner districts, particularly in rural
areas;&lt;br/&gt;--Outreach and Interventions for middle grades and high school
students involving summer camps and academic year content enrichment
labs;&lt;br/&gt;--Research on the impact of camps on the content knowledge of
student participants;&lt;br/&gt;--Grant-developed content courses incorporated
into the core curriculum offerings for all students in liberal arts and
sciences; and&lt;br/&gt;--Recruitment of pre-service teacher candidates with
demonstrated talent in the mathematics and/or the sciences through designated
departmental advisors who work to identify high ability undergraduates within
partner institutions, as well as those in community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;