* 0412965
* SGER:  Exploratory Research in Device Development for Robot Assisted Image Guided Needle Access of Cochlea
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Louis Whitcomb, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 06/30/2006
* USD 98,812.00

At present, otologic surgeons are unable to perform surgical procedures on the
inner ear without rendering irreversible injury to cochlear and vestibular
function. This limitation fundamentally constrains our ability to understand,
diagnose, and treat inner ear disorders such as hearing loss and vertigo. This
exploratory research program seeks to develop and test a "proof of concept"
real-time cochlear imaging system that will provide navigation for the precise
and atraumatic placement of micro-needles into compartments of the inner ear
using robotic assistance. The system will consist of a robotic end-effector
combining a 70 MHz focused-beam ultrasonic transducer with a 110 micron diameter
micro-needle. The end-effector will be actuated in two degrees-of-freedom and
mounted on a robotic arm to acquire both 2-D planar and 3-D volumetric
ultrasonic images, and to insert and retract the micro-needle. Intellectual
Merit: The proposed robotic device will be the first system capable of (a)
performing real-time ultrasonic imaging of the cochlea and (b) employing these
images for image-guided needle placement into the compartments of the cochlea.
The proposed system will enable in vivo otologic research presently considered
impossible. The proposed SGER will enable us to do the basic research necessary
to develop a working real-time robotic image guided intervention system. Broader
Impact: The ability to perform real-time in vivo imaging of the intracochlear
membranes and to place precisely tools and sensors within the cochlea with
minimal trauma would open new avenues for the diagnosis and treatment of inner
ear disorders. The intracochlear placement of sensors for example, would allow
real-time spectrographic assessment of metabolic changes inside the cochlea,
enabling new lines of research into cochlear pathophysiology. In the future, the
placement of needles within the inner ear would permit the direct delivery of
therapeutic compounds to treat cochlear disease, including medications, gene
therapy vectors and stem cell therapy