* 0412206
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Post-introduction Evolution of Increased Invasiveness in Bromus Tectorum, an Invasive Grass, Bromus Tectorum
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Peter Alpert, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 11/30/2006
* USD 4,920.00

Invasions of native plant communities by exotic, weedy species are an important
component of human-induced environmental change. This process may drastically
and rapidly change the biodiversity of natural habitats, but the processes
determining the degree and rapidity of such invasions are poorly studied. When
an exotic or weedy species moves into a new habitat, it may undergo evolutionary
change as it adapts to the novel environment and to a new community of species
with which it interacts. If this evolutionary change results in improved growth,
reproduction, and survival in the newly inhabited region, then evolution may
play a major role in invasion success. This possibility has been little
explored, and is the subject of this research project. The PIs have identified
pairs of populations of the invasive plant, Bromus tectorum, where one
population represents an introduced (or "invading") population, and the paired
population is the source of the introduction. The proposed research will
specifically test whether the introduced (i.e., invading) populations exhibit
stronger competitive ability than the source populations from which they
originated. The proposed work will improve our understanding of the mechanisms
associated with the successful invasions of exotic plants. This research can
give insight not only into mechanisms of invasion, but also into processes of
microevolution, information much needed in these times of rapid global change.

