* 0412761
* Verification of shear wave velocity versus cyclic stress ratio to cause liquefaction using centrifuge modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Xiangwu Zeng, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2005
* USD 24,939.00

Currently, the most commonly used test in the laboratory is cyclic triaxial
test, which has some significant shortcomings when comparing with the real field
situation. A much better technique to verify these procedures in laboratory is
through small-scale physical modeling. However, it is not possible to conduct
reliable SPT or CPT tests in a small-scale model test. In a recent project
sponsored by NSF (Determination of soil properties for in-flight centrifuge
models using bender elements, CMS-9728860), we have developed a technique that
can accurately measure the shear wave velocity at different depths in a
centrifuge model during the flight of a centrifuge. This technique makes it
possible to verify the shear wave velocity versus cyclic stress ratio to cause
liquefaction. The method of using shear wave velocity to evaluate liquefaction
potential has been developing rapidly in recent years since shear wave velocity
measurement is non-destructive and quite reliable. Since this technique is now
widely used in geotechnical earthquake engineering design, an independent and
reliable verification/validation of this procedure is urgently needed. In this
study, saturated sand models with different relative densities will be subject
to a model earthquake equivalent to a standard magnitude 7.5 earthquake. Before
the earthquake, shear wave velocity will be measured at different depths in the
model. Accelerometers and pore pressure transducers will be placed in the model
to record the cyclic stress ratio and excess pore pressure in the soil. From the
recorded data, it is possible to calculate cyclic stress ratio and modified
shear wave velocities in the model at different depths. From the recording of
pore pressure transducers, it is also possible to check whether the soil at a
specific depth liquefies. Thus the data from these tests would provide unique
data points to verify the empirical shear wave velocity versus cyclic stress
ratio to cause liquefaction curve, which would be a major contribution to
geotechnical earthquake engineering.