* 0412674
* BE/GenEn:  A Biochemical, Genetic, and Genomic Investigation of the Evolution and Ecology of Sexual Reproduction
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Terry Snell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,052,051.00

Sexual reproduction is widespread among plants and animals, but its selective
advantages are poorly understood. Genetic recombination produced by sexual
reproduction strongly influences evolutionary rates, genome structure, and
adaptation, however little is known about how genes and ecosystems interact to
maintain sexual reproduction and determine its frequency. In many species,
mutations or hybridization give rise to populations that reproduce asexually.
However, most species and nearly all higher-order taxa maintain sexual
reproduction, implying that the evolutionary loss of sex eventually leads to
extinction. This paradox is particularly striking in species capable of both
sexual and asexual reproduction. In these species the majority of reproduction
is asexual but environmental cues trigger episodic sexual reproduction. Although
sex can be readily lost in these species, both asexual and sexual reproduction
are maintained over evolutionary time. Thus asexual/sexual species represent an
especially powerful system in which to study the dynamic interaction of asexual
and sexual reproduction, environment, and species evolution.&lt;br/&gt;Of
central importance to understanding the dynamics of sex is the evolution and
ecological role of the genes that determine the frequency and prevalence of
sexual reproduction in populations. Ultimately, these genes influence genetic
diversity, rates of adaptation and speciation, and levels of biocomplexity in
ecosystems. Despite their importance, few of these genes have been identified in
animals and their evolutionary dynamics remain largely unknown. The objective of
the research is to isolate and characterize these genes in rotifers, one of the
largest, most successful asexual/sexual groups, and to track the evolution and
functional interaction of these genes with the genome and the environment in
order to understand how genes and environment interact to regulate sexual
reproduction and determine its frequency. &lt;br/&gt;The project will employ a
combination of biochemical, genetic, and mathematical approaches, including
protein purification and functional assays, gene library analysis, and the
identification of regulatory pathways by comparing natural and laboratory
populations that have lost the capacity to reproduce sexually. The first of
three aims in this one-year exploratory project is to complete protein
purification of the rotifer sex (i.e., mixis) inducing protein (MIP). The second
is to obtain amino acid sequence on both the MIP and the rotifer mate
recognition pheromone (MRP) so that we can deduce the nucleotide sequence of the
genes. The third aim will be the isolation of the MRP and MIP genes by screening
a cDNA genetic library made from a sexually reproducing population of rotifers.
Ultimately, these measurements will elucidate the forces maintaining sexual
reproduction in life cycles, the dynamics of loss of sexual reproduction in lab
and natural populations, the underlying genetic mechanisms of such loss, and
establish correlations with environmental variables that may influence these
processes. Models will be developed to explain and predict the sex ratio, sex
induction threshold, and identify environments where loss of sexual reproduction
is expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide interdisciplinary
research training for a research technician and 2 undergraduates. A library of
well characterized rotifer stocks will be maintained and samples distributed
upon request. The project will expand a website (jbpc.mbl.edu/wheelbase) to
provide a searchable database of genetic libraries, experimental results, and
descriptions of techniques. These tools and resources will enable many
researchers to incorporate rotifers into comparative genetic studies.&lt;br/&gt;