* 0412702
* Osmolyte Channels in Fish Erthrocytes:Functional and Molecular Properties
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Leon Goldstein, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2007
* USD 452,697.00

Osmolyte Channels in Fish Erythrocytes: Functional and Molecular
Properties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leon
Goldstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Regulation of cell volume is an
important physiological mechanism. Cells undergoing physiological dilution of
the extracellular fluid and cell division, initially swell, and then, within
minutes, restore their normal cell volume. This is accomplished by adjusting
their intracellular solute concentrations to match that of the extracellular
environment via the transport of osmotically active cell constituents
(osmolytes) including ions and organic constituents. During cell swelling,
specific protein channels are activated in the cell membrane, which lead to
increased release of osmolytes from the swollen cells. Once cell volume is
restored the channels are deactivated resulting in cessation of release of
osmolytes from the previously swollen cells. Although the functional
characteristics of the osmolyte channels have been detailed, their molecular
identity is still not clear. &lt;br/&gt; Evidence suggests that the cell
membrane protein, AE, is involved in the activation of osmolyte transport during
cell swelling in fish red blood cells. Recently it has been discovered that
there are three genes for the expression of AE proteins in skate (Raja erinacea)
red blood cells. This research addresses the questions: Which genes are involved
in expression of AE proteins in the red blood cell membranes? Which of the three
proteins expressed in the cell membranes function as osmolyte transporters? What
are the regulatory factors that activate the transporters during cell swelling?
&lt;br/&gt;Intact skate red blood cells, isolated red blood cell membranes, and
AE protein expression systems in frog eggs will be used to determine:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Which of the three AE proteins are expressed in the frog cell.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Which of the three AE proteins expressed in the frog egg cell
membranes form &lt;br/&gt;osmolyte transport channels. &lt;br/&gt;3.Which of the
AE proteins in red blood cell membranes localize to lipid domains ('rafts')
found on the surface of the cell membranes. &lt;br/&gt;4. Which of several
peripheral proteins found in the red blood cell membranes and attached to the AE
protein are involved in the regulation of the cell membrane transporters.
&lt;br/&gt;These studies will provide insights into the molecular and regulatory
mechanisms involved in the control of cell volume.&lt;br/&gt; Undergraduate and
graduate students will be recruited for the project from Brown University , the
Mount Desert Island Biological Research Lab and from participation in an
existing REU program. In addition, research experiences will be sponsored for
high school students recruited from Providence and rural Maine. &lt;br/&gt;