* 0412932
* A Modern Iinventory of the Ppolyclad Ffauna of the Caribbean
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Marianne Litvaitis, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2008
* USD 588,788.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;DEB 0412932&lt;br/&gt;Marian
Litvaitis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to
document the diversity of a group of &lt;br/&gt;marine, free-living flatworms
throughout the wider Caribbean. &lt;br/&gt;Individual flatworm specimens will be
hand-collected from several &lt;br/&gt;sites, and associated field data and
images will be linked to each &lt;br/&gt;specimen. Students working with Leslie
Newman and accompanying her on &lt;br/&gt;sampling trips, will gauge patterns of
distribution of flatworms, &lt;br/&gt;receive training in underwater
photography, and gather specimens for &lt;br/&gt;microscopical and molecular
studies. She will also train students in &lt;br/&gt;curatorial techniques.
Working in the laboratory of Marianne Litvaitis &lt;br/&gt;at the University of
New Hampshire, the students will concentrate on &lt;br/&gt;histology,
systematics, DNA techniques, graphics, and database &lt;br/&gt;construction.
Commonly, positive species identification requires &lt;br/&gt;sectioning the
animals. DNA sequences will be used as molecular &lt;br/&gt;barcodes for each
species and to address questions of within-group &lt;br/&gt;relationships.
Detailed taxonomic information, tissue vouchers, DNA &lt;br/&gt;sequences, and
images of whole, live animals and of histological &lt;br/&gt;sections will be
collected for each species and included in a &lt;br/&gt;web-based, searchable
database. Additional products of the proposed &lt;br/&gt;study include CD-ROM
and hard copy versions of an identification guide &lt;br/&gt;that will be
available in English and Spanish, and a separate marine &lt;br/&gt;flatworms web
page specifically designed for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
significance of the project includes an extensive training &lt;br/&gt;component
ranging from the undergraduate to the graduate level. Two &lt;br/&gt;minority
graduate students have been recruited. Additional outreach and
&lt;br/&gt;educational components include guest lectures, hands-on
demonstrations, &lt;br/&gt;and marine field trips to stimulate interest in K-12
students for &lt;br/&gt;marine invertebrates in general. Although many of these
flatworms are &lt;br/&gt;prominent members of coral reefs, little is known about
their &lt;br/&gt;biodiversity. This is surprising considering that some of these
worms &lt;br/&gt;have been shown to prey on commercially important bivalve
species and &lt;br/&gt;thus, impact the aquaculture industry. Other species in
this group have &lt;br/&gt;proven to be toxic to fish. Finally, preliminary
studies have shown &lt;br/&gt;that some of these flatworms contain
biopharmaceuticals and may be used &lt;br/&gt;as a vehicle to accumulate
anticancer agents. Therefore, a thorough &lt;br/&gt;understanding of their
biodiversity will provide a basis for many other &lt;br/&gt;fields of
biology.&lt;br/&gt;