* 0412684
* Undergraduate Research in Quaternary Geology at the Matanuska Glacier, Alaska: Research Experiences for Undergraduates
* GEO,OPP
* 12/05/2003,08/31/2005
* Staci Goetz, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2005
* USD 77,692.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is to continue managing a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site. Undergraduate students will conduct research for six
weeks on the Matanuska Glacier, a large valley glacier in south central Alaska.
The glacier's terminus is easily accessible from the Glenn Highway. Students
will stay at the Matanuska Glacier Research Camp, about two kilometers from the
glacier's terminus. The Camp is maintained by the Cold Regions Research and
Engineering Laboratory which also sponsors some of the ongoing research.
Students will participate in field work that will involve collecting water
samples, maintaining equipment, downloading data, filtering water for suspended
sediment, and tabulating data. Each student will identify a research project to
which he/she will devote several hours a day. Directed research projects may be
in subdisciplines of glacial geology, sedimentology, glaciohydrology, or
hydrogeology. The faculty associates will supervise the students' research to
ensure appropriate projects are defined and that the students are able to
collect the necessary information. The students will complete their
undergraduate thesis projects at the respective home institutions during the
subsequent school year and will be encouraged to present the results at a
national meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;