* 0412208
* IMR-MIP: High-Detection-Efficiency and High-Spatial-Resolution Thermal Neutron Imaging System for the Spallation Neutron Source using Pixelated Semiconductor Neutron Detectors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* William Dunn, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,978,371.00

This is award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research - Major
Instrumentation Project supports the development of pixilated semiconductor
neutron detector for the Spallation Neutron Source. The detector will a high-
detection-efficiency and high-spatial-resolution thermal neutron imaging
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutron beams are a powerful probe used to elicit
the structure of matter, and, for this reason, the international Spallation
Neutron Source (SNS) is currently being constructed at Oak Ridge National
Laboratories. To use such a source, specialized diffractometers, which sort out
different neutron energies, are used. Key to the use of such instruments are
neutron detectors that can measure neutrons scattered by a specimen whose
structure is sought. Traditionally, large gas-filled neutron detectors located
many meters from the specimen are used, the large distances necessary to provide
the necessary angular resolution of the scattered neutrons. This project will
lead to an array of novel semiconductor neutron detectors that can measure
scattered neutrons very close to the specimen, thereby eliminating neutron
interactions in the air between specimen and detector and other complications
inherent in traditional measurement techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed device is unique in that it utilizes a semiconductor wafer with a
matrix of evenly spaced etched cavities (narrow holes or thin trenches) filled
with the neutron reactive material The holes are etched into the front of the
device such that the penetrations reach deeply (50 to 300 microns) into the
semiconductor. With such cavities, together with traditional surface coatings,
the semiconductor wafer is thus completely permeated with neutron reactive
material. An array of semiconductor diodes will be produced with the necessary
properties for use at the SNS, namely (1) a high thermal-neutron intrinsic
detection efficiency that approaches 50%, (2) a spatial resolution of less than
100 microns, (3) a relatively fast response time of less than 10 microseconds,
(4) is resistant to radiation damage, and (5) is insensitive to the gamma-ray
background. In additiona, these devices require only small power sources to
operate, are rugged and extremely reliable, and are much less costly than
traditional gas-filled detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No such imaging array
presently exists, either as a commercial or a prototype device, nor is one
presently under development anywhere in the world. The goal of the present
research is to manufacture prototype neutron imaging detectors using a new and
novel technology that can meet the instrumentation requirements for three SNS
experiments, namely the VULCAN Engineering Diffractometer, the SNAP High
Pressure Diffractometer, and the Single Crystal Diffractometer (SCD). The target
of the project is to build a high-resolution linear array for the VULCAN
Diffractometer. The detector will have 1000 pixel strips, each 4 cm long and 100
microns wide. An Application Specific Integrated Chip (ASIC), not presently
available, will also be designed and manufactured to operate the miniaturized
detector array. Hence, along with the neutron detector array, an ASIC will be
developed to read the neutron-induced signals from the neutron detector array.
This technology can then be transferred to the SNAP and SCD
diffractometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve at least eight
students in various phases of the project, including the development,
measurement, fabrication, and analysis tasks. By introducing young
experimentalists to this project, detector expertise will be developed within
the United States. This is vital since there are very few remaining
experimentalists in this area. This project will result in advanced degrees for
at least five graduate students with practical experience and involvement with
researchers at a national laboratory
(ORNL/SNS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research - Major Instrumentation Project supports
the development of pixilated semiconductor neutron detector for the Spallation
Neutron Source. The detector will a high-detection-efficiency and high-spatial-
resolution thermal neutron imaging system&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Spallation
Neutron Source (SNS), due to begin operation in the year 2007, requires a
variety of neutron detectors for the beam port instruments. Several of the
instruments need small, high-efficiency, high-spatial-resolution neutron imaging
detectors. Those instruments include the VULCAN Engineering Diffractometer, the
SNAP High Pressure Diffractometer, and the Single Crystal Diffractometer (SCD).
The neutron imaging devices must be insensitive to gamma rays while retaining
high thermal-neutron intrinsic detection efficiency that approaches 50%. The
spatial resolutions must be at least 500 microns for the SNAP and SCD
Diffractometers, and 100 microns for the VULCAN Diffractometer. A last
requirement is that the neutron-imaging detector must have a relatively fast
response time less than 10 microseconds. No such instrument presently exists,
either as a commercial or a prototype device, and is not presently under
development anywhere in the world. It is the goal of the present research effort
to manufacture prototype neutron imaging detectors using an new and novel
technology that can meet the instrumentation requirements at the SNS for the
VULCAN, SNAP, and SCD Diffractometers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new devices
operate at room temperature, are compact, rugged, and reliable in design. Monte
Carlo modeling coupled with the MCNP codes will be used to guide the development
and fabrication of optimized device designs. Preliminary results indicate that
the 50% detection efficiency target is achievable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
target of the proposed effort is to build a high-resolution linear array for the
VULCAN Diffractometer. The detector will have 1000 pixel strips, each 4 cm long
and 100 microns wide. An Application Specific Integrated Chip (ASIC), not
presently available, will be designed and manufactured to operate the
miniaturized detector array. Hence, along with the neutron detector array, an
ASIC will be developed to read the neutron-induced signals from the neutron
detector array. The technology developed can be transferred to the SNAP and SCD
Diffractometers for the spatial arrays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve at least eight students in various phases of the project, including the
development, measurement, fabrication, and analysis tasks. By introducing young
experimentalists to the project through key involvement in tasks, expertise is
developed within the United States. This is vital since there are very few
remaining experimentalists in this area. This project will result in advanced
degrees for at least five graduate students with practical experience and
involvement with researchers at a national laboratory (ORNL/SNS).&lt;br/&gt;