* 0412939
* Ge-Sb-Te Phase Change Materials: Optical and Electronic Properties, Structural Transformations, and Fabrication of Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Stephen Bishop, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2008
* USD 352,544.00

This project seeks new knowledge and greater fundamental understanding of the
optical and electronic properties of crystalline and amorphous states of Ge-Sb-
Te materials, including characterizations of the bandgap, energy distribution of
electronic band tail and defect states, and other properties. Structural
investigations, including the use of fluctuation electron microscopy, aim for
detailed nanostructural description of the different amorphous states (as-
deposited, partially annealed, and melt- quenched), and their role in phase
change kinetics. The project will also explore the nanometer-scale size limit
(spatial resolution) of the phase change process with a goal of fabricating
quantum devices. %%% The project addresses basic research issues in a topical
area of materials science having high technological relevance. The research will
contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new
understanding and capabilities in electronics/photonics. The research is
relevant to applications such as rewritable CD/DVD and the PRAM nonvolatile
memory technologies. An important feature of the program is the integration of
research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. The program will support two graduate students
and recruit one or two undergraduates per year to carry out portions of this
work as their senior theses. This project will thus contribute to the education
and training of B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. graduates. Qualified students will be
identified through the SURGE (Support of Under-represented Groups in
Engineering) and WISE (Women in Science and Engineering) programs which are in
place at UIUC. Research results will be broadly disseminated by presentations at
international conferences and by publication in scientific journals. ***