* 0412830
* Hypothesis Formation and Testing in an Interpretive Domain: a Model and Intelligent Tutoring System
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Kevin Ashley, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 649,810.00

Hypothesis Formation and Testing in an Interpretive Domain:&lt;br/&gt;a Model
and Intelligent Tutoring
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the days of
Bacon and Galileo, formulating hypotheses about natural phenomena and testing
them against empirical data have been cornerstones of the natural sciences. As a
cognitive framework, hypothesis formation and testing are also important in
legal reasoning. The legal domain, however, is different from natural science
and mathematics in a significant respect. Determining whether a hypothesized
rule and proposed outcome are consistent with past legal decisions is much more
a matter of interpretation. The aims of this project are to (1) design and
evaluate an Artificial Intelligence (AI) cognitive model of framing and testing
hypotheses in an interpretive domain, legal reasoning, and (2) incorporate the
model in an intelligent tutoring system (ITS) to teach law students the process.
&lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon two recent developments: (1) a newly invented
means to frame and evaluate hypotheses predicting the outcomes of new cases
based on an AI database of existing precedents; (2) a convenient, on-line corpus
of U.S. Supreme Court oral arguments in aural and written form, including many
concrete examples of legal hypothesis framing and testing. In response to an
advocate's proposed hypothesis of how the case should be decided, the Justices
often challenge it by posing hypotheticals, sometimes forcing the advocate to
modify or abandon the hypothesis. &lt;br/&gt;By studying these examples, the
researchers, participating law students and law faculty will schematize and
model the process of framing and testing legal hypotheses, implement it
computationally, evaluate it empirically, and use it to design the ITS.
&lt;br/&gt;The tutor will implement the model in various legal domains, each
with a body of legal rules, issues, precedents, and principles, operationalized
in a way that supports hypothesis formulation, prediction, testing, and
explanation. Using the model, it will guide and challenge students' arguments.
It will predict outcomes of cases, help students construct tests and rationales
justifying the prediction, and help them evaluate the hypothesis by posing or
responding to hypothetical challenges.&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will evaluate
the project's success in terms of: (1) the accuracy of the model's predictions
for new cases and the extent it improves case retrieval; (2) how well model-
generated arguments compare to those in the Supreme Court oral arguments or
generated by law students; (3) how well ITS-trained students compare to a
control group taught the same process using conventional law school methods; (4)
whether ITS-trained students generate more accurate self-explanations of the
Supreme Court oral arguments.&lt;br/&gt; This work extends AI techniques to a
much less well-structured domain than natural science and mathematics, one more
like the common sense domains AI has yet to address. By using AI to investigate
empirically a cognitive phenomenon, framing and testing hypotheses in an
interpretive domain, it will contribute to research in AI &amp; Law, Case-based
Reasoning, AI &amp; Education, and Cognitive Science.