* 0412119
* Environmental Genome Shotgun Sequencing: Ocean Microbial Populations off The Coast of Nova Scotia, Canada
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2005,03/31/2009
* John Heidelberg, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2009
* USD 2,443,506.00

To assess the extent of microbial genomic diversity in the ocean, the J. Craig
Venter Institute has so far collected samples from over 70 oceanic sites between
Halifax, Nova Scotia and Australia as part of the Sorcerer II Global Ocean
Sampling Expedition (GOS). A"metagenome" analysis of the plankton community will
be performed on samples from the seven northernmost sites, constituting surface
waters of the Western North Atlantic Ocean near Halifax, Nova Scotia for this
NSF-funded project. A metagenome is the combined genetic information of an
entire microbial community. The significance of a metagenomic analysis is that
most bacteria cannot be cultured, thus we currently know very little about the
identities and properties of natural microbial populations. In contrast with
some other regions of the ocean, nutrient gradients (e.g., nitrogen and
phosphorus) in the Western North Atlantic are typically moderate except during
periods of deep vertical mixing. Marine microbial community biodiversity will be
quantitatively characterized using high throughput DNA sequencing and whole
genome shotgun assembly techniques. Through this "whole environment" shotgun
genomics approach, microorganisms will be inventoried to determine overall
species diversity, discover and characterize new prokaryotic species and genes,
and evaluate the ecological roles that microbes play in the Western North
Atlantic biome. Results will be compared to those from previous metagenomic work
at the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series (BATS) site as well as to other sites along
the GOS. Very preliminary analysis of sequences from each of the seven Western
North Atlantic sites has indicated that they are distinct from all other samples
collected thus far on the GOS expedition. This underscores the importance of
obtaining far deeper sequence data since genes and organisms detected in these
samples do not seem to be similar to those at other locations on the GOS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomics is a rapidly developing field that is creating
changes in medicine, business, and agriculture on a scale analogous to the
industrial revolution, but it's impact in environmental microbiology will likely
be even greater than in these other areas. By having deeper DNA sequence
coverage of the Western North Atlantic samples, a comparative genomic analysis
of uncultured organisms will be undertaken at an unprecedented level of
interrogation. All results of the genomic analysis will be made rapidly and
readily available to the global scientific community. Students and teachers who
have an understanding of genomics can appreciate the impact it is making on
society and make informed decisions about the issues it raises. Therefore, a
critical step in this project is to include training and outreach for K - 12
students, through mobile laboratories, as well as to graduate students, post-
doctoral fellows, and established faculty members through a two-day workshop on
the analysis and availability of the Western North Atlantic metagenomic data.
&lt;br/&gt;