* 0412843
* A Study of Undergraduate Programs in the Mathematical and Statistical Sciences in the United States and the Publication of the Results
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* James Maxwell, American Mathematical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 02/28/2009
* USD 296,448.00

With NSF support and with sponsorship from the Conference Board of the
Mathematical Sciences (CBMS), the CBMS2005 project will be the ninth in a
sequence of quinquennial surveys and reports that provide comprehensive national
data on the undergraduate mathematical sciences in departments ranging from two-
year to doctoral.

Professional society reports have emphasized the need for better data on the
nation's undergraduate mathematical sciences programs in order to allow leaders
at every level from local departments to national agencies to assess existing
activities, to plan future growth, and to be effective advocates for their
programs. Based on a carefully designed CBMS2005 survey of the nation's
undergraduate mathematical sciences programs, the CBMS2005 project will address
that need through published reports of the most detailed and reliable data on
the nation's undergraduate mathematical sciences.

CBMS2005 will continue long-term cross-sectional studies initiated in previous
CBMS reports, and will investigate special topics proposed by professional
society committees as being particularly important today. These special topics
are likely to include: the mathematical preparation of K-8 teachers; the impact
of reform movements on undergraduate curriculum, pedagogy, and technology use;
the growth of ``dual enrollment'' as a way for advanced high school students to
get college credit while still in high school; faculty diversity and educational
background; the shift from permanent to temporary faculty noted in the CBMS2000
report; and comparison of availability of advanced courses for mathematics
majors in various types of four-year colleges and universities.

CBMS2005 will involve an unprecedented level of cooperation between members of
the project steering committee (who come from nine different universities); the
Joint Data Committee of the AMS, ASA, IMS, and MAA; committees of various
professional societies; and statisticians at the University of North Carolina.