* 0412040
* SGER:  Biomass Burning Aerosols in Southeast Asia: Smoke Impact Assessment (BASE-ASIA)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Russell Dickerson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Southeast Asia is a rapidly developing region that has very polluted air due to
biomass burning and inefficient, low technology fossil fuel combustion. In
addition to the impact on the local air quality, these gaseous and particulate
pollutants my have regional and global influences on atmospheric composition,
radiation, the hydrological cycle, biogeochemical cycles and biodiversity. This
project involves the deployment of the University of Maryland aircraft package
in Thailand during the first phase of the multi-disciplinary, multi-
institutional, multi-agency supported BASE-ASIA (Biomass burning Aerosols in
Southeast Asia: Smoke Impact Assessment) project. This program involves the
collection of in situ and remote observational data, and analysis with numerical
models to address questions related to the type, frequency, intensity and
geographical extent of key pollutant emissions in the southeastern Asia region,
and to attempt to understand how these pollutants impact regional air quality,
radiation, and weather. The aircraft package will provide airborne observations
of a number of climate and chemistry related quantities during the first phase
pilot study in March and April, 2004. Measurements will be conducted aboard a
Thai King Air weather aircraft, and will allow the vertical and horizontal
structure of the observed species to be quantified in the regions near Bangkok
and Chiang Mai. This pilot study will set the stage for future studies of a
larger geographical region and with observations of more quantities. There will
be significant collaboration and leveraging of the NASA-funded part of the study
making use of satellite remote observations and surface radiation
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide support and research
experience for the two PIs, one graduate student, and there will be significant
outreach and opportunities for Asian students and scientists. The project will
provide the first airborne chemical composition data over Southeast Asia, data
until now unavailable due to security concerns of host countries. This pilot
study will move the community a step closer to understanding the chemical and
climatic impacts of emissions from this rapidly developing region.