* 0412510
* RETA: Distributed Leadership for Middle School Mathematics Education: Content Area Leadership Expertise in Practice
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Stephen Fisher, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,297,008.00

The investigators propose a mixed methods (quantitative and
qualitative)&lt;br/&gt;study of distributed content leadership in middle school
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;There is little research on what content, pedagogical,
and diagnostic&lt;br/&gt;knowledge leaders must have to effectively assist
teachers in&lt;br/&gt;implementing demands of rigorous mathematics instruction
and student&lt;br/&gt;learning. This research builds on prior research of the
investigators&lt;br/&gt;who examined distributed leadership at the elementary
school level.&lt;br/&gt;However, this research will go much deeper into defining
and&lt;br/&gt;understanding the leaders and the roles they play.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the project is devoted to developing instruments
to measure&lt;br/&gt;mathematics content leadership as distributed in middle
schools.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the team proposes to develop, test, and
validate&lt;br/&gt;measurement instruments of content leadership practice and
knowledge and&lt;br/&gt;to examine how content leadership affects how teachers
teach. They also&lt;br/&gt;propose to test whether content leadership can be
learned. All of this&lt;br/&gt;work will be conducted in the context of a
Mathematics and Science&lt;br/&gt;Partnership (MSP) Teacher Institute for the
21sth Century site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program of work
fills a major gap in the knowledge base by&lt;br/&gt;generating new information
and evidence about content leadership&lt;br/&gt;knowledge and practices as they
relate to improvement in mathematics&lt;br/&gt;education. The senior research
team brings together experienced scholars&lt;br/&gt;and teachers from
mathematics, mathematics education, teacher learning,&lt;br/&gt;leadership,
policy, and statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is divided into two main parts. The first will focus on&lt;br/&gt;the
development, piloting, and validation of instrumentation
for&lt;br/&gt;identifying and documenting content area leadership practice for
middle&lt;br/&gt;school mathematics. The second part will study the nature
(i.e., the&lt;br/&gt;what, the how and the why) of content area leadership
practice for&lt;br/&gt;middle school mathematics and its relations to (a)
leadership&lt;br/&gt;development and (b) classroom teachers and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work may have
significant broad impact by generating usable&lt;br/&gt;knowledge and
methodological tools that will be of considerable interest&lt;br/&gt;to MSPs and
Institute Partnerships and to the school systems around the&lt;br/&gt;nation. By
focusing on content leadership in urban schools, this work&lt;br/&gt;will
contribute to improving mathematics education for urban youth,
who&lt;br/&gt;have historically been underserved by many school
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;