* 0412959
* Metal versus Ligand-Centered Oxidizing Equivalents in Hydrocarbon Oxidations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Pericles Stavropoulos, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 07/31/2008
* USD 377,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Pericles Stavropoulos at the University of
Missouri at Rolla to develop, and mechanistically investigate, iron-based,
hydrocarbon-oxidizing systems that can store oxidizing power onto a high-valent
metal-oxo site, but also have the potential to delocalize oxidizing equivalents
as ligand-centered radicals. To accomplish this, suitable ligands and iron
reagents, which, in the presence of oxo donors, should simultaneously support a
high-valent Fe(IV)=O unit and a ligand-centered p radical will be synthesized.
These will be employed in the catalytic oxygenation of aliphatic and unsaturated
hydrocarbons, and initial mechanistic data that indicate selective oxidation
pathways will be collected. Mechanistic implications arising from the presence
of both metal- and ligand-centered oxidizing equivalents, in relation to their
individual roles in mediating hydrocarbon-activation processes will be
determined. The proposed research work concentrates on tripodal trisamidoamine
ligands, whose electron-rich character should help stabilize high-valent metal
sites. These ligands possess o-phenyldiamine moieties, which, can retain one or
more oxidizing equivalents following oxidative ligand rearrangement. In an
effort to gain control over those stereo-electronic parameters necessary for the
generation of an authentic [LoFe(IV)=O] moiety reactivity studies are will be
undertaken involving [LFe(II)] and [LFe(III)] containing compounds and oxo-donor
molecules to evaluate each ligand. The most suitable candidates will be tested
in catalytic oxygenations of alkanes and olefins, to assess the selectivity of
the process by comparison to undesirable pathways involving indiscriminate
oxygenation chemistry. Metal-centered events will be examined by characterizing
key intermediates generated in metal/oxo-donor interactions.

The proposed work aims at a better definition of the requirements needed to
attain the elusive Fe(V)=O unit and its relation to preparing useful reagents
for the selective oxygenation of hydrocarbons to commodity oxo products. Broader
impacts extend beyond the training of post-doctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
researchers to include involving rural K-12 students through a mobile laboratory
that enables hands-on experimentation and discussion of dioxygen chemistry and
producing written materials for these groups.