* 0412176
* Phylogeny and Historical Biogeography of the Primitive Bee Family Colletidae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Bryan Danforth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 286,681.00

DEB 0412176&lt;br/&gt;Danforth&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to
Dr. Bryan N. Danforth of Cornell University to investigate the phylogeny and
historical biogeography of the bee family Colletidae. This is one of the seven
currently recognized families of bees and represents over 900 species of the
approximately 16,000 species of bees in the world. Colletid bees are
particularly interesting because they are considered by many experts to
represent the most primitive bee family. In fact, this family may represent a
transitional stage in the evolution of bees from wasps. This is also an
important family from the perspective of biogeography. Members of the Colletidae
are most diverse in the southern hemisphere and their current distribution
suggests they were present on the southern continent of Gondwana before its
fragmentation during the Cretaceous period (140 to 65 million years ago). Like
ratite birds (Ratitae), southern beeches (Nothofagus), and vespid wasps
(Vespidae), colletid bees are an ideal group for investigating historical
biogeography because their phylogenetic relationships appear to reflect the
fragmentation of Gondwanaland in the Cretaceous. The project has three main
goals: (1) conduct a phylogenetic study of the colletid subfamilies, tribes, and
genera on a worldwide basis based both on morphology and molecular (DNA
sequence) data. Second (2), focus efforts at the generic, subgeneric, and
species levels on the largest and most taxonomically difficult (and very likely
polyphyletic) colletid subfamily, Colletinae. The study of Colletinae depends on
a revised higher level classification for Colletidae as a whole because the
former will probably be divided into smaller but monophyletic subfamilies.
Finally (3), analyze historical biogeographic patterns based on phylogenetic
hypothesis in order to test the prediction that the colletid bees reflect
Gondwanan fragmentation, and to compare these results with other studies of
groups with similar distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand
understanding of the relationships and classification of the most important
pollinators of flowering plants (bees), and will have implications for crop
pollination, biodiversity, and conservation. This project will provide
educational and research training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students at Cornell University. Students involved with the project will gain
experience in basic molecular biology as well as training in the specific fields
of insect systematics, bee biology and host-plant associations, and
biogeography. This project will lead to collaborative research efforts among US
as well as Brazilian, South African, Australian, and Canadian colleagues.
Additionally, the award will develop a web site on bee phylogeny, historical
biogeography, diversity, and molecular systematics. This web site will
disseminate results to the widest audience possible. The study will make use of
the recently published complete genomic sequence of the honey bee (funded by the
USDA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;