* 0412166
* Geometry and Dynamics in Riemannian and Finsler Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Dmitri Burago, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 519,545.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0412166&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Dmitri Burago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D. Burago proposes to continue
his work on a number of long-term&lt;br/&gt;projects in Riemannian and Finsler
geometry, dynamical systems of&lt;br/&gt;geometric origin, and geometric group
theory. The projects&lt;br/&gt;include: geometry of periodic metrics, area-
minimizing surfaces&lt;br/&gt;in normed spaces and minimal fillings, and
ellipticity of surface&lt;br/&gt;area functionals; low dimensional partially
hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;diffeomorphisms; unbounded bi-invariant quasi-semi-norms
and&lt;br/&gt;"large" groups; manifolds without conjugate points;
applications&lt;br/&gt;of singular geometry to dynamics of billiard systems and
certain&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic problems of geometric origin; and approximations
by&lt;br/&gt;PL-isometries. Among the problems the proposal is aimed at
there&lt;br/&gt;are: Busemann's Conjecture that flats are area-
minimizing&lt;br/&gt;surfaces in normed spaces; styding the structure of the
class of&lt;br/&gt;partially-hyperbolic systems; finding weak versions of
Hofer's&lt;br/&gt;norm (possibly on some groups of volume-
preserving&lt;br/&gt;homeomorphisms); various generalizations of E.Hopf's
conjecture&lt;br/&gt;on tori without conjugate points. This project continues
the&lt;br/&gt;proposer's previous research, including a solution of the E.
Hopf&lt;br/&gt;conjecture on tori without conjugate points posed by Hedlund
and&lt;br/&gt;Morse in the 40s, a "Boltzman-Sinaj" problem on the existence
of&lt;br/&gt;uniform estimates on the number of collisions in hard ball
gas&lt;br/&gt;models, the two-dimensional case of H. Busemann's
problem&lt;br/&gt;mentioned above, H. Furstenberg's problem on the existence
of&lt;br/&gt;bi-Lipschits non-equivalent separated nets and J. Moser's
problem&lt;br/&gt;on the existence of a continuous function that is not a
Jacobian&lt;br/&gt;determinant of a Lipschits homeomorphism (all from the 60s).
The&lt;br/&gt;conjectures and directions of research suggested in the
proposal&lt;br/&gt;grew from ideas and methods developed by the proposer and
his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators while working on these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though most topics of the proposal belong to
rather abstract&lt;br/&gt;areas of mathematics, their motivations lie in real-
word&lt;br/&gt;problems. The physical analogs of large-scale invariants
of&lt;br/&gt;periodic metrics are macroscopic properties of periodic
media&lt;br/&gt;(such as crystal substances: i.e., the rate of propagation
of&lt;br/&gt;radiation etc), and one wants to relate these properties
to&lt;br/&gt;microscopic characteristics. Hyperbolic dynamics is really
well&lt;br/&gt;understood, and it forms the first and the simplest example
of&lt;br/&gt;chaotic models; however, little is know about
partially&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic systems, which offer a much more realistic model;
the&lt;br/&gt;project is aimed in giving new insight into such systems with
a&lt;br/&gt;small number of degrees of freedom. The "Boltzman-Sinaj"
problem&lt;br/&gt;on the existence of uniform estimates on the number of
collisions&lt;br/&gt;in hard ball gas models originated from the most basic
research&lt;br/&gt;in statistical physics. Study of the geodesic flows,
billiard&lt;br/&gt;systems, geometric complexity, and optimal strategies may
result&lt;br/&gt;in better understanding of (stability) of certain models
in&lt;br/&gt;thermodynamics, biology, sociology, and physics, especially
when&lt;br/&gt;dealing with imprecise data, and perhaps result in
new&lt;br/&gt;computational algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;