* 0412871
* Dissertation Research: The Emergence of Latinos in Israel:  Transnational Migration, Forms of Contact, and Discursive Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Michael Silverstein, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2006
* USD 4,785.00

One of the most substantial changes to Israeli society in the last decade has
been the surge in foreign workers who are now estimated to number between
150,000 and 200,000 and to comprise about 10% of the Israeli workforce. Compared
to other industrialized, high per capita income countries, this is one of the
highest proportions of foreign labor in the world. This enormous change has
accompanied by large waves of Jewish immigration from the former Soviet Union
and Ethiopia, which has greatly impacted the ethnic and linguistic spectrum of
Israel. At the same time, Israeli policy-makers have been limiting work permits
for Palestinian workers from the Occupied Territories, as part of Israeli
government strategies to constitute the borders that separate the Israeli state
and the as-yet-unrealized Palestinian state. These changes affect how the
Israeli state attempts to constitute citizens as members of a Jewish nation, and
how emerging ethnic groups respond.&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research by a
doctoral student of both sociocultural anthropology and linguistics studies how
Latin American foreign workers, or Latinos, are transformed in terms of the
ethnic and linguistic ideologies dominant in Israel. Generally, the cultural and
linguistic production of migrant workers has been analyzed by social scientists
as "hybrid," a term which privileges the perspective of nation-states which
promote homogeneous citizenries. Instead of assuming such a perspective, this
project considers how Latinos come to objectify and differentiate ethnic and
linguistic varieties in Israel, and how they then come to understand themselves
as different in terms of that variation. Crucially, the ethnolinguistic
understanding of Latinos is mediated by emergent language ideologies, i.e., how
actors conceive of the relation between language, social groups, and their
social world. To chart these ideologies and language use among Latinos, research
methods include participant observation and recording in homes, in Latino social
organizations (like churches or soccer leagues), and in schools and after-school
programs for Latino children. This study will contribute to theories of language
acquisition and contact, language ideologies, ethnicity and nationhood, and
migration and state.&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of this study is that it will
advance our understanding of transnational labor migration and its effect on
workers, a topic of broad interest to policy makers in both receiving and
sending countries. &lt;br/&gt;