* 0412148
* SGER: A Stochastic Single Column Modeling Framework for Diagnosing Community Climate System Model (CCSM) Tropical Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* John Bergman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2005
* USD 26,231.00

This SGER grant supports the construction of a computationally inexpensive
numerical climate model that reproduces tropical variability from the full and
computationally expensive Community Climate System Model (CCSM) Atmospheric
Model (CAM). The idea is that the inexpensive model would then be used as a
diagnostic tool for testing new parameterizations in the
CAM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an innovative idea that examines a strategy
for assessing the quality of climate forecasts made years to centuries in
advance, where, unlike for weather predictions, validation observations at
forecasted times are not available in a few days or weeks. The traditional
method of evaluating a climate model's ability to predict long into the future
is to estimate its error statistics for retrospective "forecasts" or simulations
of, e.g., the climate of the 19th and 20th centuries, for which global
observations exist. Climate models are complex and expensive to execute on
computers. As a result comprehensive error statistics are not practical.
Instead, the PI's computationally inexpensive numerical model can be used to
diagnose the full CAM's ability to simulate the important features of the
tropical variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to
provide a large number of CCSM/CAM developers and users with an efficient and
effective tool for advancing their research.