* 0412599
* BE/GenEn:  Genome-Enabled Analyses of Natural Populations of Pathogens on Natural Hosts
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2010
* Jeffery Dangl, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,964,383.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Amy Charkowski, Nicole Perna, and Ching-Hong
Yang at the University of Wisconsin and Jeffery Dangl and Sarah Grant at the
University of North Carolina to examine the expression, genetic diversity and
evolution of the suites of virulence genes present in different strains of an
important plant pathogenic bacterium. This bacterium, Erwinia carotovora, causes
devastating "wilt" or "soft rot" diseases of important crops, including potato
and its wild relatives. The wild host plants come from diverse environments
around the world, particularly in the Andes region of South America, which is
the ancestral home of potato. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will foster
collaborations among a multidisciplinary group of scientists from five
institutions in three countries. It will result in the training of student and
postdoctoral researchers in each laboratory. It will also increase the
capabilities of the laboratory facilities at one of the largest field research
stations in Wisconsin, thus allowing modern molecular biology experiments to be
performed on field samples near the research sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even
though E. carotovora is strictly a plant pathogen, it shares many virulence
genes with important animal pathogens that cause diseases ranging from
gastrointestinal illness to the plague. The results from this work will
therefore provide information applicable to many diseases. This project will
focus on a crucial common virulence system. This virulence system uses a
"molecular syringe" to deliver bacterial proteins called effectors directly into
animal or plant host cells. Once inside, the effector proteins manipulate the
host cells to suppress disease defenses and promote bacterial growth. Nearly all
studies of this key protein delivery system have been limited to laboratory
settings. This project will bring studies from the laboratory to the field in
order to understand the effects of the natural environment on the expression and
function of these crucial virulence genes in a variety of plant hosts.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Genes encoding effector proteins vary tremendously, even
within the same species. Thus the first goal of this project will be to identify
as many of the E. carotovora effector proteins as possible using a new high
throughput system. The investigators will then determine which of these
effectors are produced in bacteria found on diseased plants in a variety of
natural locations that differ in their ecology. Preliminary results indicate
that field plants are typically infected with multiple strains of E. carotovora.
In contrast, laboratory studies typically involve infecting a each plant with
only one strain. By identifying the effectors present in each individual strain
from naturally-infected plants, it will be possible to determine whether the
effectors work in combination to promote growth of multiple strains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To quantify the contribution that the effector genes make
to bacterial growth and survival in the natural environment, E. carotovora
mutants will be examined on diverse plants under natural conditions. Finally,
wild plant species will be examined to determine if they have disease resistance
genes that recognize specific E. carotovora effector proteins, and protect the
plants from disease. The combined results from these experiments will be among
the first tests of the presence, expression, effects and diversity of bacterial
virulence genes under natural conditions. The gene sequence and expression data
from these experiments will be deposited in ASAP
(https://asap.ahabs.wisc.edu/annotation/php/ASAP1.htm), a publicly-available
searchable web-based database.&lt;br/&gt;