* 0412091
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Genome Sequencing of a Nitrogen-Fixing Bacterial Endophyte
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Eric Triplett, Institute for Genomic Research
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2007
* USD 752,148.00

The green revolution of the 1950s-1970s heralded large increases in crop yields
largely through the use of nitrogen fertilizers. However, nitrogen fertilization
is expensive economically and environmentally. Nitrogen fertilization is one of
the highest on-farm costs in agriculture. A significant amount of fossil fuel is
used to produce these fertilizers at an ever-increasing cost. In addition, much
of the fixed nitrogen applied to soils is never taken up by the plants and
leaches into ground water, contaminating much of the drinking water in many
rural areas of the United States. To eliminate the need for nitrogen
fertilization, bacteria need to be discovered that can provide fixed nitrogen to
important grasses in agriculture such as wheat and corn. In recent years,
several nitrogen-fixing bacteria have been isolated from lines of grasses that
require very little nitrogen for growth. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria have been
studied for over 100 years and they capture N2 from the atmosphere and convert
it to a form of nitrogen that can be used by plants.

One of the bacteria isolated in the Triplett laboratory has been studied
extensively and is capable of invading the interior of many plants without
causing disease symptoms. This strain probably enters plants in such high
numbers because it either eludes, or fails to induce, plant defense mechanisms
that would prevent other bacteria from entering the plant. In fact, this strain,
Klebsiella pneumoniae 342 (Kp342), actually enhances plant growth. In wheat (but
not other grasses), Kp342 actually provides fixed nitrogen to plants and can
relieve N-deficiency symptoms when cultured in the absence of any nitrogen
fertilizer. More basic knowledge of Kp342's metabolism and regulatory circuits
is needed in order to further improve this strain's ability to provide nitrogen
to wheat, corn, rice, and other grasses. The most thorough and effective way to
learn more about this strain is through determining the entire genome sequence
of this organism. Once the sequence is known, it will be examined carefully to
discover every gene in this organism. The Institute for Genomic Research and the
University of Florida will perform complete genome sequencing of Kp342. With the
discovery of every gene in Kp342 will come a significant effort in training and
outreach. A summer workshop will be established for undergraduate and graduate
students at the University of Florida where students will learn to compare the
genomes of nitrogen fixing bacteria, bacterial endophytes, and Klebsiella
strains. A significant outreach effort will be done to develop a national
curriculum in genome science that will be available to the youth in America who
are interested in science and technology.