* 0412746
* Collaborative Research: Sexual Selection on Male Ornamental Traits in Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Corey Freeman-Gallant, Skidmore College
* Continuing Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 07/31/2008
* USD 169,592.00

Collaborative Research: Sexual Selection on Male Ornaments&lt;br/&gt;PI: Peter
Dunn, Corey Freeman-Gallant&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Males often possess ornamental
traits such as long tails and bright colors that they use to attract mates.
These ornaments may be favored by female choice or male-male competition. Female
choice is likely to act on different ornaments than male-male competition,
particularly when some ornaments are more revealing of male quality than others.
For example, in species with both carotenoid (red, yellow) and melanin (black,
brown)-based ornaments, it appears that females often focus their mate choice on
the carotenoid-based ornaments, which are generally considered to be better
indicators of male condition than ornaments with melanin pigments. Surprisingly,
we have discovered two populations of a monogamous bird, the common
yellowthroat, in which male reproductive success is related to the size of a
carotenoid-based ornament (yellow bib) in one population (New York) and a
melanin-based ornament (black facial mask) in another population (Wisconsin).
Our study will examine sexual selection on each plumage ornament in both
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will 1) use aviary experiments to
identify which ornaments are favored by female choice and male-male competition,
and 2) determine if the differences between populations are caused by different
mechanisms of selection operating on different ornaments. Common yellowthroats
are one of only a handful of species in which researchers have been able to
identify the sires of most young, including extra-pair young, and, as a
consequence, make an estimate of the full force of selection on male ornaments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the broader impacts of this project will be to
foster training of students in collaborative research, which will give them a
better perspective on how science is conducted. To facilitate this training, the
PIs will exchange students between their two institutions (one a small
undergraduate institution, the other a large graduate program) each year for
both the field and laboratory components of the project. &lt;br/&gt;