* 0412210
* Childcare in Challenging Environments: Identifying Barriers to Optimal Childcare Practices in Rural Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Craig Hadley, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2006
* USD 22,394.00

This research project will explore the causes and consequences of dramatic
differences in the nutritional status of children from two ethnic groups
occupying the same village in rural Tanzania. Previous research revealed that in
this setting ethnically Sukuma children were significantly heavier and taller
for their age than were age and sex matched ethnically Pimbwe children. Contrary
to initial predictions, measures of household food insecurity during the pre-
harvest hunger season, indicators of household wealth, and maternal stature were
generally unable to account for the large differences between these ethnic
groups. In this research, the investigator will explore in more detail the
relative impact of dietary intake and maternal care giving behaviors on
children's nutritional status and mortality. Methods of data collection include
focus groups, recipe trials, a survey, and anthropometry. The objective is to
identify key differences in patterns of childcare between these two groups, as
well as to gain a better understanding of why the two groups differ in their
ability to care for their children. The research will contribute to theoretical
debates in both cultural and biological anthropology about the relationship
between subsistence and demographic outcomes, as well as the influence of
culture and ethnicity on children's health.

Broader impacts New knowledge of why women so rarely adhere to current
international nutrition recommendations for infant and child feeding will be
relevant to international and local health planners. Prior interventions have
focused on providing food during the hunger season, yet previous data have shown
that household food availability is not related to children's growth across the
season.