* 0412976
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Polymorphism, Divergence, and Selection in Sex-specific Mitochondrial DNA in the Mussel, Mytilus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Grant Pogson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2006
* USD 7,427.00

Mitochondria are cellular organelles responsible for converting energy from food
into a molecular currency useable by the cell. They are usually inherited
maternally and possess their own small genome. Over the past decade, there has
been considerable debate over the importance of natural selection in influencing
the evolution of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Evidence suggests that selection can
explain some of the differences in frequencies and kinds of mutations found in
comparisons of mtDNA sequences among species. However, this evidence is often
confounded by differences in the demographic histories of the species being
compared, i.e., stable populations show a different pattern than growing or
contracting populations. Our study takes advantage of an unusual pattern of
mtDNA inheritance in mussels of family Mytilidae in which two mitochondrial
genomes exist simultaneously, one inherited maternally and the other paternally.
Since both genomes share a demographic history, differences found between the
two mtDNA genomes in our study should provide a much clearer signal of
selection. Understanding the role of selection in mtDNA is important in
understanding human mitochondrial diseases and other genetically based ailments.
In addition, mtDNA is often used as a tool to identify population structure in
animals and plants that can be important in identifying appropriate units for
conservation.