* 0412583
* Effect of Alloying and Thermo-Mechanical-Treatment on Anisotropic Creep and Deformation of Ti-Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2011
* K. Linga Murty, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 07/31/2011
* USD 518,000.00

This renewal award, a renewal of award DMR-0101309, by the Division of Materials
Research in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the
Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems in the Directorate for Engineering to
North Carolina State University is to study the influence of thermo-mechanical-
treatment (TMT) and alloying on deformation and creep anisotropy of titanium
alloys. With this award, Professors Murty and Scattergood will characterize the
anisotropic biaxial creep of Ti alloys using closed-end internally pressurized
thin-walled tubing superimposed with axial load. The project will investigate
these behaviors in Ti and Ti-3Al-2.5V following stress-relief anneal and
complete recrystallization. Alloying additions such as Al to Ti result in
significant modification of crystallographic texture and the operating slip
systems. Cold working leads to grain-shape anisotropy of the otherwise equiaxed
grain structure of Rx materials. The effects of these variables on the
deformation microstructures will be investigated along with deformation
anisotropy following biaxial loading under varied stress-states and stress-
levels. This award will address transitions in creep mechanisms and the effect
of underlying deformation mechanism(s) on creep anisotropy. Such studies would
be important since 'blind' extrapolation of short-term data to low stresses
could lead to 'non-conservative' estimates of creep strains and life of these
structural materials in-service.

The broader impacts of the proposed study involve significance to
technologically relevant structural materials in various industries such as
aerospace, chemical, transportation, etc., where the reliability of thin-walled
tubing is of great concern during in-service exposure under multiaxial loading.
The mechanical anisotropy of these materials, while making it relatively complex
in predicting the life of structures, constitutes interesting examples for
demonstration for both undergraduate and high school students thereby giving
them a good feel for real life problems. While the outcome of the proposed study
is of direct relevance to appropriate technologies, the study involves
fundamental aspects of mechanical metallurgy and mechanics.