* 0412447
* Dissertation Research: Introduced Plants and Native Insects: A Model System for the Study of Phytophagous Insect Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* David Maddison, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2007
* USD 11,523.00

The goal of this project is to determine if introduced plants have
facilitated&lt;br/&gt;hybridization between two native herbivorous insect
species. Putative hybrids of two&lt;br/&gt;butterfly species, the Great Copper
and Edith's Copper, occur in two regions of&lt;br/&gt;California, where
introduced plant species (Curly Dock and Sheep Sorrel) are
present.&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid butterflies feed on these introduced plant
species, whereas many populations&lt;br/&gt;of the parental species retain their
associations with native host plants. This project will&lt;br/&gt;test the
hypothesis that the introduced plant species are facilitating gene flow
between&lt;br/&gt;two historically separate, genetically distinct insect
species. Molecular marker analyses&lt;br/&gt;(DNA sequence and fingerprinting
analyses), will allow detection of recent demographic&lt;br/&gt;events, such as
population expansion and gene flow.&lt;br/&gt;Many, if not all, terrestrial
ecosystems have been altered by human-caused biotic&lt;br/&gt;introductions.
These introductions have resulted in numerous novel interactions, many
of&lt;br/&gt;which have yet unknown outcomes. Native herbivorous insects using
introduced plants&lt;br/&gt;offer an excellent system to explore the
evolutionary and genetic responses of organisms&lt;br/&gt;to novel interactions.
To date, there are no documented cases of hybridization between&lt;br/&gt;native
insect species due to introduced plants. Such 'homogenization' of lineages
could&lt;br/&gt;have profound effects on the genetic diversity of native
organisms. This project will&lt;br/&gt;allow researchers to anticipate the
future of evolution in light of novel interactions.