* 0412320
* Dynamics in Polymeric Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Frank Blum, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2007
* USD 315,000.00

The object of the proposed research is to characterize and understand the
behavior, especially the dynamics (molecular motion), of thin-film polymers on
solid surfaces. Characterization of the properties of the polymers is crucial to
an understanding of how various devices work. Ultimately, the properties of
devices containing polymers can be improved if the behavior and their roles are
understood. These determinations become even more crucial as the size of the
devices, and hence the thickness of the polymer films, becomes smaller. The
properties of the very-thin polymer films will be studied with a variety of
techniques including, mainly, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), and
also modulated differential scanning calorimetry (MDSC), Fourier-transform
infra-red spectroscopy (FTIR), and other techniques. The chemical/spectroscopic
results will be correlated, when possible, to physical property studies, such as
the measurement of adhesion strength in thin films. The intellectual merit of
the proposed research is based on the understanding of the very complex
phenomena in polymer thin films. Their dynamics are difficult to quantify with
many of the techniques that are applied to chemical systems because of the
thinness and opacity of the surface systems. The use of these complementary
techniques will give unprecedented detail to the characterization of the
dynamics of adsorbed polymers, especially through the use of twodimensional
exchange deuterium NMR of adsorbed polymers. The segmental dynamics of the
polymer chains will be interpreted in terms of distributions of correlation
times and the results of the distributions will be used to determine the state
of the polymer films. The broader impact of this research lies in the impact of
the research itself on the technology, education and training of students, and
the transfer of this knowledge to the scientific community and the public. The
work to be performed will aid device makers in designing better systems for
advanced applications that include thin polymer films. These applications are in
electronic materials, sensors, particle stabilization, and composites fields, to
name just a few. Knowledge of how material properties, such as adhesion, vary as
a function of thickness allows the prediction and, indeed, avoidance of failure
of these devices. The students educated through this research will be exposed to
a wide variety of experiences, often from synthesis through the measurement of
mechanical properties. They will develop an invaluable interdisciplinary
background that will assist in making them more effective employees in complex
technological fields. The scientific community and public at-large will also
benefit through the activities of the PI in professional societies focused on
improving and disseminating knowledge. This includes strong components of public
outreach. In addition, the PI's scientific activities will enhance his own
outreach to the community through involvement in and service to the important
field of education.