* 0412000
* Knowledge Representation, Reasoning, and Problem Solving in a Cellular Domain
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Chitta Baral, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edwina L. Rissland
* 07/31/2010
* USD 496,465.00

The aim of the proposed research is to develop new and adapt existing knowledge
representation and reasoning schemes to represent and perform various kinds of
reasoning and problem solving tasks, such as prediction, explanation, diagnosis
and planning about the activities inside a cell. This project aims to focus on
happenings and mechanisms such as signal transduction, protein-protein
interactions and other biochemical reactions. The project's preliminary results
suggest that the knowledge representation, reasoning, and problem solving
approaches of Artificial Intelligence are well suited for this task. In a cell
when a ligand binds to an appropriate receptor it activates the receptor which
in turn triggers a series of events. In the terminology of planning and
reasoning about actions, the binding of a ligand to the receptor can be thought
of as an action; the conditions under which a ligand can bind to a receptor, as
the executability conditions of an action in a planning domain; Similarly, the
direct effects of the ligand binding to a receptor can be expressed using
planning terminologies. Planning is just one of the problem solving and
reasoning tasks in the context of reasoning about actions in ther cellular
domain. Others include prediction (hypothetical reasoning), explanation, and
diagnosis. In the context of a cell, representing the cell behavior using
actions and determining the effects and side effects of a drug (that manifests
as a ligand) would correspond to prediction. Similarly, figuring out what
interventions will change the cell behavior in a particular way corresponds to
planning; determining the cause behind some unexpected observations about the
cell corresponds to diagnosis. Since research on cell decoding is ongoing this
project will have only partial information about the happenings inside a cell,
and its reasoning schemes will need to be able to deal with incomplete
information. In this way, this project ties into important goals in AI research
on knowledge representation and reasoning. Although the existing research in
knowledge representation and reasoning provides a good foundation for
representing and reasoning about cell behavior, there are several new features
in this domain that pose new research challenges. Tackling them is the main goal
of this project. Challenges to be addressed include modeling triggering
activity, notions of sensitization of receptors, and protein 'recruiting'
proteins.