* 0412851
* SGER:     Structural Evolution at Micro and Nano Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Rui Huang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 01/31/2005
* USD 59,728.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits&lt;br/&gt;Advanced
technologies demand solid structures of decreasing length scales. During
fabrication and use of these structures, diffusive processes relocate matter,
and the structures change configuration over time. Evolving structures may self-
assemble into certain patterns, enabling new techniques for micro and nano
fabrication. On the other hand, structural evolution may result in nucleation
and growth of cracks and cavities, causing serious mechanical reliability
problems for devices with small feature sizes. Fundamentally, the behavior of
materials and structures at micro and nano scales differ from their counterparts
at both macro and atomistic scales, and forces of less familiar physical origins
play roles. The study of evolving structures at micro and nano scales is a new
field of great scientific interest and technological importance, to which solid
mechanics researchers can make substantial contributions. The long-term
objectives of the proposed research are: (1) to develop a research program
focusing on modeling and simulation of structural evolution at micro and nano
scales; and (2) to integrate research and education to foster interdisciplinary
education in the areas of mechanics, materials, and nanoscale science and
technology. Within the scope of this SGER project, guided self-assembly of
quantum dots on patterned and strain-engineered substrates will be investigated
via modeling and simulations. Collaborations with experimental investigators
will be established to facilitate future interactions.&lt;br/&gt;The spontaneous
formation of three-dimensional coherent islands during the Stranski-Krastanov
(SK) growth of lattice-mismatched heteroepitaxy has emerged as an attractive
technique for the synthesis of self-assembled quantum dots. However, the
considerable nonuniformity in the island sizes and the randomness of the
nucleation sites have posed significant limitations for device applications of
self-assembled quantum dots. The proposed research will develop a fundamental
understanding of the role of strain field and surface structures on the
formation of quantum dots through dynamic modeling and simulations, which will
provide the basis for developing systematic control of quantum dots synthesis
via guided self-assembly to achieve sufficient size uniformity and spatial order
for practical device applications. A variational approach will be developed as a
unifying framework for modeling and simulation. The approach extends the
established approach in continuum mechanics by including mass relocation as an
independent kinematic variable, in addition to deformation. The results from
modeling and simulations will guide experimental investigations in future
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
proposed research will lead to new ideas for fabricating micro- and nanoscale
structures for a wide range of applications including nanoelectronics,
photonics, and biomedical devices. One graduate student will be trained. Part of
the research results will be incorporated into a new graduate course on Thin
Film Mechanics, which will be offered by the PI in Fall 2004 for the first time
at the University of Texas-Austin. Other broader impacts include research
experience for undergraduates (REU) and dissemination of research results to
general public&lt;br/&gt;