* 0412120
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The Effect of Vegetative Herbivory on the Mating System and on the Demographic Value of Selfed and Outcrossed Progeny
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Tia-Lynn Ashman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

A central question of population biology is to understand the causes and
consequences of mating system variation. Biologists have recognized the
importance of both environmental and genetic factors in the evolution of plant
mating systems. However, very few studies have examined the role of antagonists
(e.g., herbivores/pathogens). Herbivores are one of the most important factors
limiting plant reproduction, and are likely to affect mating system evolution.
The proposed work tests hypotheses on the mechanisms of herbivore-mediated
mating system variation in a native plant, Impatiens capensis. The investigators
will further extend this work to understand how changes in the mating system as
a result of herbivory affect the population dynamics of I. capensis. A
combination of field experiments that manipulate herbivore levels, molecular
genetic analyses, and demographic analyses will be used to address these goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these experiments will offer important
insight to the ecological causes and long-term consequences of variation in
mating patterns and the genetic diversity of a native species. This work has
broader implications for conservation as plants have become more vulnerable to
antagonists with increasing levels of disturbance, i.e., anthropogenic factors.
It will also provide valuable training for a female graduate student, thereby,
supporting the goals of NSF to increase diversity in its programs. &lt;br/&gt;