* 0412623
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms Underlying Incipient Speciation in Peripheral Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Suzanne Edmands, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Dr. Suzanne Edmands and Mr. Dennis Peterson of the University of Southern
California are studying the early stages of speciation in the copepod Tigriopus
californicus. Much of what we know of the genetics of speciation comes from a
handful of model organisms (chiefly Drosophila) and focuses largely on sex
chromosomes. T. californicus provides an alternative model that does not have
morphologically distinguishable sex chromosomes. Work will focus on populations
at the southern end of the species range where patterns of reproductive
isolation are more severe and qualitatively different than those found in the
rest of the species range. The project has three primary goals: 1) describe
patterns of reproductive compatibility in southern populations, 2) use molecular
phylogenies to reconstruct the evolutionary history of reproductive
incompatibility, and 3) use molecular markers to determine regions of the genome
contributing to reduced survival in first- and second-generation hybrids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have broader impacts through the career
development and scientific training of both graduate and undergraduate students.
It will contribute to our understanding of the process of speciation, arguably
one of the most important yet least understood issues in biology. In addition,
it focuses on the relationship between genetic divergence and reproductive
compatibility, a subject of considerable importance to conservation and
management.&lt;br/&gt;