* 0412305
* Resonance Problems for Linear and Nonlinear Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Weinstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 321,740.00

DMS-0412305 Title: Resonance Problems for Linear and Nonlinear Waves

PI: Michael I. Weinstein Department of Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics
Columbia University New York, New York

Abstract: The Principal Investigator will study problems involving resonant
energy transfer in Hamiltonian wave equations governing propagation in nonlinear
and inhomogeneous, deterministic and random media. The proposed research will
deepen our understanding of and inform analytical and computational approaches
to the study of important wave phenomena in physical systems. Three theme areas
are considered. (1) Nonlinear scattering and resonant energy transfer: This
concerns fundamental questions for infinite dimensional dynamical systems on the
interaction of bound states (solitary waves, kinks, vortices) and radiation. (2)
Control of soliton-like coherent structures: Motivated by the problem of
trapping optical pulses in inhomogeneous media with defects, this work concerns
design of propagation media in order to achieve **controlled** energy transfer.
The ideas are also of direct relevance in the study of mathematical models of
Bose-Einstein condensation. (3) Linear and nonlinear photonic structures and
homogenization: This work addresses determination of properties of photonic
microstructures, by effective media (e.g. higher order homogenization)
approaches with applications to efficient numerical study of optical
microstructures and their optimal design.

Technological advances have made possible the fabrication of novel optical media
(photonic microstructures), which have great potential for applications ranging
from transmission media and devices in communication networks to the fundamental
science of optical and quantum computing. These media are material structures
made up of features which are of micro- (millionth of a meter) or nano-
(billionth of a meter) scales. The shape of individual microfeatures, their
spatial arrangement and the material contrasts among them (e.g. refractive index
variations) offer multiple degrees of freedom, which can now be tuned in order
to influence light pulses sent through such media. Devices based on these novel
structures can be used to shape, filter and amplify light pulses which encode
the bits of information in optical communication networks. Transmission media
using such structures can potentially achieve much lower losses and lower
distortion of pulses than in currently used optical fiber. The number of
possible designs is so huge that an approach mainly based on direct computer
exploration is not feasible. Rather, a fundamental mathematical understanding of
such phenomena must be joined with computation to achieve rational and
systematic design of optical media. The goal of this research is to develop
fundamental mathematical insights in the fields of partial differential
equations and dynamical systems and to apply them to an understanding of light
propagation (linear and nonlinear) in photonic microstructures.

