* 0412786
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Who is Quebecois? The Articulation of Nationalist and Multicultural Interests in Emerging Language Ideologies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Judith Irvine, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation research project will elaborate upon three processes related
to how people in Montreal, Quebec, think about language: how local nationalist
and multicultural interests authorize certain linguistic beliefs and practices;
how these political interests impact the formation of language ideologies; and
how points of conflict or opposition are involved in the development of dominant
language ideologies and the socialization of minority citizens. Each of these
processes will be examined within the context of the Programme d'Enseignement
des Langues d'Origine, or PELO. This is a state-funded program designed to teach
spoken "heritage" languages to children of immigrants and their descendants. By
using a variety of ethnographic, linguistic, and historical methods, the student
will investigate the ideological impact of one Tamil PELO program on the beliefs
and linguistic practices of Tamil-speaking children and adults.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project differs from other studies on Quebec's
language issues because it directly examines how multilingualism, multicultural
agendas, and nationalist policies have influenced Montreal residents' ideas
about language. In doing so, this project will account for universal and
culturally specific features of language in society. Furthermore, by
investigating the salient differences in language use and ideology that result
from the institutional mediation of Tamil citizenship, this project will
contribute to a broader understanding of transnational subjects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to contributing to the
doctoral education of a linguistic anthropologist, this project will further our
understanding of language use and ideology as integral components of teaching
and national policy-making. The collaboration with teachers, administrators, and
school commission officials throughout the research process will foster new
interactions between the academic research institution, educational
institutions, and the government. &lt;br/&gt;