* 0412651
* Functional Genomics of a Metapopulation: An Individual Based Understanding of Population Dynamics, Life History Traits, and Genetic Mechanisms in Time and Space
* BIO,EF
* 12/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Ilkka Hanski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 05/31/2010
* USD 1,760,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. James Marden and Ilkka Hanski to examine
variation in physiological traits of an insect that is a model organism for
population dynamics. As with most species, populations of checkerspot
butterflies are scattered across a landscape of distinct, isolated patches of
suitable habitat. Individual populations frequently go extinct, but this is
balanced by an approximately equal number of instances of the founding of new
populations in previously unoccupied patches of suitable habitat. This project
will test the hypothesis that old stable populations consist of butterflies of
poor flight ability and high fecundity, whereas newly founded populations
consist of butterflies of strong flight ability and reduced fecundity.
Measurements of flight ability and the tradeoff between flight and fecundity
will be incorporated into mathematical models to predict the evolution and
spatio-temporal dynamics of these traits. Functional genomic approaches (DNA
microarrays and proteomics) will be used to examine the genetic mechanisms
responsible for variation in flight ability and fecundity. Results will provide
an integrative understanding of how gene function affects organismal traits that
determine spatial population dynamics and landscape ecology. The NSF
Biocomplexity program was motivated by the understanding that "research on the
individual components of environmental systems provides only limited information
about the behavior of the systems themselves". This project will overcome that
problem by integrating data from multiple levels of biological complexity, from
genes to landscapes, in order to understand the behavior of a large and complex
ecological system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this work will enhance
understanding of processes that maintain genetic variation in fragmented
populations; this is a topic of keen interest for management and conservation of
biodiversity. The results will also provide information and methods that will be
applicable to management of insect pests that migrate among fields and regions
in agricultural landscapes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance the
infrastructure for research and education by forging a new partnership between
U.S. scientists expert in functional genomics and integrative organismal biology
with a research group in Finland that is at the forefront of population research
and theory. Long-term benefits will include opportunities for student exchange
and development of material resources including a characterized cDNA library and
a microarray that will bring genomic tools to one of the ecologically best known
species. Training of students will enhance the pool of young scientists capable
of using functional genomics in an ecological context. Participation of women
and minorities will be accomplished in part by an outreach partnership with an
NSF EPSCoR institution (Mississippi State University) that will bring
underrepresented minority undergraduates to the project each year. &lt;br/&gt;