* 0412887
* Completion of the NEES Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Ian Buckle, NEES Consortium, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 11/30/2005
* USD 510,130.00

The award provides funding to NEES Consortium, Inc., to build its headquarters
infrastructure during FY 2004. NEES Consortium, Inc., was incorporated in
January 2003. Its primary mission will be to management, operate, and maintain,
during FY 2005 - FY 2014, the equipment site infrastructure and NEESgrid
cyberinfrastructure being developed under the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES). NEES is an NSF-funded Major Research
Equipment and Facilities Construction (MREFC) project under construction during
FY 2000 - FY 2004. When completed by September 30, 2004, NEES will be national,
networked simulation resource of 15 geographically distributed, shared use
experimental research equipment sites, with teleobservation and teleoperation
capabilities, to advance earthquake engineering research and education through
collaborative and integrated experimentation, computation, theory, databases,
and model-based simulation and to improve the seismic design and performance of
U.S. civil and mechanical infrastructure systems. NEES research equipment
includes shake tables, geotechnical centrifuges, a tsunami wave basin, large-
scale laboratory experimentation systems, and mobile and permanently installed
field equipment, networked together through the high performance Internet.
NEESgrid, under development by a multi-institutional team led by the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, will enable telepresence and distributed
experimentation at the equipment sites and provide a curated repository for
experimental and analytical earthquake engineering and related data,
collaborative tools, and a simulation tools repository. This award enables the
Consortium to hire an Executive Director, Site Operations Manager, Executive
Assistant, and webmaster, as well as establish the Consortium headquarters
office. This award includes a subaward to High Performance Technologies, Inc.,
to conduct an independent validation and verification of the NEESgrid software.
Information about project activities will be available at www.nees.org.