* 0412235
* Correcting the Zurich and International Sunspot Counts from 1849 to Present
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Bradley Schaefer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 05/31/2007
* USD 75,804.00

This is a study to correct the Zurich and International sunspot numbers by
applying corrections based on improved coefficients. An accurate sunspot record
is vital for evaluating solar effects on global warming (to determine the
relative importance of solar and greenhouse effects), for predicting future
solar activity, and for all Sun-Earth connection studies on time scales from
decades to centuries. Virtually all studies of solar activity on time scales
from a few decades to a few centuries are based on the Zurich and International
sunspot counts. Yet these have previously unrecognized systematic errors on all
time scales from months to centuries with errors by up to a factor of two. These
are caused by the normal variations of the K-coefficients for the Standard
Observers in Zurich and Locarno. The Standard Observers (who are defined to have
K=0.60) are known to be nonstandard because their measured K-coefficients varied
by a factor of 2 before they became the definition of standard and because the
K-coefficients for all observers worldwide vary up-and-down in synchronization
with large amplitude. The inevitable result is that the Zurich and International
sunspot counts have corresponding errors on all time scales by up to a factor of
two. In this study, a complete error analysis will be made so that actual one-
sigma error bars can be determined for all sunspot counts and their derived
quantities. The primary data product will be a fully corrected sunspot count
from 1849 to present. The improved counts will lead to better predictions of
future solar activity on a cycle-by-cycle basis; and this will be important for
spacecraft launch/reboost/reentry planning and climate forecasters. The improved
counts may substantially change the conclusions of the importance of solar
activity on the observed global warming over the last century. Judging the
effects of greenhouse gases versus solar activity is important for environmental
economics and hence politics.