* 0412205
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Comparative Genomics of Chemosynthetic Symbionts
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Colleen Cavanaugh, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2009
* USD 748,718.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Colleen Cavanaugh of Harvard University, in
collaboration with Dr. Jonathan Eisen of The Institute for Genome Research
(TIGR), to sequence the genomes of two representative chemosynthetic bacteria
which live in symbiotic associations with marine invertebrates. Like
chloroplasts in plants (the sugar-producing organelles), chemosynthetic
symbionts provide their host an internal source of nutrition, using sulfide
instead of sunlight as an energy source. Chemosynthetic bacteria are widespread
as symbionts of marine invertebrates, as-yet-uncultured, and substantial
components of sulfur and carbon cycling in marine environments, including deep-
sea hydrothermal vents. Obtaining these symbiont genome sequences will allow
comparison with the genomes of related free-living bacteria and other
endosymbionts, providing rapid insights into the genetics, metabolic potential,
and evolution of chemosynthetic symbioses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These animal-
bacteria symbioses are significant evolutionarily, effectively creating "sulfur-
eating animals" and as models for understanding the bacterial origin and
evolution of animal cellular organelles, and, ecologically, as primary producers
in sulfide-rich environments. Genome analyses will answer questions regarding
microbial symbiosis, physiology, genetics, ecology, and evolution. Further,
comparison of these genomes will advance our understanding of how the bacteria
are passed between host generations and the similarities and differences between
infection mechanisms of mutualistic symbionts vs. pathogens. Outreach efforts
associated with the project will include the availability of the genome
sequences via the TIGR website. The project website, www.endosymbiont.org,
contains relevant links to publications, other genomes, researchers, news in the
field, and educational materials. Undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows will have ample opportunity to participate in analyses of
the symbiont genomes. Information on endosymbiont genomics will be disseminated
to scientific and general audiences by lectures at venues ranging from
elementary school classes through international research meetings. &lt;br/&gt;