* 0412864
* Land Use and Long-term Sustainability on a Mediterranean Landscape: An Archaeological Case Study in the Lower Alentejo of Portugal
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* James Boone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 124,233.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. James L. Boone and a team of
colleagues will conduct a two field seasons of archaeological and
geomorphological research into the effect of population growth and changes in
land use strategies on the sustainability of agrarian production in a
Mediterranean landscape during the Late Roman and Islamic periods (AD 450 to
1250) in the Lower Alentejo of southern Portugal. Previous work carried out by
the PI in this area has shown that soon after the dissolution of Roman control
of the region in the late 5th century AD, small hamlets and villages of a
Medieval character began to appear on patches of relatively high quality soil
and in the vicinity of former Roman villae. Over the next five hundred years,
during the establishment of Islamic culture following the Muslim invasion of AD
711, settlement density increased eightfold over what had existed during the
Roman period. Following the Christian reconquista in the region in AD 1248, the
area was almost completely abandoned until the early 1500s, when it was
reoccupied at a much lower settlement density. The total settlement area in the
subsequent Late Medieval and Modern periods was never more than a third of what
it had been during the Islamic period. The questions we ask with this research
are: what kinds of social organization and land use strategies supported the
high population densities of agriculturalists and pastoralists in the area
during the Islamic period? What were processes by which these land use
strategies altered the local environment and were they sustainable in the long
term? What were the causes of the settlement hiatus following the Reconquista in
the 13th century?

The project will involve two eight-week seasons of fieldwork. The first season
will be devoted to an archaeological site survey of an 8 X 8 km area in the
study area. This will complement the previous work we have done by extending the
survey database into an area with different topography, soil characteristics,
and modern land-use practices. The combined site survey data will allow us to
document settlement growth and decline during the Late Roman and Islamic
periods. The second field season will be devoted to limited excavations of sites
from the Late Roman and early Islamic period (circa AD 550-850), a time period
that remains very poorly understood archaeologically and historically. Through
both field seasons, we will conduct geomorphic and paleoenvironmental
investigations aimed at documenting changes in the landscape and the
anthropogenic processes that brought them about. This integrated program of
research will illuminate rural social and economic organization and
anthropogenic (i.e. human-caused) environmental change and the connections
between them. By adopting a long-term perspective, we will be able to explore
the ongoing recursive interaction between humans and the Mediterranean
landscape. As such, the result will be pertinent to illuminating many pressing
contemporary issues from a uniquely expanded temporal perspective, as
populations continue to grow and place greater pressures on the scarce natural
resources of arid and semi-arid environments in the Mediterranean region and
across the globe.

