* 0412076
* Development of Nonlinear Harmonic Techniques for Studies of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Cathodes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 07/31/2008
* USD 261,400.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Development of Nonlinear Harmonic
Techniques for Studies of Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Cathodes&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: CTS- 0412076&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Stuart
Adler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A widespread technique for analyzing
fuel cell electrodes and other electrochemical devices is electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS), which seeks to separate and identify physical
mechanisms via time scale. While EIS has proven useful, it can be challenging to
interpret the impedance of complex systems such as fuel cell electrodes due to
wide dispersion and/or overlap among physical processes in the frequency domain,
as well as inherent ambiguity in interpreting linearized, low-amplitude response
(often described by equivalent circuits) uniquely in terms of physical
mechanisms. Upon linearization, many models predict similar or identical
impedance behavior, and thus do not provide mechanism-distinguishing
characteristics to compare (or fit) to experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop advanced transient
electrochemical techniques that potentially provide much higher resolution than
EIS in identifying and quantifying rate-limiting phenomena in solid-oxide fuel
cell (SOFC) cathodes. The general approach, which has been called nonlinear EIS
(NLEIS) and electrochemical frequency modulation (EFM), involves the measurement
of nonlinear 2nd and higher order voltage harmonics resulting from moderate
amplitude current perturbations. By the excitation of nonlinear responses and
interactions, these techniques potentially offer improved identification of
physical steps via nonlinearity and extent of coupling, as well as timescale.
These techniques will be developed for SOFC electrodes by studying
comprehensively characterized cathodes of well-defined geometry and composition.
In order to aid the interpretation of nonlinear harmonic data, mechanistic
models will be developed and/or extended for the electrode reaction into the
time domain, allowing identification of "fingerprint" harmonic behavior
corresponding to specific geometries and reaction mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;