* 0412213
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Genome Sequence of the Model Biotroph Peronospora parasitica
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Brett Tyler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2008
* USD 966,490.00

Obligate biotrophic plant pathogens exhibit a highly evolved relationship with
their hosts, being completely dependent on living host tissue for survival. Many
of the most destructive plant pathogens are obligate pathogens, including the
downy mildews, powdery mildews and rusts. The maize downy mildews
Peronosclerospora philippinesis and Sclerophthora rayssiae and the soybean rust
Phakopsora pachyrhizi are considered major crop biosecurity threats to the US.
However, genetic analysis of obligate biotrophs is difficult because they cannot
be grown apart from their plant hosts. As part of an international initiative a
draft genome sequence will be developed for Peronospora parasitica, a downy
mildew of Arabidopsis thaliana and placed into a community annotation database.
UK collaborators will carry out sequencing of ESTs and fingerprinting and
sequencing of BAC clones. Pe. parasitica is a compelling choice for studying
obligate biotrophy. Firstly it has culturable close relatives, such as
Phytophthora infestans and Phytophthora sojae, that have excellent genome
resources and are amenable to genetic manipulation, facilitating functional
analysis of Pe. parasitica genes. Secondly, the host of Pe. parasitica,
Arabidopsis is the leading plant model system, so that there has already been
extensive physiological, genetic and genomics studies of the interaction between
Pe. parasitica and its host.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
project will also create a resource for the plant-microbe interaction research
community that will enable significant advances in the understanding of how
biotrophic pathogens attack plants, and consequently, the design of better
methods for protecting crops and natural ecosystems from these pathogens. The
community annotation platform and annotation jamboree will provide multi-
disciplinary training environments for postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
undergraduates from all US and international institutions.&lt;br/&gt;