* 0412653
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Molecular Systematics and Evolution in Castilleja and Subtribe Castillejinae (Orobanchaceae).
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Richard Olmstead, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 05/31/2006
* USD 14,462.00

Understanding the role that hybridization plays in creating plant species, and
its impact on understanding evolutionary relationships is of vital importance to
understanding the origins of biodiversity. Hybridization, or the interbreeding
of different species, often creates a pattern in which the hybrid species
displays characteristics intermediate to the two parent species. If
hybridization is common within a species group, it can be difficult to
distinguish species due to overlap in many of their distinguishing
characteristics. Complicating matters, species of recent origin can be difficult
to distinguish, because of a similar pattern of overlapping characters. To
determine the importance of these different historical processes that result in
similar patterns, first requires the reconstruction of patterns of genetic
relationship between species (the 'family tree'). The large genus Castilleja
(Indian Paintbrush), which is made up of ~180 species distributed chiefly in
western North America, is an appropriate model to address these questions.
Preliminary results indicate that the Castilleja, in which the majority of the
species are perennial, has evolved from a group of closely related annual
species. This contradicts the commonly held wisdom that annual plants evolve
from perennial ancestors. However, a small radiation of annual paintbrush
species in South America has been identified, but little study has been devoted
to these plants, and their relationship to other Castilleja species is unknown.
Thus, the goals of this research are 3-fold: 1) develop a well-supported,
species-level evolutionary tree depicting the relationships among species of
Castilleja, 2) determine the importance of a recent species radiation versus
hybridization in creating the observed pattern of overlapping characteristics
within Castilleja, and 3) investigate the relationship of the South American
annual Castilleja species with respect to the remainder of the genus. These
objectives will be accomplished by first sampling ~120 Castilleja species from
their native ranges, and then comparing several DNA sequences between the
sampled species. Using computer algorithms to compare the DNA sequences and
extrapolate the evolutionary history of the group, it is possible to test the
significance of the evolutionary processes that may have been instrumental to
speciation in Castilleja. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results obtained will contribute
not only to the understanding of patterns of diversification in species-rich
groups, but also towards an understanding of some major processes involved in
plant speciation. Completed and ongoing research will be reported at annual
scientific meetings of the Botanical Society of America, American Society of
Plant Taxonomists, and the Society for Systematic Biology. A website on
Castilleja taxonomy and biology will be developed for the greater botanical and
scientific community, as well as for the ongoing Tree of Life project. Results
from the proposed research will be submitted to scientific journals for
publication, and the results of this research will be incorporated into the
upcoming treatment of Castilleja for the Flora of North America.&lt;br/&gt;