* 0412186
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Genome sequencing of Plant-associated Azospirillum brasilense
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Andrew Paterson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2007
* USD 791,217.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Igor B. Jouline of the Georgia Institute of
Technology, in collaboration with Dr. Andrew Paterson of the University of
Georgia and Dr. Mattheos Koffas of the University at Buffalo and with
participation of several laboratories from Australia, Canada, Belgium, France,
Germany and Israel to sequence the complete genome of the plant-associated
bacterium Azospirillum brasilense. This bacterium has a potential to be
developed as an organic fertilizer for important crops, such as wheat, rice,
corn and sorghum. Azospirillum brasilense possesses unique biological
characteristics that can also be used in the industrial production of important
biological molecules, such as anti-oxidants. In order to fully uncover the
biological, agronomical and industrial potential of this organism, its whole
genome will be sequenced using the state-of-the-art high-throughput technology.
Biological information will be derived from the genomic sequence using modern
bioinformatic techniques and displayed to the entire academic community and
general public in a user-friendly database on the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will enable researchers and students
in three public US universities to gain a unique experience in both experimental
and biological science on the forefront of the genome technology. It will serve
a purpose of promoting collaboration and communication between scientists in the
United States and many foreign countries in cross-disciplinary areas: from
agronomy to genetics to metabolic engineering. The future use of Azospirillum-
based biological fertilizers will significantly decrease the danger of health
problems associated with the current use of chemical fertilizers and will
promote sustainable agriculture. Genomic sequence of Azospirillum obtained under
this grant will enable metabolic engineers to develop a new generation of
environmentally friendly biotechnological products.&lt;br/&gt;