* 0412757
* Mathematical Biology: Nonlinear Dynamics of Oscillator Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Steven Strogatz, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2008
* USD 524,061.00

Strogatz

Many populations of biological oscillators can exhibit remarkable collective
behavior. Despite differences in their individual natural frequencies, the
oscillators spontaneously synchronize to a common frequency. Examples include
chorusing crickets, fireflies that flash in unison, and synchronous firing of
cardiac pacemaker cells. In several other branches of science and technology,
one would like to imitate nature's success at designing networks that can
synchronize themselves. For instance, a semiconductor laser array generates
greater collective power when it synchronizes, but such phase-locked operation
is notoriously difficult to achieve in practice. The PI and his students study
the dynamics of oscillator networks, using mathematical methods of dynamical
systems theory, bifurcation theory, and statistical mechanics, along with
numerical simulation. One project investigates a peculiar mathematical
phenomenon that was recently discovered in a model of cellular oscillators
communicating with one another through the exchange of a signaling molecule.
Three additional projects venture into areas where oscillator theory has rarely
been applied, namely molecular genetics, stochastic analysis, and the interplay
of human behavior and civil engineering. The goal in each case is to answer a
mathematically fascinating question that is important in the real world.
Specifically: (1) How can one build the analog of a multicellular biological
clock, using synthetic gene circuits? (2) Can a precise biological clock be made
by synchronizing many imprecise components, and is this what takes place in our
own circadian pacemakers? (3) What caused London's Millennium Bridge to wobble
on opening day? Each of these projects enlists the collaboration of a top
experimentalist in the relevant field.

Networks of oscillators arise throughout science and technology and are
ubiquitous in nature: lasers arrays work better when they oscillate
synchronously, structures such as buildings and bridges can be endangered by
synchronous oscillation, synchronous firing of cardiac pacemaker cells keeps
hearts beating. The investigator mathematically explores the behavior of
networks of oscillators, studying how networks synchronize themselves. Benefits
are expected for the understanding of how rhythmically active cells work
together in tissues and organs; for the characterization of the potentially
dangerous ways that crowds of pedestrians can inadvertently cause footbridges to
shake; and for spin-offs to technological applications involving arrays of
oscillators, such as lasers, microwave oscillators, and superconducting
Josephson junctions. By training three graduate students through the research
opportunities offered here, this project also helps to develop human resources
that are vital to our nation's success in science and engineering.