* 0412386
* Modeling the Impact of Releasing Genetically Altered Mosquitoes in Preventing the Transmission of Mosquito-Borne Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Jia Li, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 109,500.00

Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator develops and analyzes mathematical
models of&lt;br/&gt;mosquito populations in which genetically altered mosquitoes
have&lt;br/&gt;been introduced into wild mosquito populations. The
genetically&lt;br/&gt;altered mosquitos are resistant to infection by mosquito-
borne&lt;br/&gt;diseases, so their introduction into wild populations could be
an&lt;br/&gt;effective measure in controlling mosquito-borne diseases such
as&lt;br/&gt;malaria, dengue fever, and West Nile virus. He aims
to&lt;br/&gt;understand the complexity of the dynamics of
interacting&lt;br/&gt;genetically-altered and wild mosquitoes and to predict
gene&lt;br/&gt;distributions in future generations of the population.
The&lt;br/&gt;population models are structured, that is, they account for
both&lt;br/&gt;gender and genetic structure. Within this structure,
homogeneous&lt;br/&gt;models, where all transgenic (genetically-altered)
mosquitoes are&lt;br/&gt;considered as a single group without distinction,
heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;models, where homozygous and heterozygous transgenic
mosquitoes&lt;br/&gt;are distinguished, and multiple-transgenic models,
where&lt;br/&gt;genetically-altered mosquitoes have different transgenes,
are&lt;br/&gt;examined. Within each model category, formulas for the
birth&lt;br/&gt;functions and contact rates are established. To account for
data&lt;br/&gt;deviations and environmental noise, the investigator
formulates&lt;br/&gt;versions of these models that include demographic
and&lt;br/&gt;environmental stochasticities. Transmission dynamics of
the&lt;br/&gt;diseases are incorporated with various epidemiological models
for&lt;br/&gt;both human and mosquito populations. The investigator
combines&lt;br/&gt;analysis and numerical simulation to study qualitative
and&lt;br/&gt;quantitative features of the models, including existence
and&lt;br/&gt;stability of equilibria, existence of periodic and
aperiodic&lt;br/&gt;oscillations through bifurcations, and chaotic behavior
and&lt;br/&gt;transient dynamics. Model parameters are estimated or
derived&lt;br/&gt;from real biological data and the mathematical analysis of
the&lt;br/&gt;models covers all parameter regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologists recently have been able to genetically
alter&lt;br/&gt;mosquitoes so that they are resistant to malaria infection
or&lt;br/&gt;other mosquito-borne diseases, such as dengue fever and West
Nile&lt;br/&gt;virus. These diseases are transmitted between humans
by&lt;br/&gt;blood-feeding mosquitoes. Their spread and control have
been&lt;br/&gt;major concerns for public health. The introduction of
transgenic&lt;br/&gt;(genetically altered) mosquitoes into wild mosquito
populations&lt;br/&gt;could be an effective measure in controlling mosquito-
borne&lt;br/&gt;diseases. To explore this possibility, the investigator
in&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with biologists develops and analyzes
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;models that represent the population dynamics of wild
and&lt;br/&gt;transgenic mosquitoes. The models account for the spread
of&lt;br/&gt;transgenes through the mosquito population over
multiple&lt;br/&gt;generations. They help answer such questions as how
effectively&lt;br/&gt;transgenic mosquitoes would be able to compete for
partners with&lt;br/&gt;their wild counterparts, how long it would take for a
new&lt;br/&gt;resistance gene to penetrate the mosquito population, and
how&lt;br/&gt;effective it would be in mosquitoes that carry it. In this
way,&lt;br/&gt;the results of the project can provide useful guidance for
public&lt;br/&gt;health measures. &lt;br/&gt;