* 0412129
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: The Complete Genome Sequence of a Mini Consortium of Marine Ammonia Oxidizers
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2004,10/31/2009
* Patrick Chain, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2009
* USD 807,922.00

Ammonia is abundant in the oceans, in freshwater, soils and the atmosphere and
represents the prime resource of usable nitrogen for microorganisms and plants,
which provide nitrogen to animals through their consumption. On the other hand,
ammonia is considered the most abundant neurotoxin that is present everywhere in
the air that we breathe. Therefore, the understanding of mechanisms naturally
involved in the consumption of ammonia is key to maintaining a hospitable planet
Earth. A grant has been awarded to Dr. Martin G. Klotz of the University of
Louisville, in collaboration with Drs. John Heidelberg of The Institute for
Genome Research, Karen Casciotti of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, and
Bess Ward of Princeton University, to sequence the complete genomes of two
proteobacteria that are key players in the marine nitrogen cycle. Both bacteria
carry out a similar ecophysiological function in the oceans namely the
conversion of ammonia to nitrite and the production of nitrogenous gases that -
eventually - will be recycled to benign nitrogen gas. The two researched marine
bacteria belong taxonomically to different classes of bacteria; hence their
genomes likely contain different molecular bases for nitrification activities.
Thus, the unraveling of the genetic make-up of these bacteria will provide us a
great deal of insight into the diversity of molecular mechanisms capable of
ammonia degradation that have evolved over billions of years in these bacteria.
A comparison of this complex genomic information with that from ammonia-
oxidizers that function in freshwater or soils will allow future scientific
projects to design improved technological strategies for controlled removal of
ammonia generated by human activities as well as the identification of targets
for the control of such ammonia-oxidizing bacteria where their presence is
undesirable (such as in drinking-water production facilities). Work funded
through this grant will involve the training of undergraduate and graduate
students.