* 0412802
* A Comparative Study of Fitness Landscapes: Testing Competitive Disruptive Selection in Sticklebacks
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Daniel Bolnick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 06/30/2008
* USD 326,000.00

Even in ecology, "it pays to be different". Animals that eat the same food as
their fellows experience strong competition, while animals that use different
resources may avoid competition. As a result, in a given population individuals
with average morphologies may be less fit than individuals with rare
morphologies; this is known as 'disruptive selection'. In previous work, Dr.
Bolnick confirmed that competition can cause disruptive selection in a species
of fish (sticklebacks). The goal of the current project is to determine whether
this disruptive selection is common. Dr. Bolnick will measure natural selection
in many populations of sticklebacks by capturing fish from 20 lakes, comparing
their growth rate and reproductive potential to their morphology and diet.
&lt;br/&gt;The frequency of disruptive selection is important because, unlike
other types of natural selection, it can enhance genetic diversity. This project
will be the first test of whether this diversity-enhancing process is common in
natural populations. The result may have practical significance: if genetic
diversity is maintained by competition, the low population densities of many
threatened species might undermine their genetic variability. The project will
provide future high-school science teachers with research experience, and be
used for public education about evolution.&lt;br/&gt;