* 0412310
* Asymptotic Analysis of Variational and Hamiltonian PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Nicholas Ercolani, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 179,447.00

The study of pattern forming systems is a fundamental area of scientific
investigation in which the tools of modern mathematical analysis (dynamical
systems theory, the theory of partial differential equations, asymptotic
analysis and probability theory) can be brought to bear on the modelling of
physical systems especially near a critical transition in the behavior of the
system. For the projects being studied in this proposal the PI is principally
interested in patterns that arise when a continuous translational symmetry is
reduced, at a critical threshold, to a discrete periodic symmetry resulting in
what is often referred to as a "striped" pattern. Such patterns are for instance
generic in Rayleigh-Benard convection (RBC) which is a key mechanism in the
formation of many weather patterns. In RBC the striped pattern corresponds to
the formation, at a critical&lt;br/&gt;temperature, of periodic "convection
rolls" of a uniform characteristic width. A major goal of this research is to
study not just the patterns that form at a critical threshold but to
characterize the types of defects that arise in these patterns when one is far
from threshold. The patterns studied here are stationary and, consistent with
that, one may investigate the formation of defects through the minimization of a
free energy which depends on a control parameter with a critical value that
corresponds to the critical threshold of the physical system. The free energy
studied here is known as the "regularized Cross-Newell energy" and is
expressed&lt;br/&gt;in terms of a phase that locally defines the striped pattern
away from defects. From the mathematical point of view the problem is to study
the limiting behavior of minimizers to a variational problem as a critical
parameter is approached. The determination of such limits is a delicate matter
but the PI is developing geometric and analytical tools that should make this
determination tractable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second part of this proposal
also involves the asymptotic study of variational problems. The general context
of these problems is the study of the statistics of eigenvalues of N x N
Hermitean matrices as N becomes large. These statistics are taken with respect
to a class of probabilistic expectations which are invariant under the
symmetries that preserve the eigenvalues. This general area&lt;br/&gt;of study
is generally referred to as random matrix theory&lt;br/&gt;which has become
prominent because of the insights it provides into a wide range of fields
including graph theory, number theory and quantum field theory. Indeed the PIand
his collaborators recently extablished the existence of a large N expansion for
the random matrix partition function which has played a central role over the
last twenty years in discussions within the physics community concerning quantum
gravity. The key to this analysis is the study of a variational problem that
characterizes the asymptotic expected density of eigenvalues and the asymptotics
of an associated Riemann-Hilbert problem. The current proposal will study the
fine sturcture of this expansion&lt;br/&gt;which can provide detailed
information about counting functions which enumerate graphs on topologically
non-trivial surfaces. These counting functions will be determined as solutions
to partial differential equations which are continuum limits of Hamiltonian (in
fact completely integrable) sytems of ordinary differential equations which
describe how the eigenvalue density changes as the probabilistic matrix
expectations are varied. The PI will also explore&lt;br/&gt;the behavior of the
random matrix partition function as a critical threshold in the variation of
these expectations is approached. Physicists have conjectured that this phase
transition can be used to determine a viable candidate for calculating field
theoretic expectations in two-dimensional quantum gravity. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both parts of this proposal have potential relevance for
interesting&lt;br/&gt;applications. The work on pattern formation will make
definite predictions on defect formation that can be tested in the laboratory.
Indeed some of the predictions emerging from this work are currently being
tested by experimentalists. The PI envisions applications to the stability
analysis of patterns and some initial studies of the dynamics of wave patterns.
In the future one may expect this work to have relevance for modelling defect
structure in animal coat patterns (including fingerprints) and the evolution of
plant&lt;br/&gt;patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods and ideas of random
matrix theory are having a broad impact; in number theory, combinatorics, random
graph theory (or networks), growth processes and multivariate statistics, to
name just a few areas of application. It is important that the underlying
methods and results of random matrix theory be established with the highest
standards ofrigor so that they can be widely&lt;br/&gt;used in these diverse
applications. That is an overarching and fundamental goal of this part of the
research proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;