* 0412883
* Mass Redistribution in Continental Magmatic-Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Greg Arehart, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2005
* USD 15,000.00

This award will partially support a Geological Society of America Penrose
conference for 65 participants on Mass Redistribution in Continental Magmatic-
Hydrothermal Systems, to be held September 6 to 11, 2004, at Yellowstone, WY and
Butte, MT. The conference is direct response to the recommendations of the one-
day workshop on the future of mineral deposits research sponsored by NSF. The
Penrose conference is designed to provide a forum for discussion of how large-
scale magmatic-hydrothermal systems that operate in the continental crust
produce enormous geochemical redistributions of elements that sometimes result
in economic mineral deposits. The goal of the Penrose conference is to bring
together a spectrum of researchers to present data and hypotheses relevant to
magmatic-hydrothermal systems, which (after magmas) result in the largest amount
of mass-transfer in the earth's crust, and consequently contribute significantly
to the chemical heterogeneity of the earth. Researchers with diverse expertise
will examine what we know about these mass transfer processes, what we wish to
know in the future, and how we should set about obtaining and analyzing the
requisite new data. The primary reason for convening this conference is to
accelerate dissemination of ideas from disparate sub-fields that will enhance
individual and collaborative research opportunities. The organizers intend the
conference as a fertile cross-pollenation, in which mineral deposits experts
with detailed understanding of magmatic and hydrothermal ores that represent the
end products of mass transfer can interact with researchers who focus on key
processes and techniques, including igneous processes at all levels in the
crust, driving forces and paths for fluid flow in the crust, and physicochemical
parameters that facilitate mass transfer between phases. An interchange of
current information and ideas between these groups of researchers will result in
a synergy of research efforts and lead to insights into important new research
directions. To that end, the organizers have invited researchers from a broad
range of disciplines to participate and contribute to the conference. All
participants will be expected to give an oral, poster, or field trip
presentation. Publicity is currently underway via paper and web media, and
conference results will be summarized in a short article in GSA Today after the
conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this award will
support the attendance of some graduate students and post-doctoral researchers,
and expose them to international researchers, involve them in cutting edge
scientific debates, and allow them to contribute their research to discussions.
The funds will also allow some international experts to attend the conference
and contribute. &lt;br/&gt;