* 0412736
* Engineering Interfaces in No-Common-Atom Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Roy Clarke, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 119,303.00

A one-year program of research is proposed on the synthesis and atomic level
characterization of short period superlattices (SPS) in which the constituent
layers do not share a common element. These no-common-atom systems, such as
InAs/GaSb, have attracted significant interest for applications in infrared
optoelectronics technology, offering the possibility to tune electronic band
structure by manipulating the low-symmetry interface structure. The goal is to
achieve understanding of the epitaxial growth conditions and processes required
to synthesize no-common-atom SPS with well-defined interface structures. This
calls for a high level of control over atomistic mechanisms of interface
formation and the ability to characterize the interface structure with atomic
resolution. A unique feature of the project is the use of a novel direct method
to image buried interfaces using x-ray synchrotron radiation. This technique,
Coherent Bragg Rod Analysis (COBRA), is capable of providing, non-destructively,
a three-dimensional map of epitaxial thin-film structures with sub-Angstrom
resolution of atomic positions. COBRA maps will be used to seek sufficiently
detailed structural and compositional information to control growth conditions
enabling specific interface structures with tailored optoelectronic properties.
Theoretical predictions of the interface composition distributions are available
with which experimentally determined interface structures can be compared. These
kinetic models will serve as a useful guide for experiments. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
electronic materials with high technological relevance. The tunability of
electronic properties inherent in no-common-atom short period superlattices
(SPS) systems may impact infrared device technology in areas where there are
important societal needs, for example in health care, communications, and
national security. An important element of the project is the integration of
research and education through the training of students in a fundamental and
technologically significant area. The project offers exciting research
opportunities for graduate training and also for more junior students to become
interested in science and engineering. A program of research activities which
are integrated with the proposed research, but which are also accessible to less
experienced students has been devised. The use of national research facilities
(Advanced Photon Source) will expose students to forefront programs in materials
research, and provide opportunities to network with a broad range of educational
and training activities in different fields. The U. MI joint Beam Line Sector
with Howard University at the Advanced Photon Source is a focal point for
encouraging research participation of students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;