* 0412047
* Spatial Heterogeneity, Nonlocal Interactions and Time Delay in Epidemiological and Biological Spread
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Shigui Ruan, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2010
* USD 170,300.00

Ruan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator studies the effect of spatial
heterogeneity,&lt;br/&gt;nonlocal interactions and time delay on the
spatiotemporal&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of epidemiological and ecological models.
Three&lt;br/&gt;particular examples are considered. The first is the
generalized&lt;br/&gt;Ross-Macdonald vector-host (malaria) models. The focus
here is&lt;br/&gt;on the existence of traveling waves in a vector disease
model&lt;br/&gt;described by diffusive integrodifferential equations with
delay&lt;br/&gt;and the effects of nonlocal interaction and time delay on
the&lt;br/&gt;epidemic waves and spatiotemporal dynamics. The effects
of&lt;br/&gt;spatial heterogeneity and time delay on the establishment
and&lt;br/&gt;transmission of the disease are studied by considering
a&lt;br/&gt;multi-patch model. The second is nosocomial epidemic models
with&lt;br/&gt;antibiotic resistance and infection age. Persistence
and&lt;br/&gt;extinction of the infected population are considered. The
impact&lt;br/&gt;of control measures such as isolation of patients infected
with&lt;br/&gt;resistant strains, restricted use of antibiotics, and reduced
or&lt;br/&gt;extended hospital stays, are discussed in terms of the
model&lt;br/&gt;parameters. The third is the biological and
physical&lt;br/&gt;nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton (NPZ) models.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator studies spatiotemporal dynamics such as
traveling&lt;br/&gt;waves and chaotic mixing in the advective-diffusive NPZ
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important environmental effects of
globalization&lt;br/&gt;is the dramatic increase in the introduction of exotic
species,&lt;br/&gt;including pathogens that may cause disease in humans, into
new&lt;br/&gt;regions. Such introductions can lead to biological
invasions,&lt;br/&gt;which in turn can threaten public health or affect
ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;structure. Examples include nonindigenous vectors that
arrive,&lt;br/&gt;establish, and spread in new areas and foment epidemics of
human&lt;br/&gt;diseases such as malaria, yellow fever, typhus, plague, and
West&lt;br/&gt;Nile virus. The investigator studies the spatial transmission
of&lt;br/&gt;certain vector-host diseases such as malaria and hopes that
the&lt;br/&gt;study can help to understand the establishment and spread
of&lt;br/&gt;other vector-borne diseases such as West Nile. He also
studies&lt;br/&gt;nosocomial epidemics with antibiotic resistance, aiming
to&lt;br/&gt;provide some control measures to combat such epidemics
inside&lt;br/&gt;hospitals. Finally, he examines the spatiotemporal dynamics
of&lt;br/&gt;plankton populations; this may lead to a better understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;global issues such as the depletion of ocean fish markets and
the&lt;br/&gt;greenhouse effect.&lt;br/&gt;