* 0412037
* Designing the Classroom of Tomorrow by Using Advanced Technologies to Connect Formal and Informal Environments (CONNECT)
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Lynn Dierking, Institute for Learning Innovation Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2006
* USD 125,216.00

The CONNECT project is a collaborative international initiative of educational,
cognitive science and technology experts, and psychologists at 17 institutions
from 9 countries who are researching the use of advanced technologies to
facilitate learning through innovative partnerships with a wide range of schools
and informal science learning environments. The aim of the project is to
explore, test, refine and demonstrate a cutting edge approach that connects
these varied learning experiences, bridges theoretical and applied research and
introduces innovative ways for teachers and students to communicate and learn
together. This will be accomplished by designing, creating and piloting a
learning environment that weds effective informal (free-choice) learning
strategies with exemplary formal curricular activities, utilizing cutting edge
information and communication technologies. Specifically and practically the
project will document the evolution from the wired virtual learning environments
of today to the wireless learning environments of tomorrow. The Institute for
Learning Innovation (the Institute), the only U.S. partner in CONNECT, is
critical to project success because of its role in designing the educational
framework that forms the basis of the project, in developing the educational
evaluation, and in the dissemination and reporting of the project's outcomes and
impact. In the CONNECT project, the Institute's primary role will focus on three
aspects of the project: 1. Design of the educational framework underlying the
CONNECT project, (including ensuring that the CONNECT project stays focused on
the theoretical underpinnings of the educational framework during the technical
design and implementation stages) 2. Design of strategies and research
methodologies to evaluate the framework, and 3. Dissemination of the project's
approach and outcomes in the United States. The projects complex design (joining
technology experts, psychologist, educational researchers from 17 institutions
in 9 countries), the ambitious goals that entail simultaneous technology end
educational framework development, and the tight timeline, make this a
particularly challenging and risky project.

