* 0412161
* 2004 Quadrennial Ozone Symposium of the International Ozone Commission, International Association for Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics; Island of Kos, Greece; June 1-8, 2004
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Robert Hudson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2005
* USD 24,970.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Hudson, Md&lt;br/&gt;0412161&lt;br/&gt;This international
travel grant will support eleven graduate students to attend the 2004
Quadrennial Ozone Symposium of the International Ozone Commission of the
International Association for Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics (IAMAP) of the
IUGG. The Symposium will be held from June 1-8, 2004 at Kos, Greece, and it will
cover all aspects of the study of ozone in the Stratosphere and the Troposphere.
This outstanding symposium attracts a large number of the world's best
atmospheric chemists and others in related fields, e.g., climate. It is expected
that over 500 scientists will attend the 2004 Symposium, as the subjects of
tropospheric and stratospheric ozone are of great topical interests. Of these
attendees it is estimated that about one third will be graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student candidates for support will be requested to
submit the following to the Symposium Awards Committee:&lt;br/&gt;(1) A letter
requesting travel support together with the abstract of her/his&lt;br/&gt;paper
by January 31, 2004.&lt;br/&gt;(2) one letter of recommendation&lt;br/&gt;(3) a
short curriculum vitae&lt;br/&gt;(4) A letter showing that he/she is a graduate
student of good standing at&lt;br/&gt;a university within the United States of
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First priority will be given to those students who
are the principal author of
a&lt;br/&gt;paper/poster&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: For students,
attending the symposium is a motivating experience. It presents a rare
educational opportunity for them to discuss their individual research with
leaders in the field other than their immediate advisor&lt;br/&gt;