* 0412198
* Polycarbosilanes as Precursors to Ceramics and as Functional Polymeric Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Thomas Apple, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 475,000.00

Prof. Leonard Interrante, and coPIs Thomas M. Apple and Chang Ryu, all of
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, are supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic
and Organometallic Chemistry program for their research that focuses on the
synthesis and study of a class of organosilicon polymers that contain Si atoms
bridged by methylene groups These precursors have possible applications as
precursors to ceramics and as functional polymeric materials. Solid-state NMR
spectroscopy, optical microscopy and other methods, will be used to monitor the
processes of polymer phase separation, cross-linking and pyrolysis to SiC/BN
ceramic mixtures. Additionally, the graft copolymers of poly(silylenemethylene)s
and block copolymers containing poly(carbosiloxane)s will be explored to achieve
the preparation of Si-based ceramics in the form of mesoporous solids,
nanoparticles of controlled shapes and sizes, or as ordered arrays of the
ceramic phase as dots or lines on a substrate surface. The proposed research
seeks to extend the understanding of polymer, particularly graft and block
copolymer, phase separation to include polycarbosilane- and polycarbosiloxane-
containing polymers, and to explore the prospect that such phase separation can
be used to obtain nanostructured Si-based ceramic materials with predictable and
controlled microstructures or final forms.

This study of polymer precursors to ceramics will extend the understanding of
graft and block copolymer phase separation to include polycarbosilane- and
polycarbosiloxane-containing polymers. Also, the prospect that such phase
separation can be used to obtain nanostructured Si-based ceramic materials with
predictable and controlled microstructures or final forms will be explored. This
research will provide synthetic routes to metal- or semiconductor-containing
ceramic nanocomposites that may have a variety of applications including low-k
films, thermal and chemically stable elastomers, and ionic electrolyte
materials. Graduate students, undergraduate students and postdoctoral associates
will receive excellent training in synthetic materials methodology and the study
of polymeric precursors to ceramic materials in an interdisciplinary inorganic
chemistry program.