* 0412016
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  The Coprinus cinereus Genome Project
* BIO,EF
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Walt Lilly, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2008
* USD 744,055.00

The fungal kingdom includes remarkably diverse organisms of considerable
economic and scientific importance. These organisms have a rich evolutionary
history. They also provide experimental models that are fundamental to the
understanding of a wide range of biological processes. Recently, their
suitability for genomic-level analyses has resulted in the rapid release of
several draft genome sequences, including that of the mushroom, Coprinus
cinereus. C. cinereus was one of the first fungi to be sequenced because its
numerous experimental advantages have resulted in its becoming an important
model system in the higher fungi. While the draft sequence quality is high, at
least 418 gaps remain. Furthermore, current information is inadequate to
annotate the genome, due to the small number of gene sequences available from C.
cinereus or related basidiomycetes, whose gene structure differs from the
ascomycete genomes analyzed to date. Mapping data, necessary for comparative
studies of fungal chromosome organization and stability, are also lacking. Thus,
the scientific merit of this work will include the closure of the remaining gaps
in the sequence, the annotation of the genome using information from additional
cDNA sequences from a variety of cell types, the construction of a high
resolution genetic map, and the design of a model organism database using open-
source tools to permit ongoing collaborative annotation and curation of the
genome. The research will be carried out by a small consortium of investigators
from institutions with distinct educational missions. The broader impacts of the
project will include mechanisms to integrate research and education in these
distinct settings. The emphasis will be on a range of inquiry-based approaches,
including large undergraduate courses, upper-division laboratories, and
formalized mentoring of undergraduate research. These collaborations will serve
as models for efficient and cost-effective genome finishing and annotation,
which cannot be carried out as effectively in high-throughput sequencing
centers, and which can have a considerable impact on education by allowing large
numbers of students to engage in original inquiry.