* 0412859
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Development of Informatics Infrastructure for the Hydrologic Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Praveen Kumar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2007
* USD 233,444.00

0412859&lt;br/&gt;Kumar&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will advance integrative
hydrologic science through the development of a hydrologic information system
that can be implemented at universities throughout the United States. It
involves collaboration between hydrologic scientists from the Consortium of
Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc (CUAHSI) and
computer scientists from the San Diego Supercomputer Center, and supports a
larger strategy at NSF to develop cyberinfrastructure to advance
interdisciplinary study of environmental systems. The CUAHSI Hydrologic
Information System will be built around a hydrologic data model that synthesizes
data from diverse sources describing the water environment, and will support
knowledge discovery through its own analysis and visualization tools and links
to external modeling and software systems. The Hydrologic Information System
will be built as a network so that data sources from many geographic locations
can be automatically harvested and imbedded within a common data framework at
the user's location. In this project, a prototype system will be developed with
the San Diego Supercomputer Center as the hub, and the experience thus gained
used to define a request for proposals for a CUAHSI Center for Hydrologic
Information which will be responsible for the long-term maintenance and support
of this system.&lt;br/&gt;Integrative hydrologic science will be addressed
through a series of CUAHSI science driver questions posed first for a hydrologic
observatory planning study of the Neuse River Basin, whose data will be
synthesized into the CUAHSI hydrologic data model as a prototype Digital
Watershed. Similar Digital Watersheds will be constructed using later CUAHSI
planning studies for hydrologic observatories elsewhere in the nation, thus
providing a comprehensive information base for comparative studies across
different hydrologic regimes. These datasets will be made freely available
through an internet interface, and the hydrologic data model will also be
provided to hydrologic scientists who want to develop Digital Watersheds at
other locations.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is that it
harnesses information technology to support hydrologic science by building
around a data model that has a coherent intellectual structure and synthesizes
data from many disciplines. It will enable the tracing of water movement and
transport of constituents vertically between atmosphere, surface water and
groundwater, and horizontally through the landscape from watersheds and aquifers
to streams, rivers, estuaries and bays. It will integrate data across scales of
space and time. This will enable the testing of hypotheses about the interfaces
between hydrologic processes in a manner and scale that is rarely attempted now.
The results of these studies will be published in journal articles and as a
series of CUAHSI monographs. The prototype hydrologic information system
developed in this project will be of significant value in itself for hydrologic
science research and also as a guide to the future long-term implementation of
CUAHSI hydrologic information systems. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project include its networking of hydrologic scientists at many universities who
will jointly be contributing and receiving hydrologic information. The CUAHSI
hydrologic information system and its accompanying datasets will be developed in
the public domain and available to the professional hydrology community and to
educators at all levels. As educational exercises using this information are
developed by CUAHSI scientists, they will be shared with the broader community
through such facilities as the Digital Library for Earth System Education
(DLESE). &lt;br/&gt;