* 0412226
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Genome Sequence of Prochloron didemni: An Obligate Cyanobacterial Symbiont
* BIO,EF
* 07/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Jonathan Eisen, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Leita Proctor
* 02/28/2009
* USD 705,418.00

In this project, the genome of Prochloron didemni, a photosynthetic bacteria
that lives in a symbiosis with a primitive animal found in coral reefs, will be
sequenced, annotated and used for comparative genomic studies. This symbiosis is
important for many reasons including (1) that the host (the coral reef ascidian
Lissoclinum patella) is a primitive representative of the chordate animals -
thus this study may help understand symbioses between bacteria and other
chordates such as humans; (2) that the symbiont is a cyanobacterial
prochlorophyte and thus is a close relative of the photosynthetic organelles of
plants (chloroplasts); and (3) there are no genomes currently available from
cyanobacteria symbionts. Analysis of the genome will be used to elucidate genes
responsible for symbioses between chordates and bacteria, to further define the
unique photosynthetic characteristics of prochlorophytes and to determine which
factors are important in the conversion of free-living cyanobacteria into
obligate symbionts. In addition, this project should help in understanding the
broader context of symbiosis such as the distinction between mutualistic and
pathogenic associations, the profound role of microbial symbionts in marine
invertebrate ecology, and the mechanisms of innovation through symbiosis, a
major process in the history of life. This project will be a collaborative
effort between The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR), the University of Utah
and the University of California San Diego and will involve graduate and
undergraduate students from these institutes and from the Republic of Palau
where the symbiosis occurs. Perhaps most importantly, photosynthesis represents
the primary pathway for fixation of carbon from the atmosphere. Thus a better
understanding of the diversity of carbon fixation pathways, especially in the
organisms related to plant and algal chloroplasts, will potentially help in
efforts to understand global carbon cycles and eventually to mitigate the
effects of carbon being released into the atmosphere by human activity.