* 0412553
* Oregon Mathematics Leadership Institute Partnership
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2004,09/30/2013
* Brenda Young, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2013
* USD 5,599,579.00

Oregon State University (OSU), in partnership with Teachers Development Group
(TDG), Portland State University (PSU) and ten school districts and supporting
partners George Fox University and five community colleges ( Central Oregon,
Chemeketa, Clackamas, Mt. Hood, and Umpqua) is developing the Oregon Mathematics
Leadership Institute to create a sustainable and generative leadership capacity
within all core partner K-20 institutions to provide support for systemic
mathematics reform and to meet the following goals: 1) increase mathematics
achievement of all students in core partner schools; 2) close achievement gaps
for underrepresented groups of students; 3) provide challenging mathematics
coursework that support state and national standards through coherent evidence-
based programs. To achieve these goals, the project is deepening participating
mathematics teachers' mathematical content knowledge and enhancing both
mathematics teachers' and administrators' practice, professional efficacy,
commitment to, and retention in the profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Partnership is developing a cadre of teacher leaders in mathematics who are part
of a larger reflective learning community that includes university faculty,
graduate students, community college faculty, school administrators, and other
mathematics education professionals. Activities include: 1) a series of three-
week residential summer Mathematics Leadership Institutes for K-5 mathematics
specialists and middle school/high school mathematics teachers emphasizing
rigorous and relevant mathematics content, leadership development, and effective
pedagogy, 2) the coordination of online and on-site academic year activities for
building a statewide learning community of K-20 professionals, and 3) provision
of an infrastructure for sustaining and regenerating this professional community
and disseminating its expertise and resources. The core academic work in the
summer institutes consists of substantive mathematical content courses using
instructional models that emphasize the reflective discourse and collaborative
problem solving embraced by challenging school mathematics curricula. These
mathematics courses are developed by higher education disciplinary faculty
working together with master teachers and district leaders and are based on the
teacher preparation recommendations of the Conference Board of the Mathematical
Sciences. Mathematics coursework is complemented by daily seminars/colloquia on
leadership skill development, recent research in pedagogy, alternative
assessment techniques, evidence-based evaluation, and current applications of
mathematics. Academic year activities (both onsite and online) are intended to
foster reflective discourse, collaborative research and evidence-based
evaluation efforts among all K-20 partners in the learning community. The
involvement of community college mathematics faculty in both the summer
institute and academic year components of the project is building leadership
capacity among these faculty and facilitating preservice teacher recruitment
among more diverse populations of college students. Involvement of preservice
teachers in the summer institutes is facilitating mentoring relationships with
participants and future practicum placements in schools using challenging
curricula. Involvement of school administrators in components of the summer
institutes provides a model for local school team building. &lt;br/&gt;