* 0412179
* Discovery Corps Senior Fellowship:    Enhancing the Academia/Industry Scientist Transition
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Earl Wagener, Clemson University
* Fellowship Award
* Katharine Covert
* 05/31/2007
* USD 100,500.00

Earl Wagener, Clemson University, is a Discovery Corps Senior Fellow for the
2004-2005 academic year. Wagener will enhance the graduate and undergraduate
experience by facilitating the transition to industrial careers. This project
includes a semester-long course covering core research and development career
skills, prioritization of research activities, commercialization processes,
project value analysis, intellectual property, and job performance reviews.
During the second semester, selected graduate and undergraduate students (and
their advisors) with interest in industrial careers will also participate in a
unique evaluation of their research projects using industrial critical value
metrics. In addition, Vice President-level industrial Research and Development
leaders will participate in one-day seminar/project evaluation/consulting
sessions. This Discovery Corps Senior Fellowship is supported by the Division of
Chemistry and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.

The Discovery Corps Fellowship Program is a pilot program seeking new
postdoctoral and professional development models that combine research expertise
with professional service. Discovery Corps Fellows leverage their research
expertise through projects that address areas of national need. Their projects
enhance research capacity and infrastructure and contribute to workforce
development and job creation. The Discovery Corps Program supports both
Postdoctoral Fellows and Senior Fellows.