* 0412342
* Standards Mapped Graduate Education and Mentoring
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2012
* Heinz-Otto Peitgen, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2012
* USD 4,454,964.00

A uniquely integrated Partnership between Florida Atlantic University and The
Broward County School District, the nation's fifth largest fully-accredited
school district, proposes an Institute for Standards Mapped Graduate Education
and Mentoring for Middle Grade Math Teachers for a 5 year period. The
partnership builds upon a highly successful working relationship and existing
institutional cooperation. The dedicated team of researchers, administrators,
and teachers provides a strong foundation for the success of the new program.
&lt;br/&gt;The Institute creates and delivers a unique curriculum for graduate-
level middle grade teacher education as an extension of the MST (Master in
Science in Teaching) degree program of the FAU Dept. of Mathematical Sciences.
Ongoing development of the multidisciplinary curriculum by faculty and teacher
leaders is based on a new concept mapping approach and includes technology and
science integration. Major components of the program include a sequence of
special evening MST classes for teachers presented in Broward County, intensive
Summer Institutes with Student Camp, Biannual weekend Pedagogy Conferences and
Follow-Up Meetings, and an online community. The program significantly raises
the performance of participating teachers and correspondingly the standardized
test scores of their students.&lt;br/&gt;Over its duration the Institute creates
a hierarchical community of teacher leaders and&lt;br/&gt;mentors including more
than 50% of all middle grade math teachers with over 20% receiving advanced
graduate credit. The testing ground is nearly 500 middle grade mathematics
classrooms in Broward County.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies
in the ambitious goal of the proposal to eliminate the many crucial gaps in
content and pedagogy between the university-level approach to a teacher's math
and science preparation and the daily requirements of a diverse standards-driven
classroom. Intellectual content advancement of the teachers is integrated and
mapped to curriculum standards and their classroom realization and driven by the
content and pedagogy of the Florida Sunshine State Standards and the National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics standards.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of a
successful Institute are a viable model for institutional change and standards
mapped graduate education for all science and math teachers: enhanced levels of
teacher intellectual achievement in classes relevant to their classrooms,
teacher appreciation of higher level multidisciplinary connections and
technology enrichments, and university faculty understanding and awareness of
district standards and pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;