* 0412759
* Vision Through Rain and Snow
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2008
* Shree Nayar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 11/30/2008
* USD 340,000.00

Bad weather can severely limit the usefulness of computer vision in the
outdoors. The algorithms (segmentation, tracking, recognition, etc.) used in
today's vision systems are not equipped to handle the adverse effects of
weather. For outdoor vision systems to perform well in all conditions, they must
explicitly account for the diverse effects of weather. The visual effects
produced by different weather conditions can be broadly classified into two
categories: steady (fog, mist and haze) and dynamic (rain, hail and snow). This
research project is devoted to the modeling and analysis of dynamic weather
effects. The first stage of the study is to develop compact and yet descriptive
photometric and geometric models of raindrops and snowflakes. These models will
be used to develop advanced models for the dynamical and statistical properties
of rain and snow. Using these models, efficient and robust algorithms will be
developed for detecting and removing rain and snow from videos. The proposed
models will also be used to develop algorithms for fast and realistic rendering
of rain and snow. In addition, the developed models will be used to design and
implement real-time rain and snow gauges based on video cameras. Such gauges
will be very inexpensive compared to ones currently used in meteorological
sciences, and yet will provide high accuracy in the estimation of weather
parameters.

The results of the proposed research are anticipated to have a broad and
tangible impact on both research and education. From the perspective of
research, the results are expected to impact the robustness of outdoor vision
systems and the realism that computer graphics can achieve. The models,
algorithms and databases developed during the project will be broadly
disseminated in a timely fashion. With regards to education, the PI is currently
developing a course titled ``Computer Vision through the Atmosphere,'' and the
results of this investigation will contribute significantly to the content of
the course.