* 0412257
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Sequencing and Comparative Genome Annotation of Bacillus Thuringiensis
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Lee Bulla, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2007
* USD 431,000.00

The primary aim of the research is to determine the complete genome sequence of
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). This information will be used to find novel genes
that contribute to the function of this beneficial microorganism. Bt is a
ubiquitous bacterium that has been isolated from a variety of sites including
soil, stored grain, insects and plant surfaces. The most distinctive property of
Bt is the production of insecticidal proteins (Cry toxins). Cry toxin activity
affects several insects, including moths, butterflies, mosquitoes, black flies,
beetles, hoppers, aphids, wasps, bees and soil nematodes. Consequently, Cry
toxins have been exploited for more than 40 years to control agriculturally and
medically important pest and disease-vector insects. Indeed, Bt is the most
widely used environmentally compatible biopesticide worldwide. Significantly, Bt
exists in a symbiotic relationship with invertebrate animals as well as plants.
Thus, Bt is an excellent model to address questions related to microbe-host
interactions in symbiotic and pathogenic relationships. Therefore, sequencing
the Bt genome will expand the understanding of bacterial disease in insects and
nematodes, and enhance the ability to exploit Bt for environmentally safe pest
control. This information also will be important for understanding human and
animal disease. Bt is closely related to a group of organisms that includes
Bacillus cereus (Bc), an opportunistic human pathogen, and Bacillus anthracis
(Ba), a bioterrorism pathogen. Therefore, comparison of the Bt genome with those
of Ba and Bc will illuminate differences in their host-pathogen relationships.
Thus, the broader impact of the research will lay the groundwork for future
investigations to resolve basic problems in agriculture (environmentally safe
pest control), medicine and biodefense.