* 0412663
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Geographic Variation in Pollinators, Outcrossing, and the Incipient Evolution of Dioecy in Echinocereus coccineus (Cactaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Theodore Fleming, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

One of the fundamental questions in biology is: Why have separate sexes? Having
separate sexes avoids the worst type of inbreeding: self-fertilization. In
animal-pollinated plants it is hypothesized that separate sexes evolve in
certain areas (e.g., mountain-tops, deserts) because the less specialized
pollinators there predominantly self-fertilize these plants. An alternative
hypothesis is separate sexes evolve because resources (e.g., water) needed for
sexual function are scarce, and can be allocated more efficiently if the sexes
are separated. Claret-cup cacti present a unique opportunity to concurrently
test these two hypotheses because they possess both hermaphroditic (sexes
together) and dioecious (sexes separated) populations. This species is
pollinated by less-specialized bees in and around dioecious populations, which
supports the inbreeding-avoidance hypothesis. However, dioecious populations
also tend to occur in arid areas. This supports the resource-allocation
hypothesis. Genetic analyses at the plant, population and landscape scale will
determine if the rate of self-fertilization produced by bees is sufficient to
produce dioecy. The direct and indirect effects of pollinators, rainfall and
other environmental factors on the evolution of dioecy will be assessed using
Structural Equation Modeling.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Funding of this research
will provide the first test of the inbreeding-avoidance hypothesis in natural
populations. Developing the first microsatellite markers for cacti for this
project has led to collaborations across three institutions and training of
minority undergraduates in modern genetic techniques.&lt;br/&gt;