* 0412067
* Investigation of a new resonant mechanism for capture of planetesimals by a protoplanet
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Stephen Kortenkamp, Planetary Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 145,914.00



Drs. Stephen Kortenkamp and Renu Malhotra will examine a new mechanism for
capture of planetesimals by a protoplanet that involves an unusual 1:1 co-
orbital resonance between the protoplanet and planetesimal. Their two objectives
are to determine whether this resonant mechanism of planetesimal capture: (1)
plays a role in the origin of irregular satellites, and (2) aids in the
formation of protoplanetary cores of giant planets. Throughout the proposed
research, Kortenkamp and Malhotra will utilize computer intensive numerical
simulations. Such methods include direct N-body numerical integration,
statistically based planetesimal accumulation simulations, and hybrid
combinations of these two techniques.

Dr. Malhotra is an associate professor teaching planetary science at the
University of Arizona. Her classroom activities promote a healthy balance
between research and education and provide her students with first-hand accounts
of exciting new developments. Both Kortenkamp and Malhotra have a record of
publishing their results not only in technical journals related to their field
but also in prominent journals broadly disseminated to an interdisciplinary
scientific and lay audience. Kortenkamp is also active in education and public
outreach, regularly providing talks, workshops, and classes to the general
public, amateur astronomers, and groups of students and teachers. ***

