* 0412995
* Flexible Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Michael Jordan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

The next generation of machine learning systems will need to be substantially
more flexible than current systems. Machine learning systems will need to be
able to grow new structure as needed, to take into account repeated
substructures that arise from relational knowledge, to deal with abstraction
hierarchies, and to cope more gracefully with heterogeneous data. This project
addresses these issues. It aims at problems both in the Bayesian approach to
machine learning (specifically, graphical models) and the frequentist approach
to machine learning (specifically, kernel machines). In the graphical model
setting, the PI describes a new approach to structure learning based on a
flexible prior known as the Chinese restaurant process (CRP)." It explores
generalization of the CRP referred to as the hierarchical Dirichlet process"
that makes it possible to take into account repeated or partially-repeated sub-
structures. It also presents explores a generalization of the CRP that referred
to as the nested Chinese restaurant process" for learning abstraction
hierarchies.

In the area of kernel machines, the PI builds on his previous NSF-sponsored work
to consider methods for combining heterogeneous kernels based on tools from
convex optimization, in particular semidefinite programming. He will use these
ideas to define novel feature selection methods, and to design new algorithms
for the semidefinite programming approach that are the analog of the sequential
minimal optimization" (SMO) algorithm for quadratic programming that have
permitted the rise to prominence of the support vector machine. The project will
focus on driving applications in the areas of information retrieval,
bioinformatics, bug-finding in computer programs, and sensor networks.

