* 0412822
* The Migration of Peripheral Macrophages to TNCs and Their Role in Antigen Presentation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Jerry Guyden, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 08/31/2007
* USD 420,000.00

Project Abstract: The migration of peripheral macrophages to thymic nurse cells
and their role in antigen presentation.

T cells ultimately function to remove virally infected cells from the body. In
order for them to accomplish this task, T cells have to be able to distinguish
cells that are a part of the body, called self-cells, from agents that are
foreign to the body. During development in the thymus, self antigens are
presented to developing T cells. The T cells through their antigen receptor
(TcR) have the ability to recognize antigens on the surfaces of the antigen
presenting (APC) thymic cells. When a self-antigen is presented to developing T
cells, its TcR binds tightly to this protein on the surface of an APC and that T
cell is induced to die through a process called apoptosis. This makes sense
because if the T cell was allowed to mature and released in the blood stem, it
would recognize that antigen and kill the normal B cell to which it was
attached. Mature T cells are able to determine which self-cells are infected
with viruses and which produce foreign proteins on the cell surface. This is
most important when one realizes that viruses live and hide inside of the cells
that they infect. The Guyden lab has developed cell lines from one of the APCs
that function during this process and are called thymic nurse cells (TNCs).
These cells are unique to the body because they actually take up developing
thymocytes into their cytoplasm during antigen presentation. A major question
yet to be answered is, how does all of the large number of self antigens get to
the thymus for antigen presentation, when most self antigens reside outside of
the thymus? Preliminary results show that other antigen presenting cells like
macrophages and dendritic cells exist within this TNC complex along with
developing thymocytes. Further, the macrophages that are stained and returned to
the gut of a mouse can migrate to the thymus and into TNCs. It is proposed that
macrophages and dendritic cells, which have a primary function of removing dead
and apoptotic cells from the body, have the ability to present self antigens
resulting from dead cells to developing T cells within the TNC complex. Studies
using genetically manipulated animals that have T cells with only one TcR will
be carried out. Migration of macrophages or dendritic cells transferred into the
gut of these animals will be followed and their ability to induce apoptosis in
developing T cells in large enough numbers will be determined statistically. An
antibody to TNCs has also been developed and will be used to treat normal mice,
which will result in the elimination of their TNCs. The population of T cells
that mature from these treated animals will be analyzed. If TNCs function during
antigen presentation and self-antigen cannot be presented in their absence,
mature T cell that have the ability to attack self cells or are auto-immunogenic
will be detected. Broader Impact: Minority students will be trained and will be
involved in this project. Funds coming from this project will allow the training
of seven PhD students. Over the years of NSF funding, 38 minority undergraduate
students have participated in research in the laboratory and have since obtained
their PhD or MD degrees or are continuing students. Currently, there are: 1 PhD,
2 Masters, and 3 undergraduate students.