* 0412231
* IMR-MIP: VISION- CED for a Neutron Vibrational Spectrometer for SNS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Bruce Hudson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,500,000.00

This is an award to the University of Tennessee Knoxville for a Conceptual
Design and Engineering study for a next generation, time of flight (TOF) neutron
vibrational spectrometer, VISION, to be located at the Spallation Neutron Source
(SNS). This instrument will be used to investigate the molecular dynamics and
structures of a vast array of condensed matter systems. Under optimal conditions
this instrument will: (1) have two orders of magnitude greater throughput than
the best instrument that currently exists; (2) cover an energy transfer range of
0-500 meV (0-4000 cm -1); (3) have a 1-2% energy resolution while simultaneously
enabling diffraction studies for structural characterization; and (3) offer a
wide range of sample environments (low temperature, high-pressure, flow cell,
thermal analysis, etc).

The design will introduce neutron techniques developed during the decade since
the Time of Flight Crystal Analyzer (TFXA) and TOSCA instruments. These include
improved supermirror technology, parametrically matched crystal analyzer-helium
gas detectors, efficient electronics for high rate data acquisition, high
performance data analysis algorithms, novel moderator concepts, as well as the
use of well-developed Monte Carlo software for neutron optics and instrument
design and optimization. For the first time the flux available at the Spallation
Neutron Source (SNS) will enable time-resolved vibrational neutron measurements.

The research activities associated with the VISION spectrometer and conceptual
design and engineering project involve scientific studies that have intellectual
merit on many levels. Not only will these activities advance our fundamental
understanding of the structure and dynamics of entire classes of materials in
areas such as biochemistry, catalysis, materials science, geology, polymers and
engineering but it will lead to also lead to new discoveries.

Finally, the VISION instrument will introduce a new generation of students
(Undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers) and researchers
(both academic and industrial) to the use of neutron vibrational spectroscopy in
the study of new materials and a wide range of engineering problems, especially
those where the materials have interesting structure and dynamics on the
nanometer length scale and topics of commercial importance. These activities by
the current and next generation scientists are certain to return the U.S. to its
once preeminent role in neutron scattering.

This is an award to the University of Tennessee Knoxville for a Conceptual
Design and Engineering study for a next generation, time of flight (TOF) neutron
vibrational spectrometer, VISION, to be located at the Spallation Neutron Source
(SNS). This instrument will be used to investigate the molecular dynamics and
structures of a vast array of condensed matter systems. Under optimal conditions
this instrument will: (1) have two orders of magnitude greater throughput than
the best instrument that currently exists; (2) cover an energy transfer range of
0-500 meV (0-4000 cm -1); (3) have a 1-2% energy resolution while simultaneously
enabling diffraction studies for structural characterization; and (3) offer a
wide range of sample environments (low temperature, high-pressure, flow cell,
thermal analysis, etc).

The design will introduce neutron techniques developed during the decade since
the Time of Flight Crystal Analyzer (TFXA) and TOSCA instruments. The research
activities associated with the VISION spectrometer and conceptual design and
engineering project involve scientific studies that have intellectual merit on
many levels. Not only will these activities advance our fundamental
understanding of the structure and dynamics of entire classes of materials in
areas such as biochemistry, catalysis, materials science, geology, polymers and
engineering but it will lead to also lead to new discoveries.

Finally, the VISION instrument will introduce a new generation of students
(Undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers) and researchers
(both academic and industrial) to the use of neutron vibrational spectroscopy in
the study of new materials and a wide range of engineering problems, especially
those where the materials have interesting structure and dynamics on the
nanometer length scale and topics of commercial importance. These activities by
the current and next generation scientists are certain to return the U.S. to its
once preeminent role in neutron scattering.