* 0412586
* McMurdo Ground Station Science Workshop; March 9-11, 2004; Columbus, OH
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Charles Stearns, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 02/28/2006
* USD 35,787.00

This workshop will examine general questions surrounding the collection of data
from the next generation of polar orbiting satellites, and to provide
information and options to the U.S. Antarctic Program for an optimum response to
these questions. &lt;br/&gt; Both the meteorology research program, and the
synoptic weather forecasting program at McMurdo rely heavily on satellite
imagery and satellite-based data for research and operational activities.
Currently the data link from the existing satellites to the surface is through
an L-band transmission system. As soon as 2006 however the first operational
satellites that transmit data in the X-band will be launched, and by 2010 it is
expected that all L-band satellite transmission systems will have been phased
out. The next generation satellite fleet will carry new sensors and instruments
that will produce a significantly higher data flow rate than the present one,
and will be able to serve a greater scientific community than the current
satellite array does.&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will consider the forthcoming
changes in the satellite fleet and in the data transmission systems, discuss the
increased applications for data transmitted in the X-band system, and make
recommendations on available options, focusing on the scientifically most
rewarding and cost-effective responses, including an assessment of the data and
imagery stream captured at the McMurdo ground station (MGS) - a ten-meter
antenna with associated hardware and software systems whose primary purpose has
been to acquire antarctic synthetic aperture radar data. &lt;br/&gt; The
discussions engendered by the workshop will have broad implications.
Interdisciplinary participation will be sought from the fields of meteorology,
oceanography, glaciology, biology and operations. The workshop goal is to
understand the changes coming in the near future, explore the implications for,
and present options for adapting the upcoming changes for the benefit of the
U.S. Antarctic Program. The outcome of the workshop will be a written report -
The Future of the Next Generation Satellite Fleet and the McMurdo Ground Station
- which will address uses, applications, operation and automation of the ground
facility for the benefit of the research and operational community. The report
will be broadly disseminated both in hardcopy and on-line versions. &lt;br/&gt;