* 0412824
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Genome Sequences for Four Phototrophic Prokaryotes
* BIO,EF
* 07/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Thomas Beatty, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2007
* USD 1,254,415.00

Complete genome sequencing will be done for four photosynthetic bacteria. Genome
sequences of these organisms will fill large gaps in the available genomic data
for photosynthetic organisms and will help to understand the origin and early
evolution of photosynthesis. In addition, the data that will be obtained will
have agricultural applications and environmental importance for understanding
global photosynthetic productivity. Photosynthesis has a deep evolutionary
connection to nitrogen fixation and many photosynthetic bacteria are capable of
nitrogen fixation. Our ability to understand these complex evolutionary
relationships and metabolic processes is limited by a lack of data. This genome
project will fill major gaps in the evolutionary picture of photosynthesis and
its relation to other biological processes. The organisms that will be sequenced
in this project are Heliobacterium modesticaldum, Roseobacter denitrificans,
Rhodocista centenaria and Acaryochloris marina. The project will actively engage
a large number of bioinformatics students in the annotation efforts.
Bioinformatics graduate students will use the raw genome data as part of "real
world" class exercises to identify metabolic pathways or families of transport
proteins. The project team includes experts on each organism, including Robert
Blankenship, Michael Madigan, Thomas Beatty, Carl Bauer, Mamoro Mimuro and
Hideaki Miyashita and a highly experienced sequencing center, directed by
Jeffrey Touchman. The team will also partner with the public science museum at
the Arizona Science Center to develop public displays and teacher training
materials aimed at communicating the excitement and benefits of microbial
genomics to the general public and to school children, respectively.