* 0412650
* Dissertation Research: Evolution of Genomic Architecture in Laboratory Populations of Bacillus subtilis.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* C. William Birky, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

One major goal of evolutionary biologists is to determine how certain
characteristics of&lt;br/&gt;organisms can influence their rates of adaptation
and subsequent pattern of evolutionary change.&lt;br/&gt;One such characteristic
is the overall complexity of an organism. In order to address
how&lt;br/&gt;complexity influences evolutionary diversification, bacterial
populations were evolved in the lab&lt;br/&gt;either with or without selection
for the ability to make spores, which are complex structures.&lt;br/&gt;One
measure of complexity is how many traits are maintained by the organism, and
this can be&lt;br/&gt;examined by looking at the contents of the genome. Changes
in genome content will be&lt;br/&gt;examined in these bacterial populations to
detect large changes in gene organization, including&lt;br/&gt;the loss or
duplication of genes. Studying these gains and losses of genetic material will
have&lt;br/&gt;important implications for our understanding of the speed and
mode of evolutionary adaptation&lt;br/&gt;in all life forms.&lt;br/&gt;The
results of these experiments will have important implications for our
understanding of how&lt;br/&gt;complexity affects adaptive evolution and rates
of evolutionary change. This information is very&lt;br/&gt;important for our
view of interactions between fast-evolving pathogens and their host organisms.