* 0412325
* Conference:  Ubiquitin and Cellular Regulation to be held June 26- July 1, 2004, in Saxtons River, Vermont.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Daniel Finley, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2005
* USD 8,000.00

This is a FASEB summer conference entitled "Ubiquitin and Cellular Regulation"
to be held June 26-July 1, 2004, at Vermont Academy. FASEB has sponsored the
leading conference on ubiquitination since 1989, when this field grew to a
critical mass. The meeting is held biennially, except in the present case, where
the last meeting was in 2001. The mission of the meeting has shifted in response
to the changing landscape of the field. At one time, the PI of every major lab
in the field could expect to deliver a 25-minute talk. In the late 90's, as the
field exploded, it became necessary to focus carefully on the newest and most
significant developments. The last meeting was rated by 59% of participants as
the best meeting they had ever attended. Newcomers to the field participated as
speakers and a wide range of advances was presented. Short talks selected from
abstracts were presented alongside more established researchers. The 2004
conference will continue these conventions. Several entirely new topics for
sessions will be introduced, reflecting major cellular roles of ubiquitination
that have only recently been recognized. The field of ubiquitin and ubiquitin-
like proteins continues to expand at a striking pace, with new labs constantly
joining, emphasizing the importance of bringing people together at such a
meeting. Over 5% of the genome is apparently devoted to ubiquitination in
plants. Similar estimates have been made for mammals. The meeting will highlight
recent advances through invited speakers and talks selected from abstracts.
Special attention will be given to new and underrepresented groups of
investigators. This conference has an outstanding tradition of intense poster
sessions. Based on past experience, the conference will be oversubscribed by a
large margin. To foster strong interactions among participants, the conference
is limited to approximately 175 participants.