* 0412582
* Morphological and Spatial Aspects in Polymer Degradation: From Heterophasic Polymers to Proton Exchange Membranes Used in Fuel Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2011
* Shulamith Schlick, University of Detroit Mercy
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2011
* USD 714,000.00

Proposed Research. The research performed during the 2001-2004 NSF grant period
has demonstrated the strength of the imaging method based on electron spin
resonance, ESRI, to provide spatially- and morphologically-resolved information
on polymer degradation in heterophasic polymers. The systems studied were
poly(acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene) (ABS), and propylene-ethylene copolymers
(HPEC), both containing a hindered amine stabilizer (HAS). The HAS-derived
nitroxide radicals act as radical scavengers, and provide the contrast in ESRI
experiments. But questions remain, and will be addressed in this research plan.
The following major objectives are: 1. Understand the effect of irradiation
wavelength in UV degradation. 2. Assess the importance of HAS structure and
molecular weight, and of the local environment on the formation and consumption
of HAS-derived nitroxides. 3. Map the formation and distribution of nitroxides
in various domains, and evaluate the effect of the morphology on their
distribution. 4. Increase the resolution in ESRI experiments by refining the
software for image reconstruction. 5. Initiate an in situ study of degradation
of proton exchange membranes (PEMs) in fuel cells; this is a risky part in the
long-range planning described in this proposal (four years). The proposed study
includes spectroscopic methods (continuous wave and pulsed ESR, FTIR, UV), and
ESR imaging. Intellectual Merit. Polymer degradation and stabilization is a
challenging topic of great fundamental and technological importance:
Fundamental, because it reflects the change in properties of polymeric materials
due to chemical phenomena that can vary as a function of environmental
conditions. Technological, because the use of polymeric materials is increasing
steadily, and because of the increasing sophistication required in specific
applications. The ESRI method that we have developed is exceptionally sensitive
to early events in the degradation process, and therefore of predictive value.
Moreover, the method is nondestructive, an advantage that is particularly
important for semicrystalline systems such as polypropylene-based heterogeneous
and other self-assembled polymeric systems, for instance ion-containing
polymers, and block copolymer micelles. The expected results of this research
plan are accurate prediction of lifetimes for polymeric materials and a better
understanding of environmental factors (for instance heat, light, humidity, and
oxygen); these results are of great fundamental interest and crucial for
industrial applications. Broader Impact. Graduate and undergraduate students, as
well as postdoctoral fellows and visiting scientists are part of the research
team. Although focused on specific goals, the contribution of each participant
will be analyzed and shared by all, and disseminated at group seminars and
meetings. International collaborations (with scientists from Japan, France,
Poland, Russia, Romania, and Germany) and contact with scientists in industrial
labs (Dow Chemical, Toyota, General Motors, and Giner) have developed because of
the novelty of our approach to the problem of degradation, and the versatility
of the ESRI method. This PI plans to develop a new unit entitled "The Science of
Fuel Cells", in the Special Topics series at UDM, Chemistry 601, which will be
tailored for graduate and advanced undergraduate students. This topic emerged
from our studies of self-assembling of ionomers (supported by the Polymers
Program), and is motivated by our recent interest in the study of PEM stability.

