* 0412364
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Morphological Diversification of Anostomimorph and Curimatimorph Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Mark Westneat, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 07/31/2006
* USD 10,584.00

Non-technical abstract: Dissertation Research: Morphological
&lt;br/&gt;diversification of anostomimorph and curimatimorph
fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why is biodiversity distributed unequally across
the tree-of-life? Some &lt;br/&gt;groups of species have evolved extraordinary
anatomical variation while &lt;br/&gt;other groups contain many species that
look and act similar. To begin to &lt;br/&gt;understand how and why the general
phenomenon of unequal diversification &lt;br/&gt;occurs, this research will
investigate how and why a specific lineage of &lt;br/&gt;South American fishes
related to piranhas and tetras evolved an anatomical &lt;br/&gt;diversity very
much greater than that of the lineage of its closest &lt;br/&gt;relatives. This
case study is rare and valuable because it approximates a &lt;br/&gt;naturally
controlled experiment. Because the two groups of fishes contain &lt;br/&gt;equal
numbers of species, share a recent common ancestor (and therefore
&lt;br/&gt;began to evolve independently at the same time) and live together
&lt;br/&gt;throughout tropical South America, the differences in their
diversities &lt;br/&gt;cannot be explained by differences in net speciation
rate, age, or &lt;br/&gt;environmental effects. The removal of these factors
leaves at least two &lt;br/&gt;potential explanations of the observed
differences in diversity. The &lt;br/&gt;differences may be due to random
evolution, or an intrinsic feature of &lt;br/&gt;anatomy or ecology shared only
by the more diverse group may promote the &lt;br/&gt;evolution of new
morphologies. This research program will investigate &lt;br/&gt;these two
alternatives by 1) using a detailed anatomical study to &lt;br/&gt;reconstruct
the genealogical relationships, or "trees-of-life" for these &lt;br/&gt;fishes,
2) measuring the anatomical differences between these species from &lt;br/&gt;an
extensive series of x-ray images and 3) performing a novel analysis that
&lt;br/&gt;combines the measurements of anatomical differences and trees-of-life
with &lt;br/&gt;computer simulations of evolution. This analysis will test
whether &lt;br/&gt;diversities as different as those observed could have evolved
randomly. If &lt;br/&gt;the analysis were to reject the hypothesis of random
evolution, then it &lt;br/&gt;would be likely that an intrinsic difference drove
one group to diversify &lt;br/&gt;greatly while the other did not. If the second
alternative is supported, &lt;br/&gt;this project will identify the anatomical
and ecological features most &lt;br/&gt;likely to have catalyzed the evolution
of novelties in the more diverse &lt;br/&gt;group. Future studies can then test
whether the evolution of similar &lt;br/&gt;properties in other groups of
organisms generally promotes the genesis and &lt;br/&gt;maintenance of
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broad sense, this study will help reveal
why biodiversity is not &lt;br/&gt;distributed equally across the tree-of-life
for all organisms. The methods &lt;br/&gt;developed for use in this project are
transferable to studies of a wide &lt;br/&gt;variety of other organisms and will
be made freely available via the &lt;br/&gt;Internet. This project will also
promote international collaboration on the &lt;br/&gt;study of an important
group of tropical fishes valued as food throughout &lt;br/&gt;South America,
prized for their ornamental beauty worldwide and that serve &lt;br/&gt;important
ecological roles as part of the most species-rich freshwater fish
&lt;br/&gt;fauna in the world. Current and potential collaborations include work
on &lt;br/&gt;the discovery and description of new species, the building of
natural &lt;br/&gt;history collections in the United States and in South
America, and &lt;br/&gt;conservation biology. Results from this work also fuel a
continuing &lt;br/&gt;dialogue about biodiversity with students and museum
visitors through a &lt;br/&gt;series of exhibits and public
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;