* 0412203
* Dynamics of Fiber Suspensions and their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Shelley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 322,119.00

The investigators will develop robust, accurate, and cost-
effective&lt;br/&gt;methods for simulating the dynamics of suspensions of
flexible fibers&lt;br/&gt;in a Stokesian fluid. Flexible fibers make up
the&lt;br/&gt;micro-structure of suspensions that show strongly non-Newtonian
bulk&lt;br/&gt;behavior, such as elasticity, shear-thinning, and normal
stresses&lt;br/&gt;differences in shear flows. By taking a nonstandard approach
to this&lt;br/&gt;problem, and designing a numerical algorithm based on a
nonlocal&lt;br/&gt;slender-body approximation to hydrodynamical interactions, it
is&lt;br/&gt;possible to simulate problems not feasible with standard methods.
As&lt;br/&gt;this numerical method has a firm mathematical foundation,
method&lt;br/&gt;design can be approached as a numerical analysis problem,
carefully&lt;br/&gt;treating issues of accuracy and stability in algorithm
design.&lt;br/&gt;Technical obstacles to be addressed are the accurate inclusion
of&lt;br/&gt;lubrication forces when filaments approach each other, and
the&lt;br/&gt;development and application of fast summation strategies
for&lt;br/&gt;evalluating filament-filament interactions. The investigators
will&lt;br/&gt;also develop especially efficient methods for the special case
of&lt;br/&gt;rigid filaments. They will apply these methods to a set of
current&lt;br/&gt;theoretical issues, such as the development of normal
stress&lt;br/&gt;differences in flexible fiber suspensions, the effect on fluid
mixing&lt;br/&gt;of storing and releasing elastic stress in the fluidic
microstructure,&lt;br/&gt;and the large-scale dynamics of rod-like self-
locomoting elements (as&lt;br/&gt;arises in modeling bacterial
baths)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of microscopic flexible fibers immersed
in a fluid are&lt;br/&gt;essential to understanding many current problems
arising in biology,&lt;br/&gt;engineering, and physics. Examples range from
manufacturing processes&lt;br/&gt;in the pulp and paper industries to new
proposed methods for mixing&lt;br/&gt;fluids in small devices to the locomotion
of micro-organisms. These&lt;br/&gt;are all complicated systems whose dynamics
are not well understood, in&lt;br/&gt;part because the large-scale dynamics of
the flow can depend on the&lt;br/&gt;detailed nonlinear dynamics of the
microscopic fibers. To help&lt;br/&gt;increase our understanding of such
problems, the investigators are&lt;br/&gt;developing efficient and accurate
methods for numerically simulating&lt;br/&gt;the dynamics of such systems with
many interacting fibers. They will&lt;br/&gt;apply these methods to a set of
current applications, drawn from the&lt;br/&gt;basic physics of fluids,
engineering, and biology.&lt;br/&gt;