* 0412390
* Boston Science Partnership
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2013
* Arthur Eisenkraft, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2013
* USD 14,207,321.00

The Boston Science Partnership (BSP) is comprised of the following core
partners: the Boston Public School (BPS) System, Northeastern University (NEU)
and the University of Massachusetts Boston (UMB), as the lead organization. The
Harvard Medical School and the College Board participate as supporting partners.
This Partnership comes together to significantly enhance student achievement and
teacher quality in grades 6-12 science. The BSP vision is that challenging
science courses will be taught by highly qualified teachers; advanced science
courses will be accessible to all BPS students; university faculty will work
side-by-side with K-12 teachers in science education reform; and structures will
be in place to promote student achievement in grade 6 through graduate level in
science and engineering. The goals of the Partnership are to raise BPS student
achievement in science, significantly improve the quality of BPS science
teachers, increase the number of students who succeed in higher-level courses in
science and who are admitted to and retained in university science and
engineering programs, improve science teaching both in BPS and at the
universities, and institutionalize these changes so that the Boston Science
Partnership and its work will be sustained.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Distinctive
strategies that support BSP in obtaining its goals
include:&lt;br/&gt;--Combining the College Board's vertical teaming approach
with BPS' own Collaborative Coaching and Learning (CCL) model, which requires
teachers to inquire into their own and each other's teaching practices in an
effort to improve student achievement;&lt;br/&gt;--Collaboration by science
professors and BPS science teachers to develop graduate courses that
contextualize content in support of the specific curriculum that teachers are
expected to deliver in BPS classrooms; and&lt;br/&gt;--Joining together of
engineering faculty and BPS science teachers to interpret the
technology/engineering strand of the Massachusetts Science Frameworks in light
of the national technology frameworks, and to create a graduate course in
engineering that prepares teachers to teach this material as part of the science
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation measures associated with project
implementation will be complemented by research efforts intended to answer
questions such as: What are the institutional capacities and barriers of UMB and
NEU that will advance or inhibit the sustainability of the innovations they have
initiated within their own institutions through the BSP? What are the
institutional capacities and barriers that explain the abilities of UMB and NEU
to achieve authentic and sustainable collaborations with each other in order to
improve science teaching and learning within BPS? How do the strategies that UMB
and NEU use to manage their capacities and barriers to change enhance the
field's understanding of and ability to achieve sustainable change within
institutions of higher education? What are the roles that vertical teaming,
contextualized courses, and the use of the CCL model play in the development of
high quality teachers? In what ways does science instruction in university
science courses improve as a result of science professors' a) increased
knowledge about how students learn and K-12 science education including the
National Science Education Standards, and b) observations of high-quality K-12
science teachers and participation in debriefing discussions about inquiry-based
teaching practices based on how students learn? The BSP research agenda will be
carried out jointly by UMB and the Education Development Center (EDC) with the
Program Evaluation and Research Group (PERG), Lesley University, providing
leadership for project evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work of the BSP has
the potential of impacting 14,759 students in grades 6-8, 18,305 students in
grades 9-12, 186 full-time science teachers, and 256 teachers who teach science
part of the day. &lt;br/&gt;