* 0412886
* Photolysis by Oxides with Internal Dipolar Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Gregory Rohrer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 387,385.00

Certain transition metal oxide ceramics can catalyze water photolysis and
produce hydrogen from water and sunlight. Particulate systems that catalyze this
process remain impractical because of their low energy conversion efficiency,
which is limited by carrier recombination and the back reaction of reduced and
oxidized intermediates before they can form more stable molecular species. The
basic idea of this research is use the bulk photovoltaic effect to build an
internal field into every crystallite in a particulate catalyst, so that the
photogenerated charge carriers will be separated and the reduced and oxidized
products formed at different locations. An internal field can be incorporated
within the individual crystallites by using a ferroelectric material. Thus,
experiments will be conducted to test the hypothesis that internal dipolar
fields can be used to increase the quantum efficiency of water photolysis in
particulate systems. Specifically, the photolysis efficiency of catalysts in the
ferroelectric and paraelectric state will be compared. The influence of dipolar
fields on the reactivity of thin catalytic films on ferroelectrics, such as TiO2
on BaTiO3, will also be explored. A composite will allow the charge separating
and catalytic functions to be optimized separately. The efficiency will probably
be affected by the size of the ferroelectric particle and by the thickness of
the film. These length scale phenomena will be explored independently by
comparing the efficiencies of catalysts with different particle sizes and by
testing the reactivity of films of different thicknesses in a planar
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a fuel for the future, hydrogen is attractive
because it has three times the energy density of oil and its combustion does not
create dangerous emissions, greenhouse gases, or radioactive byproducts. It is
currently possible to produce this sustainable, clean burning fuel from sunlight
and water. However, the potential societal benefits of this energy source will
not be realized until the cost become competitive with established fuel sources
(fossil and nuclear). Therefore, the overarching goal of this research is to
develop new materials that will make photolytic hydrogen economically
feasible.&lt;br/&gt;