* 0412373
* A Greater Birmingham Partnership: Building Communities of Learners and Leaders in Middle School Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2004,07/31/2006
* John Mayer, Birmingham Southern College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 9,961,108.00

ABSTRACT-0412373&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Greater Birmingham Partnership (GBMP):
Building Communities of Learners and Leaders in Middle School Mathematics is
fundamentally targeting the improvement of middle school mathematics, with
implications for both future and current teachers, and with a secondary focus on
high school teachers of mathematics. The core partners include the lead
organization, Birmingham-Southern College, as well as, the University of Alabama
at Birmingham and eight Greater Birmingham Alabama school districts: Bessemer
City, Fairfield City, Homewood City, Hoover City, Jefferson County, Mountain
Brook City, Shelby County, and Vestavia City School Systems. A significant
supporting partner is the Mathematics Education Collaborative (MEC) of the State
of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the GBMP is to
significantly improve the mathematics achievement of approximately 22,000
students in grades 6-8, while narrowing the mathematics achievement gaps among
varied populations of students, through a number of strategies, which include:
(A) engaging all 274 middle grades teachers of mathematics in a series of
mathematical content courses centered on deep mathematical problems; (B)
leadership development of middle grades teachers as members of Mathematical
Support Teams (60 teachers), Mathematics Focus Groups (40 teachers), and
Mathematical Study Groups focused on special topics; (C) design/modification of
university mathematics courses for pre- and in-service teachers, including the
integration of engineering ideas that will focus students on the powerful
application of mathematical ideas; (D) placement of interns in classrooms of
teachers that model exemplary practices in mathematical instruction; (E)
establishment of teacher certification in middle grades mathematics; (F)
parental engagement as advocates for high quality mathematics for all students;
(H) enhancement of the capacity of administrators to identify and support
quality mathematical instruction; and (I) exploration of research questions
associated with mathematical learning by middle grades students (metacognitive
processes, motivation, social interaction, accommodations), efficacy of
professional development strategies, obtaining consistency of solid mathematical
reform in eight disparate-some of which serve very privileged populations and
others which serve extremely disadvantaged populations-school districts
simultaneously, studying pedagogical change in university faculty as a result of
their collaborations with K-12 districts, and optimizing features of
mesosystems-Institutions of Higher Education and K-12 factors that maximize
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GBMP brings together classroom teachers
of mathematics, school administrators, university faculty (mathematicians,
engineers, and educators), experts in professional development, researchers,
community and business leaders, and the Alabama State Department of Education to
focus on the curricular, pedagogical, mathematical content, certification, and
parental interests that must be synergistically addressed in order to support
all middle grades learners in acquiring the mathematical power necessary for
success in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;