* 0412537
* Project Pathways: Opening Routes to Math &amp; Science Success for all Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2012
* Eugenia Echols, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2012
* USD 13,392,614.00

Project Pathways targets mathematics and science learning and achievement in
grades 9-12. The project will produce a research-based and tested model to
support secondary mathematics and science teachers. Core partners include four
school districts (Chandler, Mesa, Tempe, and Tolleson) and the Center for
Research on Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology
(CRESMET) at Arizona State University (ASU). The Maricopa Community College
District and Intel are collaborators with ASU in delivering the project's
research-based services and products to these districts. The demographics of the
partner school districts mirror those of Arizona, where 45% of students are
persons of color and the Hispanic population is expanding rapidly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pathways will produce tools and knowledge to guide
secondary mathematics and science teachers in promoting conceptual learning and
STEM behaviors that the literature deems essential for continued STEM learning
and course-taking. These key behaviors include competence and flexibility in
scientific inquiry, mathematical problem solving, and engineering design. A
central concept is that of function, which research identifies as a unifying
concept of secondary mathematics and science. As the core strategy of the
Pathways model, teams of engineers, mathematicians and scientists will partner
with master teachers and STEM education faculty to generate instructional
sequences for both teachers and students. The instructional materials will take
the form of modules for secondary mathematics and science teachers, with
companion modules for secondary STEM classrooms and companion tools for
secondary STEM learning communities. The professional learning community tools
will support teachers in adapting their new knowledge and instructional
approaches to their own classrooms by engaging them in deep reflections on their
instruction and their students' learning. Pathways materials will be easily
adaptable in any learning environment. In this project, however, they will be
packaged for use in four courses in an ASU graduate degree program for inservice
teachers, delivered on-site in the teachers' schools. To better assist Arizona's
many bilingual students, Pathways will adapt student modules to an innovative,
research-developed English language learner technology platform. Other Pathways
strategies include activities (such as science fairs for students and a regional
conference for high school guidance counselors) to encourage all students to
take challenging mathematics and science courses and to consider science-based
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teams of STEM education faculty and graduate
students will research the effectiveness of the courses and learning communities
on teachers' understanding of mathematics and science concepts and their
understanding of the process by which foundational STEM concepts and behaviors
develop in students. They will also investigate the process by which teachers
shift their classroom practices to promote improved STEM learning in their
students. Graduate research assistants will be recruited to participate in the
Pathways project, preparing many future faculty for careers as STEM education
researchers. Pathways will establish new patterns of information-sharing and
collaboration among STEM scientists and educators, community college faculty,
secondary administrators and teachers, and industry partners. The project aims
to narrow the majority/minority achievement gap, encourage students to take
challenging STEM courses, increase high school student STEM learning and
achievement, and improve the pass rates in ASU's introductory calculus, physics
and biology courses.&lt;br/&gt;