* 0412328
* Social Identity Complexity: Antecedents and Consequences
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Marilynn Brewer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2007
* USD 175,011.00

In the United States, the debate over multiculturalism is usually cast almost
exclusively in terms of racial/ethnic differentiation. Although ethnic identity
is both psychologically and socially highly significant, it is rarely the case
that ethnicity is the only significant group membership that an individual has.
As members of a large and complex society, Americans are differentiated or
subdivided along many meaningful social dimensions, including gender and sexual
orientation, life stage (e.g., student, worker, retiree), economic sector (e.g.,
technology, service, academics, professional), religion, political ideology, and
recreational preferences. Each of these divisions provides a basis for shared
identity and group membership that may become an important source of social
identification. Further, most of these differentiations are cross-cutting in the
sense that individuals may share a common ingroup membership on one dimension
but belong to different categories on another dimension. Hence, having multiple
group memberships reduces the likelihood that one's social world can be reduced
to a single ingroup-outgroup distinction. The purpose of this proposed program
of research is to determine how an individual's awareness of his or her own
multiple group memberships and social identities contributes to tolerance and
acceptance of diversity in the society as a whole. Drawing on a theory of social
identity complexity (Roccas & Brewer, 2002), a program of five sets of studies
employing both correlational and experimental methods will assess the
antecedents of social identity complexity and test the hypothesis that
increasing social identity complexity will enhance identification with
inclusive, superordinate social categories and consequent acceptance of
difference and diversity within the superordinate group.