* 0412255
* WORKSHOP:  Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) Symposium; August 2-4, 2004; Austin, Texas
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Kristin Wood, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/28/2005
* USD 9,900.00

The Fifteenth Annual Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) Symposium to be held in
Austin, Texas, August 2-4, 2004, is a topical meeting that is a research
exchange in the area of rapid prototyping. It is a mechanism for transfer and
dissemination of knowledge and understanding in the field of additive, freeform
manufacturing. The meeting is well regarded by the research community and draws
approximately 100 researchers from universities, companies and national
laboratories from all over the world. The SFF Symposium also attracts graduate
students worldwide. In 2003, approximately 44 percent of the entire meeting was
students. Participants represented 35 universities, 12 of which were
international.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFF Symposium is an excellent model for
advancing discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training and
learning. The networking of world-class researchers with students is strong
since the meeting encourages through its pricing structure the involvement of
students. The meeting is a pinion for research infrastructure by the networking
of research personnel and information. Through the heavily cited proceedings,
information is widely disseminated to an extensive network of researchers and
students around the world. The societal impact is identification of pre-
commercial technologies and sharing of information pertaining to freeform
fabrication that will eventually be developed and implemented into machines and
processes that will enhance domestic productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
information is available at the SFF Symposium web page,
http://utwired.engr.utexas.edu/lff/