* 0412609
* Metal Oxide and Bimetallic Nanostructures on Planar Titania Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Peter Rossky, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2008
* USD 510,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0412609&lt;br/&gt;White/Texas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor White and
his coworkers at the University of Texas at Austin are investigating the photo
and thermal induced chemistry of small oxygen containing molecules on
nanostructured oxide and bimetallic surfaces. Using a novel
hydrophobic/hydrophilic patterning method, they are depositing nanometer sized
titanium and molybdenum oxide particles, as well as Au/Cu bimetallic particles
on planar TiO2 surfaces. Scanning tunneling microscopy, thermal desorption
spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy are used to examine the
kinetics and mechanisms of the reactions on these structured surfaces.
Information from this fundamental research is important for developing an
understanding of the reactivity of nanoparticles of oxide and bimetallic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The surface chemical reactivity of nanometer
sized materials is likely to differ in important ways from the surface
reactivity of bulk oxide and bimetallic materials. This research project,
carried out by Professor White and his group at the University of Texas,
addresses this important question. Using a hydrophobic/hydrophilic patterning
method, nanostructured surfaces of titanium and molybdenum oxides, as well as
Au/Cu bimetallic nanoparticles are prepared and characterized. The surface
chemistry of these materials is then examined using standard UHV surface
chemistry probes. This fundamental information is crucial for developing an
understanding of the reactivity of nanomaterials for use in many technical
applications. &lt;br/&gt;