* 0412622
* Special Year in Number Theory and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Miklos Bona, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 08/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

Proposal Number: 0412622 Proposal Title: Special Year in Number Theory and
Combinatorics Received on 12/17/03 Principal Investigator: F. Garvan CO-PI(s):
Miklos Bona Neil White Richard Crew Institution: University of Florida

ABSTRACT

The 2004-2005 Special Year at the Department of Mathematics, University of
Florida is in Number Theory and Combinatorics and features two parallel
programs. The Number Theory part of Special Year 2004-05 will be highlighted by
two conferences: (i) An International Conference on Additive Number Theory in
November 2004, and (ii) An International Conference on Arithmetic Geometry in
February 2005. The highlight of the Combinatorics part of the Special Year
Program will be (iii) A Workshop on Automated Deduction in Geometry in September
2004, and (iv) The Third International Conference on Pattern Avoiding
Permutations in March 2005. There are plans to publish the refereed proceedings
of these conferences. Topics for these conferences have been chosen from areas
of our research strengths but involve broader themes. The conferences will be
augmented by lectures throughout the year on the latest trends in research by
eminent visiting mathematicians, as well as History Lectures which should appeal
to students. The Additive Number Theory Conference will involve three main
themes: partitions and q-series; Goldbach, Waring type problems, and sieves; and
basis and density questions. The Arithmetic Geometry Conference will be devoted
to p-adic methods in arithmetic and algebraic geometry. Automated Deduction in
Geometry Workshop will be a forum to exchange ideas and views, to present
research results and progress, and to demonstrate software tools on the
intersection between geometry and automated deduction. The Conference on Pattern
Avoiding Permutations is on the exact and asymptotic enumeration and structural
analysis, of permutations with subsequence conditions. This area is connected to
the theory of Young tableaux, labeled trees, partially ordered sets, and planar
maps, as well as sorting and searching.

The Special Year Program in Number Theory and Combinatorics will be of interest
even to researchers outside of mathematics and therefore will strengthen ties
with other disciplines. Number Theory is the study of the properties of whole
numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. Topics such as partitions,
elliptic curves, and cryptography, covered by our conferences in number theory
will be of interest to physicists and those in computer science. Combinatorics
is the study of discrete collections of objects, and how they can be arranged
and counted efficiently. The areas covered by the conferences in combinatorics
will be of appeal to computer and engineering sciences. Number Theory and
Combinatorics are ideally suited to attract the attention of non-experts and
students to significant developments in mathematics. Thus the History Lectures
in these areas will inform graduate and undergraduate students as to how
fundamental ideas and concepts developed, and this in turn will help in
attracting talented students to take to more advanced study in mathematics.