* 0412793
* Dissertation Research: A Phylogenetic Perspective on Community Ecology and Ecological Diversification in Emydid Turtles.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* John Wiens, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,956.00

Non-technical abstract for DEB-0412793&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates fundamental ecological and evolutionary questions using turtles in
the family Emydidae as the study system. This family includes many familiar
North American species such as the eastern box turtle, the red eared slider, and
the painted turtle. Emydids are amazingly ecologically varied. Species in this
family are adapted for a wide variety of habitats such as ponds, rivers, and
prairies, and subsist on resources as varied as clams, insects, and aquatic
plants. Because emydids are so ecologically diverse, they are an ideal group in
which to ask questions about the evolution of the ecological characteristics of
species and the origins of ecological patterns in natural communities. All such
research questions depend on an accurate knowledge of the evolutionary
relationships of modern emydid species. We will compare DNA sequences from the
nuclear and mitochondrial genes of modern emydid species to examine
relationships among these species. This knowledge will allow us to address
question with broad implications for the fields of ecology and evolutionary
biology. For example, is the amount of time that emydids have occurred in
different continental regions correlated with the number of emydid species that
occur in each region? Presumably in a region that the family has occupied for a
long period of time, there will have been time for more species to evolve.
Differences in the number of species that occur in different regions often are
thought to be related to the amount of time that various groups have lived in
each region, yet few studies have ever tested this hypothesis. Another research
question is to examine the evolution of tradeoffs in performance capacity (e.g.,
speed, endurance, swimming ability) of species adapted to different habitats
(e.g., species adapted to aquatic versus terrestrial habitats). Many influential
theories assume that tradeoffs in performance must occur in organisms that use
different habitats or use different resources, but very few studies have ever
tried to measure such tradeoffs or detail how they evolved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to addressing questions with broad
implications in ecology and evolutionary biology, this project will provide many
opportunities for undergraduates and advanced high-school students to learn
about science and scientific techniques by assisting in the research. Students
will learn how to use video editing and image analysis software (which is used
in a variety of fields from medicine to the arts), how to isolate and amplify
DNA from specific regions of genes (techniques used in medicine, forensics, and
nearly every field of biology), and will be encouraged to design and execute
independent research projects (learning firsthand about the process of
formulating and testing a scientific hypothesis).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;