* 0412678
* Vibrational Spectroscopy and Reaction Dynamics of Complexes and Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Marsha Lester, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 451,045.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Marsha Lester of the University of Pennsylvania will
investigate molecular associations and reactive intermediates that are predicted
to play a role in the reactions of hydroxyl radicals with molecular partners of
significance in the earth's atmosphere. Infrared spectroscopy will be used to
identify five- and six-membered cyclic complexes that are inferred to be
important in the hydrogen abstraction reactions of hydroxyl radicals with nitric
acid, hydrogen peroxide, and acetone. The intermediates of the reactions between
hydroxyl and nitrogen dioxide, and hydroxyl and carbon monoxide will also be
investigated. Through these studies the structure, stability, and
dissociation/reaction dynamics of the hydroxyl adducts and intermediates will be
examined, thereby providing new insights on the mechanisms for hydrogen atom
transfer and radical association reactions in the atmosphere.

Graduate and undergraduate students, including women and members of
underrepresented minorities, and postdoctoral research associates will
participate in this research. They will acquire knowledge and skills in
preparation for advanced studies or employment in the scientific/technological
sectors of our economy. The research findings will also be adapted for classroom
use through courses developed for high school teachers, undergraduate nonscience
majors, and graduate students.