* 0412926
* IMR: Acquisition Of Complimentary Equipment To Enhance Student Training In Nanoscale Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Claudio Guerra-Vela, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 65,350.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program provides
funds to the University of Puerto Rico at Humacao, to purchase two instruments,
a high power optical microscope with image processing capability and a
semiconductor analyzer. The instruments will be used in nanoscience related
research and training. The first project is the fabrication and electrical
characterization of conducting polymer nanofibers using a simple electrospinning
technique. In this method, the polymer dissolved in an appropriate solvent is
placed in a hypodermic needle. By applying a high voltage to the needle, the
polymer solution is forced out from the needle in the form of a jet, and as the
solvent evaporates, ultra fine fibers of the polymer can be generated. The
second project is the fabrication of carbon nanotubes using chemical vapor
deposition (CVD) techniques. The nanofibers and nanotubes will be electrically
connected in a field effect transistor configuration. The purpose is to be able
to fabricate electronic devices. The optical microscope will be used in
selecting good samples for characterization and to study electro chromic effects
in the polymer nanofibers in-situ while there is an external current flowing
through the fiber. Electro chromic effects on bulk conducting polymers have been
done in the past but not in nanofibers. The instruments will also be used in
Senior Lab for specialized experiments related to nanotechnology. The
instruments are of the multi-user type and will enhance research collaboration
with the Department of Physics and Electronics and the Biology Department. The
acquisition will strengthen the undergraduate program in Physics and Electronics
at the University and the research and education program in the Southeast part
of the island

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the
University of Puerto Rico at Humacao, with the acquisition a high power optical
microscope with image processing capability and a semiconductor analyzer. The
instruments will be used in nanoscience related research and training. The first
project is the fabrication and electrical characterization of conducting polymer
nanofibers. The second project is the fabrication of carbon nanotubes using
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) techniques. The purpose is to be able to
fabricate electronic devices. The optical microscope will be used in selecting
good samples for characterization and also to study electro chromic effects in
the polymer nanofibers in-situ with electric current flowing through the fiber.
Electro chromic effects on bulk conducting polymers have been done in the past
but not in nanofibers. The instruments will also be used in Senior Lab for
specialized experiments related to nanotechnology. The instruments will enhance
research collaboration with the Department of Physics and Electronics and the
Biology Department. The acquisition will strengthen the undergraduate program in
Physics and Electronics at the University and the research and education program
in the South-East part of the island

