* 0412876
* Dissertation Research: Religious Healing and Cultural Models in an Afro-Brazilian Community
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Linda Garro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

In Afro-Brazilian spirit-possession religion, people seeking healing during
times of distress engage with spirits through trance, spiritual afflictions;
ritualized dance movements, and diverse gestures and postures. These engagements
represent cultural models of movement and sensory experience. A cultural
anthropology student will investigate these models through an in-depth study of
individuals' bodily ways of being to examine individual variation in displaying
those models and to explore how individuals' body styles interact with their
activities in a spiritual healing community. Employing participant observation,
person-centered and semi-structured interviews, ranking tasks, focus groups,
extensive videotaping and notation of movement in daily and ceremonial life and
consensus analysis, this study seeks to understand bodily aspects of
sociocultural life. The project will assess the proposition that the greater the
medium's bodily displays correspond with the culturally understood bodily
characteristics of the spirits that he or she embodies, the greater his or her
rank of healing power. This tests the hypothesis that bodily engagement is a
crucial component in perceptions of healing efficacy. In addition to
contributing to the education of a young social scientist, this research will
advance our understanding of how healing is accomplished by spiritualist
healers. The new knowledge will be of interest to health and welfare
professionals in all societies where such healing practices are prevalent.