* 0412912
* Collaborative Research:     Coordinating Robot Teams Using Market-Based Mechanisms
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Pinar Keskinocak, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2010
* USD 154,000.00

Collaborative Research: Coordinating Robot Teams using Market-Based Mechanisms

In the near future, teams of robots will take on tasks in initially unknown
environments where human presence is not possible due to safety or cost reasons,
including applications where robots have to visit or cover areas in initially
unknown terrain, such as mine sweeping and de-mining, search and rescue
operations after earthquakes, the exploration of distant planets, and hazardous
material cleaning. The efficient and robust coordination of the robots is
imperative for all of these scenarios. This project develops and implements
methods for the dynamic assignment and re-assignment of tasks to robot teams
through the use of combinatorial auctions in the context of exploration tasks in
initially unknown environments. Previous work has demonstrated the use of
single-item auctions for multi-robot task allocation, in which robots bid on
tasks that are auctioned off one at a time. Unfortunately, single-item auctions
do not take synergies between tasks into account, which can result in suboptimal
task allocations and poor team performance. This project studies more complex
auctions, including combinatorial auctions, where robots bid on bundles of
tasks. Initial feasibility studies show that combinatorial auctions generally
lead to significantly superior team performance compared to single-item
auctions, and generate very good results compared to optimal centralized
methods. The project focuses on combinatorial bidding strategies which result in
team behavior that is efficient, effective, adaptable to dynamic environments,
and robust in the presence of error conditions. It also studies alternative
winner determination methods for various objective functions, such as minimizing
the total travel distance (or energy consumption) and the total time to task
completion. This interdisciplinary project between robotics and auction
researchers will produce both theoretical and experimental results, in
particular, new methods with theoretical analyses of their correctness and
efficiency and their demonstration on both simple and complex multi-robot
exploration scenarios with real-time requirements. The students involved in this
research will learn to work as part of an interdisciplinary team and will deepen
their understanding of two usually separate areas of research.



