* 0412074
* IMR-MIP DANSE - Distributed Data Analysis for Neutron Scattering Experiments
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Brent Fultz, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2006
* USD 985,000.00

The Spallation Neutron Source (the "SNS"), under construction in Oak Ridge,
Tennessee with a budget of $B1.411, is the world's largest science construction
project. In 2006 it will start to produce intense beams of neutrons to be used
as probes of materials. The instruments that control these beams, and detect the
neutrons scattered from specimens, are state-of-the-art. Neutron scattering
experiments performed at the SNS will produce data of unprecedented detail on
the positions and motions of atoms and spins in materials, molecules, and
condensed matter. Under the IMR-MIP program at the NSF, a conceptual engineering
design effort is being supported to build software for the analysis of data from
the SNS and other neutron facilities in a system called DANSE - distributed data
analysis for neutron scattering experiments. The DANSE project includes a
central resources activity, and subprojects in the different subfields of
neutron scattering science at different institutions around the U.S. The lead
institution is the California Institute of Technology. The scientific
subprojects are led by faculty at Michigan State Univ. (diffraction), at Iowa
State Univ. (engineering diffraction), the University of Maryland
(reflectometry), the University of Tennessee (small-angle scattering), and Los
Alamos, and Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;DANSE uses a new software architecture based on
the data flow paradigm. Analysis is performed with reusable software components
that can be connected across a network using standardized data streams.
Components are integrated into a coherent interpretive framework using the open
source language Python so that custom analysis procedures can be constructed
easily at runtime. The architecture enables high performance computing on
distributed resources and opens access to the future cyber infrastructure of
grid-based computing. DANSE provides an unprecedented opportunity to merge data
analysis, theory, and simulation into a uniform computing environment. The goals
of the DANSE project are to build a software system that 1) enables new and more
sophisticated science to be performed with neutron scattering experiments, 2)
makes the analysis of data easier for all scientists, and 3) provides a robust
software infrastructure that can be maintained in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Spallation Neutron Source (the
"SNS"), under construction in Oak Ridge, Tennessee with a budget of $
1,411,000,000, is the world's largest science construction project. In 2006 it
will start to produce intense beams of neutrons to be used as probes of
materials. The instruments that control these beams, and detect the neutrons
scattered from the specimens under study, are state-of-the-art. Neutron
scattering experiments performed at the SNS will produce data of unprecedented
detail on the positions and motions of atoms in materials. The raw experimental
data acquired with these instruments are not simple to interpret, and new
software is required to transform the data into useful forms. Beyond such data
reductions that are available today, there is an opportunity to interpret data
using several major advances in computational materials science that have
occurred over the past decade. Under the IMR-MIP program at the NSF, a
conceptual engineering design effort is being supported to build a software
system called DANSE - distributed data analysis for neutron scattering
experiments. The DANSE project includes two parts. The first is a software
engineering effort to build a framework that permits the interoperability of
modular software components. The second is an effort by scientists&lt;br/&gt;at
different institutions around the U.S. to develop the software components needed
for data analysis for the different subfields of neutron scattering research.
The lead institution is the California Institute of Technology. The scientific
subprojects are led by scientists at Michigan State University, Iowa State
University, the University of Maryland, and University of Tennessee. The goals
of the DANSE project are to build a software system that 1) enables new and more
sophisticated science to be performed with neutron scattering experiments, 2)
makes the analysis of data easier for all scientists, and 3) provides a robust
software infrastructure that can be maintained in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;