* 0412900
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Can Efficient Learning Mitigate the Bullwhip Effect?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Elena Katok, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2006
* USD 14,781.00

The proposed research studies the effect of several training protocols and
coordination opportunities on the nature of the orders made in and the
performance of multi-echelon serial supply chains. Specifically, we investigate
the extent to which system-wide training and team communication help mitigate
the "Bullwhip Effect", the observation that the variability of orders in supply
chains increases as one moves closer to the source of production. This
phenomenon, documented both in the field and in the laboratory, is prevalent,
persistent and costly to both firms and consumers, and cannot be fully explained
by standard theories. &lt;br/&gt; To examine the impact of training and
communication, we employ the well-known "Beer Distribution Game" in which
experimental subjects assigned the role of a retailer, a wholesaler, a
distributor or a manufacturer in a serial supply chain strategically interact --
ordering and shipping beer to meet customer demand over multiple periods. We
will compare trained subjects' decisions and supply chain performance in the
standard baseline case where individuals formulate their strategies
independently with two other treatments. In the system-wide training condition,
participants first obtain a learning experience as a central planner who makes
ordering decisions for the whole supply chain and is able to observe the
immediate system-wide outcome of her actions. In the team communication
condition, participants from the same supply chain are encouraged to discuss
team strategies prior to the game. We expect the bullwhip effect to be reduced
in both conditions. We will further examine the performance of each approach
under different demand scenarios. &lt;br/&gt; Previous work has explored the
impact of internal or operational innovations such as sharing point of sale
information on supply chain performance, However, essentially all prior work
uses naive participants with no or little training experience and prevents
communication. Our work will have broad impact to the extent that it will
provide a much-needed test of whether human resource activities like training
and communications will enhance individual learning and behavior and improve
system performance in real-world supply chains as well as other dynamic decision
tasks involving delays and multiple participants.&lt;br/&gt;