* 0412404
* University of Pennsylvania Science Teachers Institute: Preparation and Retention of Highly Qualified Science Teachers Through Content Intensive Programs
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2012
* Larry Gladney, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 06/30/2012
* USD 6,232,915.00

The University of Pennsylvania (Penn) School of Arts and Sciences Departments of
Biology, Chemistry, Earth and Environmental Science, Mathematics, and Physics,
in collaboration with the Graduate School of Education (GSE), is establishing
the Penn Science Teachers Institute (Penn STI) in a major effort to engage in
the development and retention of highly qualified science teachers in middle and
secondary grades. The Penn STI, managed through the Department of Chemistry,
provides content intensive master degree programs for developing content,
pedagogy, and leadership skills for science teachers. This Institute is aimed at
the mid-Atlantic region and 20 area schools/districts in the mid-Atlantic region
and includes four major components: 1) An 8-science/2-science education course
Master of Integrated Science Education degree program designed for current
middle level science teachers. 2) An 8-chemistry/2-science education course
Master of Chemistry Education degree program designed for current high school
science teachers. 3) A resource center supporting participating and graduate
teachers as they become teacher leaders and implement classroom reforms in their
schools. 4) An Administrator's Science/Math Academy designed for school
administrators to become better prepared to create a school environment
conducive to improved science teaching and learning.

Up to100 middle level science teachers and 100 high school science teachers are
expected to participate in the degree programs, along with approximately 200
school administrators. The 200 science teachers who graduate from the content
intensive programs, supported by their administrators and a university-based
resource center, are expected to fundamentally change the teaching and learning
of science in middle and secondary level classrooms in the region, benefiting
the learning of science by tens of thousands of students yearly.