* 0412929
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Thermal and Flow Control for Airfoil-Endwall Junctures
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Lee Langston, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 12/31/2008
* USD 219,937.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0412971 AND
0412929&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL TYPE: INVESTIGATOR INITIATED (GOALI
COLLABORATIVE)&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: KAREN A. THOLE AND LEE S.
LANGSTON&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: VIRGINIA POLYTECHNIC INST./UNIVERSITY OF
CONNECTICUT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: THERMAL AND
FLOW CONTROL FOR AIRFOIL-ENDWALL JUNCTURES&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
research program is to advance fundamental understanding of three dimensional
flows and their consequences on heat transfer in turbomachines. A primary
objective is to define an approach for industry to use in modifying junctures at
the turbine airfoil-platform interface to reduce the presence of three-
dimensional flows and their effects on both aerodynamic losses and heat
transfer. The intellectual merit consists of investigating the following
fundamental issues: the impact of a geometric modification at the leading edge-
platform juncture on the development of the secondary flows within an airfoil
passage; the impact of a geometric modification on the aerodynamic loss and
surface heat transfer; and the influence of compressibility on these
modifications at the leading edge-platform juncture. The broader impact of this
investigation includes determining a new methodology that can be applied to
reduce the impact of three-dimensional flows present in all turbomachines. From
an economical consideration, it is important that the US remain a stronghold in
both military propulsion and power generation. The knowledge and understanding
gains from this investigation allow the US to make more efficient use of energy
resources and to retain its stronghold in the gas turbine sector of the economy.
The success of this new approach to designing turbine airfoils will impact the
$200B electric power generation industry, which requires $20B-30B/year in gas
turbine equipment. The broader impacts include training of graduate students at
two different institutions and their participation in the industrial
collaboration. In addition to the students involved directly with the research,
a number of students will be educated on relevant issues in the gas turbine area
by the Pratt and Whitney industrial team member. The PI's are strongly committed
to increasing participation of underrepresented groups in the US, and Prof.
Karen Thole already has a strong track record in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*co-funded jointly by the Fluid Dynamics
&amp; Hydraulics, Thermal Transport &amp; Thermal Processing programs&lt;br/&gt;