* 0412324
* NSF Institute:  Preparing Virginia's Mathematics Specialist
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2013
* Ena Gross, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 07/31/2013
* USD 4,520,204.00

Title: Preparing Virginia.s Mathematics Specialists &lt;br/&gt;Lead Partner:
Virginia Commonwealth University &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Virginia Commonwealth
University, in conjunction with the Virginia Mathematics and Science Coalition,
two university core partners (Norfolk State University and the University of
Virginia) and 5 school district core partners offers an NSF Institute to prepare
K-5 middle school Mathematics Specialists. Two cohorts of 25 teachers each earn
Masters Degrees in mathematics content and educational leadership, which
encompass the proposed activities specified for licensure as a Mathematics
Specialist by the Virginia Department of Education. Participants are recruited
from participating school systems across the state, representing diverse
populations, based on recommendations from school administrators. The school
system agrees to assign teachers who complete the Masters Degree program to be
licensed as Mathematics Specialists with sufficient non-classroom time to carry
out their responsibilities as specified under the established Virginia
description for Specialist. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Institute features: Four-
week residential sessions in three successive summers (repeated for a second
cohort) with extensive academic year follow-up program; one academic year
distance learning class; and one academic year practicum/project class. Courses
are team-taught by university mathematics and mathematics education faculty
along with school system Master Teachers and Mathematics Supervisors.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of the project responds to the
need to prepare a core of Virginia's first Mathematics Specialists for
assignment in K-5 schools following the Virginia's Department of Education
endorsement of the concept of Mathematics Specialists to lead mathematics
instruction in schools across Virginia. Specialists will be leaders within their
schools assisting colleagues in teaching the mathematics their students need in
preparation for advanced mathematics and science curricula in future years and
leading teacher professional development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Broader
Impacts of this project are reflected in the mathematics interest and
preparation of Virginia's K-5 students resulting in increased mathematics
ability and achievement. The enhanced preparation and motivation enhances
achievement of students in mathematics and science curricula during their
succeeding K-20 studies. The project and its research/ evaluation based
refinements serve as a model for the preparation of Mathematics Specialists,
which will be sustained by partner institutions and adaptable to other Virginia
and national Specialist training programs.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;