* 0412502
* Math in the Middle Institute Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2011
* Jim Lewis, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Hannah M. Sevian
* 07/31/2011
* USD 5,900,000.00

Abstract: 0412502 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Math in the Middle Institute
Partnership ( M2 ) comprising the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln Public
Schools (LPS) and Educational Service Unit (Educational Service Units (ESU) #6,
#7 &amp; #13 and 15 Rural School Districts), creates and sustains a partnership
with the capacity to educate and support teams of outstanding middle level
(Grades 5-8) mathematics teachers (122 total) who will become intellectual
leaders in their schools, districts, and ESUs. Investing in high-quality
teachers, the long-term goal is improving K-12 student achievement in
mathematics and significantly reducing achievement gaps in the mathematical
performance of diverse student populations. The work of the M2 Institute informs
and provides evidence-based contributions to research on learning, teaching, and
teacher professional development. Commitment to rural teachers, schools, and
districts is a focus feature of M2. &lt;br/&gt;Math in the Middle Institute
Partnership ( M 2 )consists of three major components: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i.
The M2 Institute, a multi-year institute offers participants a coherent program
of study to deepen their mathematical knowledge for teaching and to develop
their leadership skills; &lt;br/&gt;ii. Mathematics learning teams develop
collegiality. Teams led by M2 teachers, supported by school administrators and
university faculty, help teachers align their teaching with state standards, and
assist teachers in examining their instructional and assessment practices; and
&lt;br/&gt;iii. A research initiative transforms the M2 Institute and the M2
mathematics learning teams into laboratories for educational improvement and
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The M2 Institute: (1) enriches teachers'
mathematics knowledge; (2) assists them in transferring mathematics knowledge
into their classrooms; and (3) creates communities of professionals (K-12 and
college) who work together as leaders to strengthen middle level mathematics
courses and curricula in the middle level classroom. Strengthened by the
knowledge and leadership skills gained in the M2 Institute, M 2 teachers lead
district and ESU efforts to improve mathematics teaching and learning, creating
mathematics learning teams in which they mentor and coach their peers developing
ways to enhance student achievement. The research agenda generates new evidence-
based knowledge about mathematics teacher professional development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The M 2 Institute becomes a model for
a content-focused professional development Institute producing intellectual
leaders with a deep understanding of the mathematics taught in the middle grades
and the ability to lead school and district efforts greatly increasing student
achievement in mathematics. Learning teams combine the expertise of teachers and
university faculty ensuring that the benefits of the M 2 Institute reach far
beyond the original 122 middle school participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The extensive engagement in teacher
education by faculty and graduate students in a departmental culture supportive
of educational activities sparks further change in the university culture and
develops a generation of mathematicians with a strong commitment to outstanding
teaching, teacher education, and K-12 outreach. Successful models for higher
education faculty working across colleges improving teacher professional
development and pre-service education are developed. Supporting education in
rural schools contributes to a segment of our education community that has been
neglected for too long. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;