* 0412049
* Optimization of Pseudospectra
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Michael Overton, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 384,279.00

Optimization problems involving eigenvalues arise in many applications. In
recent years, attention has focused on semidefinite programs, which are linear
optimization problems in the space of real symmetric matrices, with positive
semidefinite constraints. This project focuses on optimization problems in the
larger space of square matrices, not generally symmetric. In this context, it is
well known that eigenvalues, which provide information about asymptotic behavior
of dynamical systems, are not as useful as pseudospectra, which provide a more
robust measure of system behavior. This project focuses on the computation,
analysis and, especially, numerical optimization of pseudospectral functions. A
secondary goal is to advance the development of algorithms for general
nonsmooth, nonconvex optimization problems.

Applications of this work arise in many contexts. A good example that we have
used is a model of a Boeing 767 at a flutter condition. Flutter occurs when the
plane flies so fast that the interaction of the aerodynamic (wind) forces with
the structural forces in the airplane combine to generate an instability which
could be catastrophic. Normally, a plane like this does not fly so fast but it
is important to know what would happen if it did, and whether a simple
controller could bring the plane under control. Eigenvalues tell us about
stability in the long term, but pseudospectra are far more informative, telling
us about stability in the short term. Optimizing the pseudospectra over the
parameters of the controller may result in the design of a controller that is
simple yet effective in avoiding the instability and preventing catastrophe.