* 0412072
* The Rice University Mathematics Leadership Institute
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* John Polking, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2011
* USD 4,166,679.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three mathematical
sciences departments at Rice University, in partnership with Aldine and Houston
Independent School Districts, are providing the Mathematics Leadership Institute
(MLI) for high school mathematics teachers in the Houston area. MLI is a
collaboration among two ethnically diverse school districts, the Departments of
Mathematics (MATH), Computational and Applied Mathematics (CAAM), and Statistics
(STAT) at Rice University and the Rice University School Mathematics Project
(RUSMP). The MLI is developing a cadre of 80 lead teachers in mathematics and
expanding teachers' knowledge in each of the important mathematics strands that
form the core of the high school mathematics curriculum. Lead teachers on each
high school campus provide mathematics content and pedagogical support for the
entire mathematics department. In addition to developing mathematics teachers
who are able to engage all students in challenging mathematics and ensuring all
students have access to and encouraged to participate in challenging and
advanced mathematics courses, the project is also impacting the instructional
practices of college faculty, post-docs, and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each institute under MLI consists of two four-
week sessions conducted over two consecutive summers and focusing on increasing
teachers' knowledge of mathematics and pedagogy, leadership development, current
research on mathematics education, advances in technology, diversity issues
related to student achievement gaps and retaining and strategies for retaining a
diverse teaching workforce. Lead teachers' academic year activities include
collaborative planning, coaching, demonstration teaching, and co-teaching with
high school mathematics teachers, monthly meetings for the Institute
participants, colloquia, seminars, and opportunities to participate in
discussion groups with mathematics faculty, post-docs and graduate students and
to collaborate on the development of curriculum materials. The Institute also
supports teachers as they prepare for Texas Master Mathematics Certification.
Through their interactions with lead teachers, CAAM, MATH, and STAT faculty,
post-docs, and graduate students are gaining valuable insight into successful
teaching practices that will transfer to their own
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;