* 0412153
* The mechanics of anterior tooth use in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* William Hylander, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 02/28/2006
* USD 23,153.00

The prevalence of tree exudate feeding (e.g., tree gums and saps) or gummivory
among primates suggests that this feeding behavior has significantly influenced
primate evolution. Some gummivorous primate species actively elicit tree exudate
flow by mechanically damaging trees with their anterior teeth. This type of
biting behavior is defined as gouging. This project will record jaw forces and
jaw gapes (or the magnitude of jaw opening) during gouging in the South American
common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus). Anthropologists previously have
hypothesized that tree gouging involves large jaw forces or large jaw gapes
relative to those experienced during chewing and incision. These hypotheses have
been put forth without any attempt to measure the jaw forces or jaw gapes during
gouging. The proposed research will generate novel information about the
possible mechanical effects that gummivory might have on primate skull form and
function. Based on preliminary data, gouging appears to require relatively large
jaw gapes, but not necessarily relatively large jaw forces. This finding
contradicts earlier ideas about this behavior and emphasizes the under-
appreciated significance of jaw gapes in primate biting. &lt;br/&gt; With few
exceptions, in vivo studies of primate jaw and tooth function (i.e., studies of
living animals performing a behavior) have not focused on anterior tooth use or
biting. This shortcoming persists despite several researchers noting the likely
significance of biting for primate morphology and ecology. This proposal is
important because it will be one of the first in vivo studies of jaw mechanics
during a biting behavior in primates and therefore will contribute new insights
into how biting might affect the form and function of primate skulls.
&lt;br/&gt; The in vivo data collected in this project will play a key role in
studying adaptations for gouging in the marmoset head. Using recently collected
field data, the substrates that marmosets gouge in the lab will be made to mimic
the trees that marmosets gouge in the wild. By matching the lab substrates to
wild ones, this project can more realistically study jaw performance during
gouging. This in turn provides improved tests of adaptive hypotheses for this
behavior. Furthermore, the in vivo data are a core reference for comparisons of
skull functional morphology, quantitative genetics of skull form, jaw-muscle
fiber architecture and jaw trabecular structure between marmosets and non-
gouging tamarins. These analyses will provide an extensive characterization of
tree gouging adaptations in marmosets and serve as a model approach for other
anthropologists for combining lab, field and skull morphometric methods in
studying primate adaptations. &lt;br/&gt; Another important goal of this project
involves training students through integrating education and research. The
promotion of student learning and training through active participation will be
emphasized in this project. Because in vivo research skills can only be mastered
through interactive apprenticeship and these opportunities are relatively rare,
this project will provide a significant educational resource for biological
anthropology. Finally, the inclusive project studying skull function and ecology
of tree gouging in marmosets links researchers from U.S. and Brasilian
universities fostering interaction and intellectual exchange between
them.&lt;br/&gt;