* 0412109
* Discovery Corps Postdoctoral Fellowship:     CO2-Based Membrane Technology:    Research, Education, and Outreach
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Geoffrey Bothun, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

Geoffrey D. Bothun, North Carolina A &amp; T, is a Discovery Corps Postdoctoral
Fellow for the 2004-2005 and 2005-2006 academic years. Bothun will pursue his
research interests in membrane-based supercritical fluid separations. He will
also design undergraduate research projects integrated with the "Center for
Environmentally Responsible Solvents and Processes", an NSF-funded Science and
Technology Center based at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. With
these projects, he will initiate and manage a "cascading mentorship program"
aimed at promoting undergraduate research and enhancing the number of NC A&amp;T
students pursing post-graduate degrees. This Discovery Corps Postdoctoral
Fellowship is supported by the Division of Chemistry, the Division of Chemical
Transport Systems and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Corps Fellowship Program is a
pilot program seeking new postdoctoral and professional development models that
combine research expertise with professional service. Discovery Corps Fellows
leverage their research expertise through projects that address areas of
national need. Their projects enhance research capacity and infrastructure and
contribute to workforce development and job creation. The Discovery Corps
Program supports both Postdoctoral Fellows and Senior Fellows.&lt;br/&gt;