* 0412081
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH  Temperature and Nutrient Control of Cyanobacterial Nitrogen Fixation in Subalpine Drainages: a mesocosm Experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2004,11/30/2005
* Wayne Wurtsbaugh, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 11/30/2005
* USD 10,939.00

Nitrogen is an essential nutrient for algae and other aquatic plants. Some
algae, called cyanobacteria, can use nitrogen from the atmosphere in a process
called nitrogen fixation. However, we know very little about where or even if
nitrogen fixation occurs in undisturbed watersheds such as those found in
wilderness areas of the Sawtooth Mountains (ID). In these watersheds,
temperature and nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) concentrations may interact
to control rates and location of nitrogen fixation. Understanding how these
factors control nitrogen fixation is particularly important as global warming
increases water temperatures and human disturbances create water pollution.
During my first three years of research I focused on the location and nutrient
control of nitrogen fixation in Sawtooth Mountain lakes and streams. I now
propose to use stream-side experiments to test how temperature and nutrients
influence nitrogen fixation rates. Cyanobacteria responses will be measured
after 3, 21, and 42 days to examine both short-term and long-term responses to
nutrient and temperature alterations. This experiment will provide insight into
how global warming may affect nitrogen fixation in aquatic ecosystems. As part
of this project, public presentations about the effects of temperature on
aquatic ecosystems will be made at Forest Service campfire lectures and as an
educational web-based poster directed at high-school students.