* 0412696
* BE/GEN-EN Genomic Approaches to Understanding Variation in Marine Larval Recruitment
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Eric Powell, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,887,740.00

Most marine animals have complex life histories, with distinctive larval and
adult phases. Larvae of such species develop for weeks in the plankton, are
microscopic, weakly swimming, easily dispersed by ocean currents, and typically
subject to high mortality, resulting in erratic recruitment to adult
populations. Factors dictating recruitment success and migration or connectivity
among adult populations are major concerns in marine fisheries management,
ecology, and conservation. This research project combines the tools of
physiological genomics and population modeling to investigate the complexity of
biological factors affecting marine recruitment and the non-linear interactions
among these factors. Three hypothesis-driven research activities - gene mapping,
gene-expression analysis, and mathematical population modeling - are each
expected to advance knowledge of the endogenous and exogenous sources of
variation in marine recruitment. Although exogenous factors, such as ocean
currents, temperature, and food availability, have long been studied and are
addressed in this project through computer simulations, endogenous factors, such
as genetic and physiological components of larval fitness, have received little
attention to date. The subject for this project, the Pacific oyster, is poised
for the application of genomic methods for identifying, quantifying, and
modeling endogenous mechanisms controlling the biocomplexity at the heart of the
marine recruitment problem. Genetic variation in key physiological processes,
such as larval growth and resistance to starvation, has been identified, and
genes responsible for this variation will be revealed through comprehensive
gene-expression profiling. Genes regulating physiological processes will also be
located, using available genetic maps and appropriate experimental populations.
Finally, experimental data on endogenous sources of variation in larval fitness
can be synthesized into a biochemically explicit, individual-based model of
larval population dynamics, which permits realistic computer simulations of
recruitment success and population abundance in response to both short-term and
long-term environmental change. Developing genomic tools is vital to
understanding marine animals, whose enormous fecundities make them fundamentally
different from the more familiar and better-studied terrestrial animals. The
overarching scientific significance of the project is the infusion of marine
environmental science with a genomically enabled, Darwinian perspective on
individual differences, adaptation, and evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader scientific impacts of the project are several. First, the project is
cross training graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in fields whose
synthesis is critical to the future of environmental science -genetics,
genomics, physiology, computational biology, and mathematical simulations of
populations. Second, through infrastructure provided by the NSF's West Coast
Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence (COSEE-West), investigators are
using ocean science to enhance the general science and math education of as many
as 2 million K-12 children throughout the greater Los Angeles area. Third, the
project enhances science infrastructure by contributing genetic maps, gene-
expression profiles, and tens of thousands of DNA sequences to public databases
(GenBank), for an ecologically and economically important group of marine
organisms. Finally, the project benefits a large oyster aquaculture industry by
identifying genes or patterns of gene expression that affect larval survival or
predict yield of hatchery 'seed' oysters. Globally, filter-feeding bivalves play
an important role in the ecology of coastal waters and are a prized human food.
Indeed, the Pacific oyster, which has been introduced to all continents but
Antarctica, has had the highest worldwide production of any cultured freshwater
or marine species, since 1998, at about 4 million metric tons per year (worth
$3.4 billion). &lt;br/&gt;