* 0413204
* Variable Compliance Haptic Field Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* J. Edward Colgate, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 08/31/2008
* USD 529,000.00

Prop ID: 0413204&lt;br/&gt; P I: Colgate, J. Edward Organization: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt; Title: Variable Compliance Haptic Field
Displays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
address a novel class of haptic devices: "Haptic Field Displays" (HFDs). HFDs
are large scale arrays of moveable pins or "tactels" covered by a flexible
graphical display. HFD pin arrays will be much like the "tactile arrays" that
have been developed for displaying Braille or virtual environments, but with
some key differences. For instance, HFDs will be full-screen enabling scanning
with the fingertip or using multiple fingers. They will operate not by actively
controlling the displacement or force of each tactel, but by controlling
compliance. The intellectual merit of this research stems from two sets of
studies. The first is a set of psychophysical studies that will provide
quantitative specifications for HFDs including the necessary dynamic range of
tactel compliance and the resolution (or just noticeable difference) of
compliance. These studies will also lead to an initial set of HFD primitives
that naturally encode affordances (such as pushing, sliding or rotating).
Finally, these experiments will assess human operator performance in using HFDs,
especially in spatial localization and analog level-setting tasks. The second
set of studies will address the design and integration of electronically
programmable HFD tactels, each a meso-scale mechatronic system including a
variable compliance mechanism, actuation and sensing. These studies will focus
on the meso-scale realization of two low power "semi-active" approaches:
variable damping achieved by controlling an orifice, and variable compliance
achieved by placing a continuously variable transmission (CVT) between the
fingertip and compliant element. Broader impacts of this research include the
potential to improve the usability of graphical interfaces for normally-abled
populations, as well as increase the accessibility of interfaces for
differently-abled populations such as the elderly, those with low vision, and
those who are blind. In addition, it has the potential to increase safety and
utility in situations where high demands are placed on vision. For instance,
HFDs would allow automobile drivers to focus visual attention on the road while
simultaneously taking advantage of the growing assortment of electronic devices
that may be found in a vehicle. This research will also impact undergraduate and
graduate education at Northwestern more generally: tactel design and control
will be integrated into at least two project-based courses taught by the P.I.s.