* 0413994
* New Methods for Complex Stereocontrolled Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* James White, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2007
* USD 501,000.00

This research program focuses on the discovery and development of synthetic
methods suitable for the synthesis of complex molecular architectures. Five
specific structures embracing unusual structural motifs are targeted.
Cyclization of homoallylic triflates will be exploited in the synthesis of
polycyclopropane-containing structures of the type found in the unusual
antifungal agent FR900848. Coupled intramolecular [2+2] photoaddition/retro-
Mannich fragmentation reactions will produce spiroamines, including the
spiro[6.5]imine forming the core of the pinnatoxins. A new approach to the
hydrindane nucleus through cationic cyclization of ene diynes will be explored,
leading to the fused tetracycle representing the core unit of the marine
metabolite neomangicol A. Synthesis of the unique sesquiterpene ligulaverin A
will test a biogenetic hypothesis involving an unprecedented intramolecular
Diels-Alder reaction. Synthesis of elisabethane-type diterpenoids will be
approached through sequential asymmetric Doetz and intramolecular Diels-Alder
reactions.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research of Professor James D. White, of the Department of Chemistry at
Oregon State University. Professor White will focus his work on the synthesis of
complex organic molecules through novel adaptation and coupling of various
molecular transformations. These studies will develop the tools required for the
synthesis of the complex molecules displaying interesting and important
biological and biochemical activity and will serve as a training ground for the
next generation of synthetic chemists required to prepare such molecules.