* 0413435
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research:Grinding of Polymers and Fiber Reinforced Polymer Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Sherif Elwakil, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 25,500.00

0413435&lt;br/&gt;Elwakil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports cooperative
research between Dr. Sherif Elwakil, Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, Massachusetts and Dr. Nahid Abdelsalam
Azab, Department of Design and Production Engineering, Ain Shams University,
Cairo, Egypt. The PIs seek to modify and validate a previously established
mathematical model that describes the process of grinding polymers and Fiber
Reinforced Polymer composites by carrying out appropriately designed grinding
experiments on a wide spectrum of polymers/composites. This would provide deeper
insights into the process and would also provide a mechanism for optimizing its
parameters, thus making it possible to produce polymeric structural components
having high dimensional accuracy and excellent surface finish. This would help
reducing the clogging of the grinding wheel and excessive vibration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of the proposed work would have a broader
impact on manufacturing. It can lead to eliminating an obstacle that has
prevented the widespread use of polymers and FRP composites for producing
structural components. Currently, metals are used for that purpose because,
contrary to polymers, they can be machined to have high dimensional accuracy and
excellent surface finish. This is particularly crucial when parts are assembled
together based on a specified fit. Accordingly, if the same precision were to be
achieved when machining polymers, these would be an attractive replacement for
metals as the preferred material for structural components because of the cost
advantage. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;