* 0413962
* U.S.-Japan Seminar: Fourth Japan-America Frontiers of Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 03/31/2007
* USD 27,000.00

0413962&lt;br/&gt;Hunziker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of young American engineers in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on
frontiers of engineering to be held in Keihanna, Japan from November 4-6, 2004.
The co-organizers are Professor James G. Fujimoto at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology in Boston and Dr. Kazuhiro Sakurada of the Kyowa Hakko Kogyo
Company in Tokyo, Japan. In an effort to enhance networks among young Japanese
and American engineers and their home institutions, the National Academy of
Engineering (NAE), the Engineering Academy of Japan (EAJ), and the Japan Science
and Technology Agency (JST) are organizing the Fourth Japan-American Frontiers
of Engineering Symposium. This activity is designed to bring together a select
group of young emerging American and Japanese leaders from academia, government
labs and industry to discuss pioneering technical work and leading edge research
in various engineering fields and industry sectors. The goal of the symposium is
to facilitate an interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and methodology that
could eventually lead to collaborative networks of young engineers from the two
countries. About 60 outstanding young engineers, 30 from each country, will
participate in the meeting. The program organizers, consisting of 10
distinguished younger engineers, will organize the symposium and identify topics
and speakers. Sessions will consist of talks by speakers on advances and
opportunities in their engineering fields followed by discussion. Speakers will
focus their talks on cutting-edge research and innovation, keeping in mind that
the audience will be technically sophisticated but
nonspecialists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have complementary
engineering expertise in the field. This enables them to evaluate and attract
the best engineering researchers to participate. The interdisciplinary nature of
the meeting facilitates interactions that would not have occurred otherwise. The
exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in the field will enable U.S.
participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage for future
collaborative projects. Following the seminar the organizers plan to establish a
workshop web page. Conference proceedings will be published on this web site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;