* 0413441
* Systematics and Evolution of Photobacterium, A Clade of Luminous Bacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Paul Dunlap, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2008
* USD 579,610.00

This project seeks to characterize, through DNA sequence analysis, the
evolutionary relationships among members of the bacterial genus Photobacterium.
These bacteria are very common in the world's oceans, colonizing marine animals
as benign skin or intestinal inhabitants, in some cases causing disease, in
others forming beneficial symbiotic associations with the animals based on the
bacterium's luminescence. Despite the worldwide distribution and environmental
importance of this group of bacteria, what distinguishes one kind of
Photobacterium from another, how many different kinds there are, and what
criteria should be used to define a Photobacterium species are unresolved
problems, a situation that is common to all bacterial groups and that impedes
progress in many areas of biomedicine, industry, and basic science. To resolve
these problems, genetically different kinds of Photobacterium, identified by DNA
fingerprinting, will be isolated from marine habitats. From these bacteria,
several genes, chosen for their ability to reveal evolutionary relationships for
members of the group, will be sequenced and the sequences analyzed to
reconstruct their evolutionary history and establish DNA sequence criteria for
defining a Photobacterium species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a
wide scientific impact on understanding the nature and extent of the differences
in DNA sequence that determine whether different bacteria belong to different
species. The sequence information from this project will be made available
through public databases. The project provides training to student participants
in the areas of systematics, microbial biology and symbiosis, and these
scientific themes and specific results from the project will be incorporated
into undergraduate courses taught at the University of Michigan in microbial
biology. More broadly, a publicly accessible web site designed for the general
public, the K-12 classroom environment, and the general science community will
make available information from this project on Photobacterium, emphasizing the
natural history, ecological distributions, and environmental activities of its
different members.&lt;br/&gt;