* 0413401
* Implementing Ice Cloud Microphysics and Radiation Schemes into the Community Atmospheric Model (CAM)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2007
* David Mitchell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2007
* USD 110,272.00

This grant supports research aimed at the improvement of the ice cloud
microphysics and radiation parameterizations in the atmospheric model component
of the Community Climate Systems Model (CCSM), referred to as the CAM. While the
CAM currently assumes a temperature dependent ice particle size distribution
(SD), recent studies show that the temperature dependence of the SD in anvil
cirrus is much different than non-convective cirrus, and earlier estimates of
the concentrations of small ice crystals (D < 100 micrometers) appear
underestimated. Ice particle fall speeds in the CAM are based on Stoke's law and
a linear interpolation scheme, which is not based on our current knowledge of
ice particle fall velocities. The above shortcoming may be largely removed by
using newly developed SD-Temperature parameterizations for anvil and non-
convective cirrus clouds, by utilizing current knowledge of ice particle fall
speeds, and by using a radiation scheme incorporating the modified anomalous
diffraction approximation to treat ice crystal-radiation interactions. This
project will allow these changes to be implemented and tested in the CAM during
two three-month visits to NCAR.

The broader impacts of this work include a potential improvement in CCSM
performance. The CCSM is used by the academic community more than any other
Global Climate Model (GCM) to study the climate system in short- and long-term
simulations. Any improvement in performance would benefit this community. The
representation of clouds and cloud properties in GCMs continues to be the area
producing the greatest uncertainty in GCM climate forecasts due to their role in
the earth's radiation budget. Thus, this research has the potential to improve
climate predictions, which would provide important information for environmental
and economic planning.