* 0413206
* Representationally Complete Analogical - Reasoning Systems and Steps Toward Their Application in Political Science
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Patrick Winston, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 05/31/2008
* USD 446,371.00

This project addresses an aspect of problem solving that is key for both
machines and humans: reasoning by analogy with relevant precedents. The goal of
the proposed research is a computational model of precedent-based analogical
reasoning using a simple but expressive and cognitively plausible suite of
representations that capture knowledge about entities, classes, causes, values,
and motion along real and abstract trajectories. The project's target domain is
political science, where in areas such as intelligence analysis, international
relations, and government policy, experts use this type of case-based reasoning
to analyze, assess, and make recommendations about new situations based on
relevant past experience. The project, which builds on analogy research begun in
the NSF-sponsored Bridge System, will make use of collections of well-documented
political scenarios and analogies that have been analyzed by experts. While this
project focuses primarily on development of a computational theory about
reasoning by analogy from experience, a prototype tool will be built that is
intended to assist analysts charged with evaluating courses of action by
addressing an important aspect of analytical expertise: the ability to detect
unintended consequences with precedential reasoning. This "blunder stopper"
component of the prototype will monitor situations and proposed actions, match
these against a data base of precedents, and, if appropriate, advise the analyst
to examine a relevant precedent for possibilities suggested by the precedent
that might otherwise be overlooked. In addressing a problem of interest to both
computer science and social science, this project will contribute to theories of
precedent-based reasoning in general, and course of action analysis in political
science in particular.