* 0413837
* Dissertation Research: Ethnomedicine of Tanzania in Ecological Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Nina Etkin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2006
* USD 18,218.00

The overwhelming majority of people in developing countries rely on medicinal
plants for primary health care and for the treatment of HIV/AIDS, yet these
plants go without protection, monitoring, or even a comprehension as to the
context or extent of their collection and use. This dissertation research by a
cultural anthropologist will study the circumstances of medicinal plant use and
management in Tanga, Tanzania. Using a specific location with high biological
and cultural diversity as an example, this study utilizes participatory,
ethnographic, and ethnobotanical methods to investigate local ecological
knowledge, beliefs, and behaviors related to natural resource management in
general and to medicinal plants in particular; the cultural, ethnomedical,
economic, and ecological contexts of medicinal plants; the potential ecological
consequences of management by collectors; and the selection criteria used to
identify particular plants for diverse uses. The research will include medicinal
plant market surveys; multiple semi- and unstructured interviews with 3 groups
of medicinal plant collectors including lay, commercial, and specialist
collectors; a local ecological knowledge survey with the same collectors;
careful observation of medicinal plant collecting and management activities; and
an ecological experiment. With assistance from local botanists, the ecological
experiment will test two opposing hypotheses about harvesting and management
impacts on biodiversity: that areas subjected to more harvest are less
biologically diverse (which suggests unsustainable practices), and that areas
subjected to more harvest are more biologically diverse because collectors
promote the growth of individual plants or populations of plants, (which
suggests management is occurring, not mere extraction). The broader impacts of
this research involve strengthening existing links and building new links
between Tanzanian researchers and U.S. researchers, and conveying the research
findings in meaningful and accessible ways to government health planners, NGOs
working in Tanzania, and to the research communities themselves. By privileging
local people and their ecological knowledge, this research will contribute to
the design of culturally appropriate resource management and to the sustainable
use of medicinal plants. The research has the potential to improve both
ecological conservation and human health efforts in Tanzania and to serve as a
model for other regions of the world that rely on medicinal plants for managing
health. This project is cofunded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering.