* 0413291
* Non-Parametric Representations of Motions and Actions in Video
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Robert Pless, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 04/30/2008
* USD 300,000.00

The PI proposes to establish a 3 year program to develop non-parametric
representations of the behaviors and actions of unknown objects in video
sequences. The approach is to use the generative statistical modeling tools of
Pattern Theory to optimize non-linear dimensionality reduction tools to be
applied to natural image sequences. Applications include registration and de-
noising of medical or aerial image data sets, understanding of non-rigid and
deformable motion, and content based video indexing. The intellectual merit
includes formal tools to indicate under what real world conditions techniques
such as Isomap fail. Collaborators whose focus is the study of cardiovascular
MRI data, diagnostic human motion analysis, and the mechanics of head injuries
facilitate explicit testing of these approaches in real and diverse
applications. The broader impacts of this proposal include expanding access to
healthcare by allowing new experimental protocols for MRI imaging studies, and
gives tools that support human motion analysis in unstructured settings.
Extracting general representations from video supports content based indexing
which lies at the heart of the multi-media component of the national digital
library initiative. A web-based portal (Wumap) will serve as a national resource
for automatically generating web-based visualizations of natural patterns and
will have portions designed for young K-12 students.