* 0413852
* Mechanisms And Modeling Of High-Temperature Anisotropic Deformation Of Single Crystal Superalloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Bhaskar Majumdar, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 08/31/2009
* USD 299,584.00

This award by the Division of Materials Research to New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology is to carry out research on superalloys driven by the
desire to increase their high temperature capability thereby enabling higher
efficiency turbine engines. There is also a need for improved life prediction
methodology that considers long-term microstructural stability. The overall goal
of this research is to understand and model the anisotropic deformation behavior
of single crystal nickel-base superalloys that contain a high volume fraction of
gamma prime precipitates embedded coherently in the disordered gamma matrix.
These nanostructured materials exhibit excellent high temperature properties.
There is considerable debate regarding the evolution of internal stresses and
mechanisms of dislocation movement, and their influence on the creep response
and microstructural stability of these alloys. In-situ neutron diffraction
studies to be carried out in collaboration with Los Alamos Neutron Science
Center is to probe the internal elastic strain state in the gamma and gamma
prime phases of single crystal and columnar grain alloys obtained by directional
solidification techniques. Such direct measurements should help confirm or
reject previous hypotheses on deformation mechanisms. The experimental work will
be complemented with modeling of the mechanical response using crystal
plasticity and finite element method modeling (FEM). The nanoscale dimensions of
the gamma require a combination of dislocation and FEM analysis, and the crystal
plasticity method appears to be an efficient means to achieve these objectives.
The motion of dislocations and their resistance to flow is accounted for in the
crystal plasticity component of a user-defined material subroutine; thus,
different types of dislocation interactions and velocity laws can be
incorporated. Another important component of the user subroutine is the
accounting of geometrically necessary dislocations (GND) through strain gradient
plasticity. These dislocations can account for the observed interface
dislocation networks, and preliminary analysis shows that the strain gradient
effect is in direct agreement with a number of observations related to a
"rafting" microstructure observed in these alloys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major intellectual merit of the proposal is a combination of novel experimental
techniques being developed to probe internal stresses at the nanoscale level,
and finite element modeling studies that include crystal plasticity and
evolution of geometrically necessary dislocations. Prediction can be made about
strain rates as well as changes in internal energy that drives the kinetics of
rafting. The broader impact of the program will be in the following areas. At
the scientific level, the methodology will form a framework to understand
nanophase structures, where constrained deformation requires the incorporation
of geometrically necessary dislocations, and where microstructural stability can
be an important issue. At the industrial level, the collaboration with Research
Applications Inc. will aid insertion of the modeling methodology into the
turbine industry. In addition, active interaction with Cannon Muskegon (alloy
developer) and Pratt &amp; Whitney (aircraft engine manufacturer) will directly
benefit both material users and suppliers. Finally, at the educational level,
both graduate and undergraduate students in the program will interact directly
with industry and the national laboratory and prepare them for careers in
science and technology. The infrastructure program in place in the state will
foster nanomaterials research and collaboration among the universities and the
national laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;