* 0413139
* An  energy-efficient  bipedal  walking   robot
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Andy Ruina, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 07/31/2008
* USD 364,000.00

The goal here is to develop a powered bipedal robot that walks in a more human-
looking manner and with smaller energy cost than all previous walking robots
that have similar gross abilities. The geometry of the robot will be loosely
based on human body parts. This robot will generate its life-like motions by
chasing efficiency and simplicity rather than by tracking trajectories. Others
have built beautifully engineered humanoid walking robots with flat feet and
with motions that are carefully controlled to move smoothly, joint by joint and
at every instant in time. These robots typically use about 50 times as much
energy per unit weight and distance as does a person. Ruina's approach will
build on his Cornell lab's recent bipedal robot that has a natural-looking gait
and which uses (scaled) about as much energy as is used by a human. The existent
Cornell robot, based on the `passive dynamic' approach of McGeer, is basically
sticks and hinges arranged in a way that is reminiscent of a human body, and
with a small motor to extend the ankles as each foot leaves the ground. The
robot being developed will add functionality including the ability to stand
still, to start and stop walking, to walk at various speeds, and to turn.
Intellectual merit: The proposed new robot will test the general hypothesis that
robotic human mimicry is well-accomplished by holding energetic efficiency and
control simplicity paramount. Broader impact: Robots serve as a natural vehicle
of science education. As in past years at Cornell, undergraduate students will
be involved in the research. Visiting high-school students are inspired by
visits to the lab. Cooperation with the Science Museum of Minnesota Cyborgs
exhibit will continue as will cooperation with the media. Dissemination of the
should alter the mode of thinking of those involved in the design of robots and
also of those involved in the diagnosis and correction of human walking
disabilities