* 0413728
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Redundant Traffic Encoding and Marking Scheme for Voice-Over-IP Quality-of-Service
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Emad Aboelela, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 29,100.00

0413728&lt;br/&gt;Aboelela&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research between Dr. Emad Aboelela, Department of Computer
and Information Science, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, Massachusetts
and Dr. Nazih El-Derini, Department of Computer Science and Automatic Control,
Faculty of Engineering, University of Alexandria, Alexandria, Egypt. The PIs
will study redundant traffic encoding and marking for Voice over Internet
Protocol Quality -of-Service. (VoIP) enables voice traffic to be carried over an
IP network such as the global Internet. The objectives of the project are: 1. to
identify the aspects that lead to poor voice quality through simulation and real
implementation of VoIP connection between the research lab in the US and its
counterpart in Egypt. 2. to increase the likelihood of a receiver to replace
lost or delayed packets through generating a redundant stream as a duplicate of
the original voice stream. 3. to decrease the overhead of the proposed QoS
scheme through utilizing a low-bit-rate speech encoding technique for the
redundant stream. 4. to decrease the probability that the same speech content
gets lost, or delayed, from both the original and redundant voice streams. 5. to
allow the receiver to reassemble the sent voice stream from either the original
stream or duplicate stream through providing a packet sequencing technique. The
solution is to be implemented mainly at the end hosts and can be supported with
minimal changes to the infrastructure of the Internet. Preliminary experiments
show that the proposed approach has relatively low overhead. In the Internet
community, research and development has been devoted to enforce an acceptable
QoS for the transmission of real-time multimedia streams (including voice), both
at universities and major corporate and government laboratories, but the goal is
still elusive. The QoS schemes can be categorized as resource reservation or
prioritization, possibly along with traffic engineering. The PIs plan an
innovative scheme to improve VoIP quality through applying various speech-
encoding algorithms and utilizing different traffic engineering techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impacts: The growth in IP-based services
has been explosive, and it is projected that this market will continue to grow
at an even higher rate for several years to come. Recent industry trends show
that multimedia holds the potential for a wide range of applications. VoIP
offers the potential to gain competitive advantage through the introduction of
new services and application. The proposed project will create foundations for
future research and collaboration between the research communities as well as
the private sectors in Egypt and the US. The results of the project will be
published in the project website to reach broad audiences in the research,
educational, and private sector communities as well as in scientific journals.
This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these
cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;