* 0413521
* Synthesis and Chemistry of Unusual Valence Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2004,11/30/2007
* Anthony Arduengo, III, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 11/30/2007
* USD 339,500.00

With this new award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports
the work of Professor Anthony J. Arduengo of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa, AL. The research will extend the PI's work
on the organic chemistry of compounds with unusual valence structures. The
primary goals of the research are to prepare exotic new molecules with
interesting and useful properties. The PI has been a pioneer in the development
of carbenes, structures with a divalent carbon, which are stable at room
temperature. These species are both intellectually interesting and important
ligands in organometallic catalysts. A number of stable novel di and tri
carbenes will be synthesized and their complexes with metals investigated. The
ability of these carbenes to coordinate to more than one metal and the
electronic communication between the metals will be subject to investigation.
Stable carbenes with conventional metal coordination ligands will be synthesized
and their ability to coordinate more than one metal in different environments
scrutinized. The principles used to render carbenes stable will be extended to
other reactive species which are normally not sufficiently stable to permit
their isolation. These include molecules containing divalent silicon and
germanium, and divalent positively charged nitrogen. These investigations, which
will involve integration of theory and experiment, will benefit from the
addition of Professor D. A. Dixon, an eminent computational chemist and
collaborator with the PI, to the faculty at the University of Alabama
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With their synthesis of novel metal-containing molecules,
these studies will contribute to the development of new catalysts and
organometallic materials. Since Professor Arduengo holds an adjunct appointment
at the Technical Universitat in Braunschweig, Germany, this research provides an
opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students on these projects to
interact with scientists from German laboratories and spend time in a German
University. Participants in this research will interact with industrial partners
on applications of the technologies that are developed. The research will also
involve a collaboration with Professor Daniel Williams and his group of
undergraduate researchers at Kennesaw State University in Kennesaw,
GA.&lt;br/&gt;