* 0413803
* GOALI:  Comibinatorial Methods and Micro-Scale Characterization Techniques for TBC Optimization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Kevin Hemker, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 08/31/2009
* USD 459,993.00

This GOALI grant from the Division of Materials Research to Johns Hopkins
University is to employ combinatorial methods and micro-scale testing to
elucidate the role of alloy chemistry on the martensite transformation in bond
coats for thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) applied to superalloys. With this
award, Professors Hemker and Zhao will be opening a new paradigm for bond coat
design, and the research will promote the development of experimental tools
needed to advance new materials into a variety of structural applications. This
grant is motivated by the recent discovery of martensite transformation
occurring in thermally cycled, platinum modified, nickel aluminide bond coats.
This transformation has been shown to dramatically influence the performance of
the TBC and is known to be highly dependent on alloy chemistry, which can vary
as a result of element interdiffusion. The use of diffusion multiples provides a
highly efficient means for clarifying the role that stoichiometry and ternary
elements (e.g. Platinum, Chromium, Rhenium, Tungsten, Molybdenium, Tantalum,
Cobalt and Hafnium) will have in governing martensite formation. Targeted thin
film combinatorial samples of specific compositions, determined using diffusion
multiples, are fabricated with inert plasma deposition and characterized with a
suite of novel micro-scale characterization techniques (micro-tensile testing,
nanoindentation, micro-probe spectroscopy, differential thermal analysis, X-ray
diffraction and transmission electron microscopy). The results should provide a
fundamental understanding of the martensite transformation that occurs in TBC
bond coats and thereby provide a science-based protocol for the development of
long lasting, high performance TBC coatings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technological motivation for this research is rooted in the fact that thermal
barrier coatings offer tremendous opportunities for increasing the temperature
capabilities and durability of components in aircraft engines and power
turbines. In addition, the scientific challenges to be addressed, namely the
development of combinatorial methods and novel micro-scale characterization
techniques for assessing the stability, strength and performance of multilayered
coatings, have a much broader application for the development of multicomponent
structural materials. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) collaboration includes closely meshed research activities and
yearly personnel exchanges, and places Johns Hopkins students and faculty in
direct contact with engineers and scientists at the GE Global Research Center.
This broadens the education of the JHU students by providing invaluable
technological and industrial experience. The benefits to GE include the
availability of unique JHU experimental expertise and the ability to focus on
fundamental research in an area that is of high technological interest.
&lt;br/&gt;