* 0413788
* Computational Studies of MHD Accretion Flows
* MPS,AST
* 09/30/2003,08/31/2005
* James Stone, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2005
* USD 130,395.00

AST 0098625&lt;br/&gt;Stone&lt;br/&gt;A wide variety of objects, ranging from
new stars in formation (protostars), to objects which are the cinders of burned
out stars (white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes), to active galactic
nuclei (AGN, such as quasars) are thought to have accretion disks surrounding
them. Inflows of gas from these disks onto the central object seem to account
for some of the most dramatic components of the Universe. They emit prodigious
amounts of power and radiate it over a tremendous swath of the electromagnetic
spectrum (from the mid-infrared to hard X-rays and gamma rays). Our theoretical
understanding of these accretion flows, however, is still limited by the
complexities involved in developing the necessary magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) and
radiation hydrodynam-ics computer models. Our understanding of the local physics
that control such flows has progressed rapidly in the last few years. It is now
important to examine how local processes such as the magnetorotational
instability (MRI) determine global disk structure and evolution, especially
since only global disk models can be directly compared to high spatial-,
spectral-, and time-resolution observations of accretion flows around
protostars, white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes.&lt;br/&gt;Using
computational methods, this project will develop the first time-dependent,
three-dimensional MHD models of the interaction of an accretion disk with a
magnetized and rotating central star. These calculations will allow quantitative
measurement of the mixing rate of the stellar field into the disk, the size of
the interaction region, the time-averaged torque exerted on the star, and the
geometry and kinematics of any polar cap accretion flows that might form. Such
quantities are fundamental to the theory of how magnetized stars interact with
accretion disks, yet to date they have yet to be calculated from first
principles. Direct comparison of the simulations to a large and varied set of
observations will be undertaken, including spectroscopic observations of
magnetospheric funnel flows and accretion shocks in T Tauri stars, and the
observed distribution of the rotation rates in T Tauri stars. Synthetic spectra
of the models will be compared to that observed for accreting black holes at the
center of early type galaxies and the galactic center, while fluctuations in the
mass accretion rate can be compared to X-ray variabil-ity observed by RXTE in
X-ray binaries. These global calculations are the first step towards star-disk
interaction models which span many decades in radius.&lt;br/&gt;The calculations
will all be performed with a variety of 2D and 3D MHD computer codes, using
large allocations of supercomputer time on massively parallel machines at the
national supercomputer centers. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF
program for Extragalactic Astronomy &amp; Cosmology
(AST/EXC).&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;