* 0413601
* IMR:  Acquisition of a Thin Film Deposition System for Organic/Inorganic Materials Research and Educational Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Henry White, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 112,000.00

In the last decade the field of organic electronics has received a tremendous
impetus; performance improvements coupled with the ability to process these
materials at low temperatures over large areas on flexible substrates provide
unique technologies and generate new applications. This award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research Program provides support for the
acquisition of a thin film deposition (TFD) system at the University of
Missouri-Columbia which will be primarily used for the growth of organic films,
organic/hybrid optoelectronic devices, and gold nano-functionalized materials.
The TFD system, while strengthening the materials growth facility within the
physics department, will broaden interdisciplinary cooperation between
departments on campus. The broader impact of the proposal derives from the
introduction of experimental and instrumentation courses both for undergraduate
and graduate physics/materials science students, where the TFD system will be
incorporated as part of the course curriculum. Such hands-on courses will
enhance the quality of education by preparing students for employment in
materials science, biotechnology, and semiconductor based academic research or
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from The Instrumentation for Materials
Research program provides support for the acquisition of a thin film deposition
(TFD) system at the University of Missouri-Columbia which will be primarily used
for the growth of organic films, organic/hybrid optoelectronic devices, and gold
nano-functionalized materials. In particular, the TFD system will allow: (1)
thin film growth of organic polymers and molecules for photophysical studies
(including electronic and vibrational spectroscopy under hydrostatic pressure)
and fabrication of OLEDs, photodetectors and potential spintronics devices; (2)
thin film growth of gold nanoparticle absorbed substrates for application in
biosensors; (3) fabrication of ZnO-based devices. The proposed work on
electronic and vibrational spectroscopy from oriented films and nanofibers of
organic materials will probe structure-property relationships and their
influence on both charge-transport and photophysical properties. Self-assembled
thin films of gold nanoparticles with collagen fibrils provide applications in
tissue regeneration and chip-based biosensors. Further, ZnO-based devices
provide unique opportunities in optical storage and biomedical imaging. The
broader impact of the proposal derives from enhancing the quality of education
by the introduction of hands-on courses for upper-level undergraduate and
graduate students in physics/materials science.