* 0413077
* Scaffolding for Nanotechnology:  Extraordinary IR Transmission of Metal Microarrays for Sensors, Control of Light, and Surface Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Jim Coe, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2008
* USD 382,000.00

Professor James Coe of Ohio State University is supported by the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry Program to develop a fundamental understanding of the
extraordinary transmission effect seen in metal microarrays. First seen by
Ebessen's group in the visible wavelength range, the effect can also be seen in
the infrared (as shown by the PI) by employing arrays with appropriate
dimensions. In addition, stacked arrays are being studied as a way of coupling
infrared spectroscopy with electrochemical/capacitance measurements, an
important application for sensors. The ability of the metal micro-arrays to
record high sensitivity infrared absorbance spectra of surfaces is also being
exploited by the Coe group. A variety of systems are under study, including
alkane thiol monolayers, phospholipid bilayers, DNA and membrane bound proteins.
The questions of interest are phase transitions in the monolayers and bilayers
and the orientation of membrane-bound proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
observation of extraordinary transmission in the infrared is novel, and for
applications such as sensors, the infrared spectral region is much more
promising than the visible-ultraviolet region because of the unique fingerprint
of molecules in the infrared. Thus, in the long run, these devices might serve
as the sensor in combinatorial or arrayed techniques for the rapid, sensitive
and molecule-specific detection of nanotech constructions, DNA and membrane-
bound species. Students working in this are are exposed to combinations of
physical chemistry, bioanalysis as well as surface
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;