* 0413538
* Special Projects (CNS):  National Center for Women and Information Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2011
* Telle Whitney, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2011
* USD 4,127,031.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Special Projects Program - FY04&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNS
0413538 PI's: Robert B. Schnabel, University of Colorado; Lucinda M. Sanders,
University of Colorado; and Telle Whitney, Anita Borg Institute for Women and
Technology&lt;br/&gt;Title: National Center for Women and Information
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad national coalition of leaders from
academia, government, industry, and non-profit organizations has mobilized to
form the National Center for Women and Information Technology (NCWIT), to
address the issue of low participation of women in information technology (IT).
The Center's twenty-year goal is workplace parity: equal participation for women
and men in IT industrial and academic careers. The strategy for meeting this
goal is to embrace and leverage existing efforts within a systemic, broad
approach that: collects, assesses, and aggressively disseminates effective
practices; encompasses the full education and career pipeline; and conducts new
research and develops new programs where most needed, based upon measurement and
data. The University of Colorado at Boulder, in collaboration with the Anita
Borg Institute for Women and Technology, has received a CISE Special Projects
award that will provide a portion of the funding for the NCWIT's infrastructure,
research and application, with an emphasis upon the areas of undergraduate
education, graduate education, and faculty careers, and collaboration with a
broad set of universities through the Center's academic
alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several main projects in the Center will be
conducted with the support of this award. The effective practices in
undergraduate curriculum project will collect approaches for enhancing
undergraduate education in computer science/IT that increase the participation
and success of women, provide additional evaluation where needed, actively
disseminate the most effective approaches, and suggest adjustments to
undergraduate curriculum and educational approaches as appropriate. The
community college pipeline project will determine effective practices for
recruiting women from community colleges to four-year degree programs in
computer science (CS) and IT. The graduate admissions criteria project will
study a cohort of CS graduate students over a multi-year period, exploring their
preparation and qualifications for graduate school and their experiences,
progress and successes. The faculty careers project will research the factors
that help or hinder women attain senior leadership positions in academic CS and
IT departments, and will identify best practices that help women advance to
senior leadership positions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is multi-dimensional. The NCWIT, under the leadership of Dr. Robert
Schnabel, will coordinate activities of scientists in seven organizations,
pulling together their research efforts on women in IT as well as collecting,
evaluating and disseminating best practices. The Center has the potential to
significantly contribute to scholarship in the field of gender equity in IT, as
well as to act as a facilitator for translating the research findings in this
area to practice. Girls and women are participating in information technology
(IT) at very low rates, and the situation is not improving. The broader impact
of NCWIT's activities lies in its potential to increase the number of girls and
women entering and staying in IT.&lt;br/&gt;