* 0413971
* U.S. - Egypt Cooperative Research: Synthesis and Characterization of Novel Nanoparticle Catalysts to Minimize Pollution
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Mohamed Samy El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2009
* USD 34,000.00

0413971&lt;br/&gt;El-Shall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support cooperative research between Dr. M. Samy El-Shall, Department of
Chemistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia and Dr. Nagi R.
Ebrahim, Department of Chemistry, Suez Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt. This
project deals with the development of efficient catalysts based on
nanostructured materials to minimize pollution in the environment. Specifically,
novel catalysts will be developed for the catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide
since even minimal exposure to carbon monoxide can be lethal. The project
combines the laser methods developed at Virginia Commonwealth University in the
USA with the chemical methods developed at Suez Canal University in Egypt, to
synthesize and characterize a new family of efficient nanoparticle catalysts for
the removal of harmful gases and chemical contaminants from the environment. The
work at VCU will deal with the synthesis of nanoparticle catalysts by the laser
vaporization controlled condensation method. The work at Suez Canal University
will deal with the preparation of transition metal catalysts by chemical
methods. The proposed research will result in a better understanding of the
molecular processes and the mechanisms of the reactions involved in
heterogeneous catalysis. The resulting catalysts are expected to provide
efficient means for catalytic oxidation of air contaminants. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broad impact: Successful results will likely initiate new
efforts for a variety of environmental applications involving both the
industrial and commercial sectors in Egypt and the US. The cooperative research
is expected to lead to economic development in both countries. In addition, the
project has broad implications in the education and training of graduate
students and junior scientists in the multi-disciplinary research areas of
catalysis, nanoparticles, environmental chemistry, and materials science. The
proposed research will introduce the new area of research on nanostructure
materials to the Egyptian scientific community. This is expected to open new
fields of research with promising applications in advanced materials, sensors
and devices. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;