* 0413170
* US.-Egypt Cooperative Research : Material Flow Analysis and Integration for Watersheds
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mahmoud El-Halwagi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 30,000.00

0413170&lt;br/&gt;El-Halwagi&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to support
cooperative research between Dr. Mahmoud El-Halwagi, Department of Chemical
Engineering, Texas A&amp;M University, College Station, Texas and Dr. M.K.
Eiwda, Department of Environmental Engineering, Zagazig University, Zagazig,
Egypt. They will develop a systematic and generally applicable methodology for
material flow analysis and integration in drain systems and water sheds. It will
focus on developing a mathematical framework and application for the management
of various metals and pollutants in Bahr El-Baqar drain systems and its outfall
leading to Lake Manzala in the Nile Delta. A material flow model will be
developed dealing with the water phase while including information on the solid
and air phases as they interface with the water medium. The model will include
the environmental phenomena that influence the fate and transport of targeted
species. The model will include material flow analysis operators that
characterize the system inputs and outputs as they relate to the surroundings.
Data for the drain systems (Qalyoubia, Belbies, and Bahr El-Baqar) along with
the outfall to Lake Manzala will be used to illustrate the effectiveness of the
model. Next, mass integration techniques will be employed to aid in the
development of species-management strategies. The simulation model will be
transformed into a synthesis model by introducing optimization variables and
including models for the potential management strategies. The problem of
minimizing negative environmental impact subject to technical, social, economic,
and regulatory constraints will be posed as a nonlinear optimization program
whose solution identifies the most effective solution strategies. The models and
management strategies will be coded into a computer-aided tool-using LINGO
programming platform. The work is based on a novel framework that involves data
extraction and aggregation, system identification, model development and
aggregation, strategy development, and assessment of complex environmental
systems involving watersheds. The models will provide a new platform that can
systematically provide a complete material flow analysis and yield useful
insights on the transport and fate of targeted species. These new techniques
will lay the foundations for fundamental research in the emerging area of
environmental biocomplexity and will result in institutionalizing a new
environmental and systems research program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope and
broader impacts: The project will result in the creation of an active, inter-
disciplinary team of faculty and students working together to address these
complex environmental issues in unique, fundamental, and integrated ways. The
proposed work has significant benefits, both environmental and economic,
including the reduction of environmental discharges, conservation of water
resources, and abatement of pollution. It can also impact growth policies by
providing cost-effective water management strategies. The solutions describe the
role of the various entities in solving the problem and provide a cost-benefit
analysis for the proposed strategies. The approach is generic enough to be
adapted and evolved to study material flow analysis and integration for a wide
variety of systems and pollutants. This project is being supported under the US-
Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in
both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;