* 0413453
* REVSYS: Revisionary Systematics of the North American Scorpion Family Vaejovidae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Lorenzo Prendini, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Scott D. Snyder
* 08/31/2009
* USD 414,578.00

DEB 0413453 REVSYS: Revisionary Systematics of the North American scorpion
family Vaejovidae PI: Lorenzo Prendini, American Museum of Natural History Co-
PI: W. David Sissom, West Texas A&M University

Although comprising a small component of terrestrial arthropod diversity,
scorpions are of considerable interest to scientist and layman alike. Scorpion
envenomation represents a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in some
regions, e.g. Mexico, where 100,000 scorpion stings occur annually and 800
people die as a consequence. Scorpions are among the most ancient arthropods
"derived from aquatic ancestors that lived in the Silurian, more than 400 Mya"
but the morphology of modern species has hardly changed from fossil forms.
Scorpions occur on all continents except Antarctica, from tropical rainforests
to hot deserts, from sea level to 4,600 m elevation, and from the intertidal
zone to the world's deepest caves. They are often abundant in suitable habitat
and important in ecological food webs, e.g. in controlling insect populations.
Scorpions are unusual among arthropods in that all species give birth to live
young and several reproduce without fertilization (parthenogenesis). Scorpions
resemble large vertebrates in their slow reproductive rates and remarkable
longevity. Many are sensitive to environmental degradation. They are also
increasingly threatened by habitat destruction and harvesting for the exotic pet
trade. The small litter sizes, long generation times and low survivorship of
most scorpions, taken together with their specific habitat requirements and
restricted ranges, exacerbates their risk of extinction due to human activities.
Inventorying their diversity and distribution is a priority for their
conservation. Many scorpion families and genera have never been revised
taxonomically and new species and distribution records continue to be
discovered, even in regions previously thought well surveyed. The family
Vaejovidae, restricted to North America, is the most diverse group of scorpions
in the continent, comprising 10 genera (45%) and ca. 150 species (64%), but
double the number of described species may be recognised once all habitats have
been thoroughly surveyed. The position of Vaejovidae within the scorpion branch
of the Tree of Life is unclear, the classification of vaejovid genera is a
shambles, and the keys for identifying vaejovid species are unworkable. This
REVSYS project, involving six US and Mexican specialists, a Mexican Ph.D.
student, US and Mexican undergraduates and K-12 students, will rectify this
situation by undertaking a phylogenetic analysis and taxonomic revision of all
vaejovid genera and species based on morphological and molecular (DNA sequence)
data. Using existing museum material and new material collected during thirteen
fieldtrips to the southwestern US and Mexico, new, automated diagnoses and
descriptions will be produced for each species, accompanied by digital images of
habitus and diagnostic characters, and GIS-produced distribution maps plotting
all known records.

A website with interactive maps and illustrated keys for identification of
vaejovid subfamilies, genera and species, concise taxonomic treatments of each,
cladograms illustrating phylogenetic relationships among them, a searchable
specimen database, and other downloadable products of this research, will be
provided. This revision and phylogeny of the vaejovid radiation will also
contribute to the broader understanding of scorpion phylogeny, the evolution and
speciation of arid-adapted arthropods, and the diversity, biogeography and
conservation of the arid zone in southwestern North America.