* 0413615
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Scarcity and Cooperation? A Social Network Analysis of Two Chilika Lake Communities in Orissa, India
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* J Brosius, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2006
* USD 11,490.00

Population pressures and resource scarcity have led environmental security
theorists to argue that rapid social change may trigger instability and conflict
at the local level. This dissertation research by a cultural anthropologist from
the University of Georgia, will explore how the presence of shrimp aquaculture
in Chilika Lake - a coastal lagoon in Orissa, India - is associated with changes
in access to resources and social changes within the local caste system. By
exploring and comparing social networks in aquaculture and non-aquaculture
sectors of the lake, this dissertation research will look at caste relations to
test the thesis that resource scarcity may lead to greater cooperation at the
local level. Resource scarcity may encourage cooperation because of the vested
interest and competitive advantage that exists in expanding a community's
resource base. Recent and historical changes in community fishing grounds will
be modeled through participatory mapping exercises based on a Geographic
Information System (GIS). Together with available census data, this is expected
to demonstrate a shrinking resource base in the aquaculture sector of the lake.
Social network data will be collected using formal and informal interviewing
techniques. Photo-elicitation and specialized computer software will also be
employed to model and compare personal networks based on caste and subcaste in
both sectors of the lake. An increase in social interaction between members of
different castes in the aquaculture sector of the lake will demonstrate the
erosion of caste prohibitions and the existence of increased
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is that by
testing the notion that human-induced environmental scarcity necessarily leads
to conflict, it will provide a model for policymakers to identify areas that may
be socially segmented and conflict-prone. In addition the project materially
advances the education of a young social scientist. &lt;br/&gt;