* 0413047
* Human Migration in Ancient Mesoamerica
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Jane Buikstra, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 256,369.00

The major question of this research involves migration and human movement in
ancient Mexico. Dr. T. Douglas Price and colleagues from Mexico, the U.S., and
Canada will be investigating evidence for the movement of individuals using
isotopic tracers. We will utilize new techniques involving the chemistry of
prehistoric bone that allow direct evaluation of past human movement. Just as
medical doctors use isotopes to follow pathways in your body, strontium isotopes
in human bones and teeth allow archaeologists to follow past peoples in their
movement across a region. For the first time in the New World, this research
will use a combination of three isotopes (strontium, oxygen, and lead) for
enhanced resolution of migration evidence. This combination should provide
powerful means for identifying both migrants and places of origin.

The principle of the method is straightforward. The isotopes of the environment
of the place of birth are permanently fixed in tooth enamel. Bone, however,
rebuilds itself continuously through a person's life and the isotopes in bone
will represent the environment of the place of death. A different between the
enamel isotopes and the place of death isotopes means that the person must have
moved from one place to another during life. In some cases it is possible to
determine where that person came from. Strontium, lead, and oxygen isotopes
reflect different kinds of information on the geology and climate of the place
of birth. Thus the use of several isotopes in combination will improve our
ability to identify migrants and to search for their place of origin.

In terms of intellectual merit, this project will provide new information on the
nature and scale of human movement in prehispanic Mesoamerica and on
relationships between different peoples and cultures in this region. We hope to
provide insight on the origins of elite, commoners, and sacrificial victims, of
the nature of urban growth, political relationships between major centers, and
the nature of the relationship between Teotihuacan and the rest of Classic
Mesoamerica. The study will also document the application of isotopic methods
for the investigation of human migration. At the same time we are developing new
methods for the proveniencing of prehistoric human remains.

The broader impact of study will be to demonstrate the application of new
scientific methods to old archaeological questions and involve a number of young
scholars in the process. The project is cooperative one among senior scientists,
younger colleagues, and graduate students. This is an international research
project involving scholars from throughout North America. Our work will also
interface with local archaeologists in Guatemala, Belize, and Honduras. The
research will result in at least one PhD dissertation as well as publications in
a variety of journals including Latin American Antiquity and the Journal of
Archaeological Science, among others.

