* 0413933
* 2004 Environmental Bioinorganic Chemistry Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* James Moffett, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2005
* USD 14,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0413933&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon
Research Conference on Environmental Bioinorganic Chemistry is an important
forum that brings together bioinorganic chemists, geochemists, environmental
microbiologists, and industrial researchers to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms of the function, fate, and effect of trace elements in environmental
systems. In this proposal, funds are requested to defray expenses of speakers,
discussion leaders and conference chairs attending the conference, as well as
other attendees on the basis of financial need. Funds will supplement monies
provided by the Gordon Research Conference itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trace
metals are essential for the functioning of organisms and ecosystems and are
also pervasive contaminants, emitted by a variety of industrial sources.
Generally, their importance is associated with their roles in metalloenzymes
that catalyze critical biogeochemical processes, such as nitrogen fixation. The
effects of both essential and toxic metals are also modulated by intracellular
and extracellular metal-binding compounds that control their biological
availability and reactivity. There is increasing recognition that processes
involving these metals must be understood at the molecular level in order to
predict how their geochemical cycles are coupled to ecosystem structure and
function. Moreover, geochemistry often poses severe constraints on cellular
biochemistry, through extremes in temperature and pressure, as well as
exceedingly low concentrations of certain metals that lead to the development of
novel metalloenzymes and metal acquisition strategies. New knowledge about these
processes provides the bioinorganic chemistry community with vast new
opportunities to explore the relationships between coordination environment and
reactivity. The 2004 Gordon Conference will be a very important meeting for the
dissemination of new findings between the geosciences and basic chemistry
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this Conference are
expected to be substantial. The inaugural conference, held in 2002, was an
outstanding success in bridging gaps between fields that are highly
interdependent, but generally do not communicate very well. The Conference has
promoted new and productive collaborations between chemists and environmental
researchers, led to the exchange of graduate students and postdocs between these
disciplines, and it has fostered a diversified and supportive intellectual
community to help young scientists foster their careers. New disciplines provide
opportunities for early-career scientists, affording a special opportunity to
encourage the career development of female scientists. Moreover, participation
of a diverse community of scientists in the conference will be encouraged, and
will be a consideration in decision-making if the conference is over-subscribed.
&lt;br/&gt;