* 0413618
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Bracovirus Evolution: Comparative Analysis of Multiple Proviral and Viral Genomes
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Dawn Gundersen-Rindal, Institute for Genomic Research
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2007
* USD 862,640.00

Endo-parasitoid wasps are used as bio-control agents of agricultural pests as
they lay their eggs in caterpillars. When eggs hatch the wasp larvae feed on the
caterpillar killing it. Parasitoids are extremely diverse and prevalent in
nature and provide excellent models for research. For example, some wasps engage
in a symbiosis with polydnaviruses (PDVs) depicting a novel interdependence
between a virus and its host. Within the wasp, the PDVs exist in a dormant state
as a provirus and virus particles are produced only by female wasps that are co-
injected into caterpillars at the time of laying eggs. PDVs do not replicate in
the infected caterpillars but are needed as they suppress caterpillar immunity
and/or alter its physiology in a manner that favors survival of the parasitoid
wasp larvae. Thus, PDVs are only pathogenic in caterpillars. Their unique life
cycle and critical role in the evolution of the ability of the wasp to
manipulate caterpillar biology have challenged our concepts of the scope of
virus-host interactions. In order to facilitate research on PDVs, viral and/or
proviral sequences will be determined from different wasp species by The
Institute for Genomic Research in collaboration with scientists from the US
Department of Agriculture-Animal Research Services, Kenya, and France. An
important component of the project involves training for students as well as
building capacity of a research institute in Kenya. The sequence data will
provide fundamental knowledge on PDVs to the general scientific community and
this may be used to improve integrated pest management technologies.