* 0413651
* Conference on Submanifolds, Singular Varieties and Stratified Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Sylvain Cappell, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2005
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0413651 Principal Investigator: Sylvain Cappell

This research conference will bring together workers and students in three key
and currently active geometrical areas: singular varieties, submanifolds and
knotting, and stratified spaces. These three areas of topology have historically
enjoyed vigorous and productive scientific interactions, spurring important
innovations through sharing ideas. Moreover, developments and problems in these
subjects in topology are connected to parallel questions in other branches of
geometry, analysis and algebraic geometry, where there are foundational
questions concerning extending "classical" methods from smooth (nonsingular)
settings to more general ones in which singularities can arise. Exciting recent
developments to be discussed at this meeting include investigations on how
singularities of embeddings and immersions in four-dimensional manifolds are
shedding new light on basic questions concerning classification and structure of
four dimensional manifolds; and how such questions also interact with new
approaches to deep invariants of knots and links in three dimensional manifolds
and their cobordisms. Also to be discussed are various theories of
characteristic clases for singular varieties and foundational questions
concerning their definitions, calculational methods, and applications, e.g., to
current developments in transformation groups and to geometrical combinatorics
of polytopes.

This research conference on important, current geometrical approaches to
topology will bring together researchers and students who are investigating some
mathemtically basic, ubiquitous and related topological phenomena from several
different perspectives. These involve spaces, called varieties, that can have
variable geometry at different points. Such variations in geometry, called
singularities, can be analyzed using mathematical theories of knots and links
(in many dimnensions); to elucidate this, such varieties are decomposed into
strata. Because the natural spaces that arise in many research problems in both
mathematics and theoretical physics display such singularities, investigations
of such varieties, of their strata and their singularities, and of related
questions about knots and links are needed. Recent and exciting developments to
be analyzed include relations of such questions to four dimensional geometry, to
the symmetries and invariants of such spaces, and to applications to problems in
enumeration and combinatorics that arise in a very wide range of scientific
problems.