* 0413523
* Heteroepitaxy of 1D Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Jeff Drucker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 328,000.00

This project addresses fundamentals of one dimensional (1D) nanostructure
heteroepitaxy with the aims of 1) understanding and extending the principles of
vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) nanowire growth to vapor-solid-solid (VSS) epitaxy as a
new approach to nanowire synthesis, , and 2) forming new nanoscale
heteroepitaxial structures based on highly strained, defect free nanowire growth
for the rational design of functional architectures. In VLS a liquid metal seed
is used to catalytically direct one dimensional growth, whereas for VSS
nanopatterned solid silicides will be used as the catalytic medium. Solid phase
approaches are expected to greatly extend the range of materials, nanowire
orientations and processing options available. Direct experimental comparison
between VLS and VSS nanowire growth for the model Si/Ge system will be performed
to assess mechanisms and kinetics of 1D growth. A combination of growth
techniques and in situ, real-time observation will be used to study growth
parameters. For example, growth on cylindrical, single crystal Si rods or laser-
textured surfaces will be utilized to determine the orientation dependence of
nanowire epitaxy. A broad range of growth temperatures and pressures will be
used to distinguish nucleation and growth kinetics, and nanowire growth on
patterned metal silicide seeds of varying size will be done to examine scaling
of VSS to nanoscale dimensions. A transmission electron microscope capable of
atomic resolution imaging at disilane and digermane gas pressures of up to 10
Torr and sample temperatures of up to 1000 degrees C will be used for dynamic
characterization of nanowire nucleation and growth by obtaining high contrast
atomic resolution images and detailed elemental maps during real-time in situ
experiments. HREM strain mapping, atomistic elastic modeling, and
photoluminescence studies of tailored architectures will be included in the
study. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in
a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. An
important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area. With many promising uses for semiconducting nanowires
emerging, from sensor arrays to flexible electronics, this research may have
substantial technological impact. Additionally, the PI will collaborate in an
exploratory study of the societal dimensions of ubiquitous sensing with a bio-
ethicist, and a visiting social scientist. Results of both the materials
research and the societal case study will be incorporated into a new course
entitled Nanomaterials being developed by the PI. &lt;br/&gt;***