* 0413740
* SRC  Summer 2004 Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Robert Lund, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert J. Serfling
* 02/28/2005
* USD 10,000.00

ROBERT B. LUND's PROPOSAL # 0413740 - ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
provides travel support for junior researchers and graduate students to attend
the 2004 Summer Research Conference (SRC) in Statistics at Blacksburg, Virginia.
The conference is sponsored jointly by the Southern Regional Council on
Statistics and the American Statistical Association and will be held June 6
through June 9, 2004. Invited session topics include Bayesian methods,
statistical finance, Markov chains, design of experiments, generalized linear
models, functional data analysis, application and case studies, and statistical
education. Participants are exposed to cutting-edge research in statistics as
well as future issues in statistical education and training.&lt;br/&gt;The
primary impact of the conference will be the dissemination of research
information and teaching techniques. For many junior participants, this
conference provides a first exposure to new research topics. Young statisticians
are thus afforded a broad view of current activity within the discipline in a
relatively short time frame and small conference setting. The SRC in 2004
emphasizes a broad set of topics that should be of interest to many general
statisticians. Hence, numerous collaborations are expected to be conceived at
the conference. The 2004 SRC is expected to have approximately 100 participants.
This small scale is expected to enhance interaction during the three-day
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;