* 0413312
* 3d Perception of Specular Surfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Pietro Perona, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 320,000.00

The recovery of the shape of reflective surfaces from images is investigated.
Both the computational foundations as well as human visual perception are
explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key issues on the computational front are : (i)
the geometrical relationship between surface shape and observations of a
reflected scene on the surface; (ii) the nature and role of constraints that
help in reconstructing shape from visual measurements. This second issue is
investigated first under stringent assumptions (calibrated known scene) which
are then lightened progressively (un-calibrated known scene, un-calibrated
unknown scene). The relevance of additional visual measurements (multiple images
from stereoscopic rigs, occluding boundaries, internal boundaries) as well as
the relevance and use of statistical constraints (generic viewpoint assumption,
isotropy, homogeneity) is also explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human perception
of mirror surfaces is little explored and very poorly understood. The first area
of investigation is qualitative shape perception in the presence of an
increasing number of cues (image patch, surface boundaries, reflected scene,
internal boundaries) and with different scene statistics both natural and
synthetic (regular periodic patterns, isotropic textures, indoor scenes, outdoor
scenes). The cues that lead the human visual system to classify surfaces as
specular vs. textured/matte are explored next. A third issue is the relationship
between the mechanisms underlying shape-from-texture and shape-from-
specularities. The proposed research provides: i) methods to measure the shape
of specular surfaces, a notoriously hard problem in computer vision; ii)
fundamental understanding of the geometry and statistics underlying vision of
reflective surfaces; iii) exploration of the value of prior knowledge in a
Bayesian framework; iv) insight into an underexplored ability of the human
visual system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal
include extending the applicability of 3D scanning system to specular surfaces,
which are common in engineering, medicine and art conservation. For this reason
methods that are general, practical and low-cost are of particular interest in
this study.&lt;br/&gt;