* 0413575
* Technician Support  for Stable Isotopic Research Facility (SIRF) at Indiana University
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Lisa Pratt, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2008
* USD 217,014.00

0413575&lt;br/&gt;Ripley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support
a technical position in the Stable Isotope Research Facility (SIRF) at Indiana
University over a three-year period. Duties of the research technician will
include: 1) training of all users of laboratory facilities, 2) maintenance of
mass spectrometers and associated gas preparation systems, 3) development of new
analytical techniques, and 4) analyses of non-routine samples, especially those
produced by laser ablation methods. The SIRF houses four stable isotope ratio
mass spectrometers and a variety of associated on-line sample preparation
devices including a laser fluorination system for sulfur isotopic analyses,
high-temperature combustion furnaces and related gas chromatographic systems for
carbon and hydrogen isotopic analyses, elemental analyzers for sulfur, carbon,
oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen analyses, water-CO2 equilibration and water to
hydrogen conversion devices, and an automated carbonate-CO2 preparation system.
In addition to on-line peripheral systems The SIRF contains several traditional
vacuum extraction systems. These include a CO2 laser fluorination system, a
conventional BrF5 extraction line, SO2 lines for the preparation of large
standard samples for both EA and dual inlet analyses, high- and low-temperature
sequential carbon extraction lines, a system for the extraction of inclusion
fluids and gases, and chromatographic systems for the isolation of various
sulfur species. Technician support is essential to ensure that this lab
continues as a first-rate national center for stable isotopic analyses and
training. Over the past 24 months more than 30 visiting researchers have
utilized the SIRF laboratory facilities. The development of new analytical
techniques, particularly those aimed at reducing sample size, is critical for
advancing our understanding of important earth processes. A dedicated technician
provides invaluable support for faculty and student research, and plays a
pivotal role in the development of analytical skills that are essential for
tomorrow's researchers. The research technician in this position will also
supervise part-time, project specific, laboratory technicians who are supported
through individual research grants (e.g. NSF, NASA,
DOE).&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;