* 0413085
* Quantitative Analysis of 3D Haptic Performance and Perception
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2009
* Ralph Hollis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 10/31/2009
* USD 450,000.00

The project concerns high-performance haptic (sense of touch) interaction with
three-dimensional (3D) computed (virtual) and real environments. The principal
research objective is to quantitatively determine how much reality is achievable
in 3D haptic/visual virtual and remote real environments. The approach is based
on six-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) haptic interaction technology using Lorentz
magnetic levitation. Both proprioceptive (kinesthetic) senses of the fingers,
hand, and wrist as well as the tactile senses in the skin are involved in the
interaction. Lorentz levitation provides higher bandwidths and motion
resolutions than are available with traditional technologies. The project
includes i) adding direct force-torque sensing, combining favorable aspects of
both impedance- and admittance-type devices; ii) the creation of a highly
realistic 3D peg-in-hole virtual environment; iii) development of an elastic
deformation environment with buckling phenomena; iv) comparison of subjects'
interaction with virtual, real, and remote-real environments, and v) performance
of a suite of psychophysical experiments to quantitatively measure the degree of
reality provided. The quantitative characterization of haptic interaction
transparency afforded by this approach contrasts markedly with pure engineering
measurements or purely subjective evaluations. The research results provide
knowledge for the engineering science of haptic interface design while helping
to elucidate the nature of the human haptic interaction process. This could lead
to the future widespread use of haptic technology for computer augmented design,
medical training, telemanipulation and telepresence systems, vehicle piloting
simulation, and the exploration of complex multi-dimensional data sets. The
project has an important educational impact which includes the study of haptics
in undergraduate and graduate course work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;