* 0413985
* Cultural Transmission and Stone Tools: A Study of Early Paleoindian Technology in North America
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Bruce Huckell, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 11,832.00

&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of Dr. Bruce Huckell, Briggs Buchanan will
analyze Early Paleoindian stone tool assemblages from sites throughout North
America. The Early Paleoindian (ca. 11,500-10,500 B.P.) period represents the
initial fluorescence of hunter-gatherer occupation of the New World. Buchanan's
analysis will use the types and style of stone tools to define technological
traditions that will be used to test hypotheses concerning the rate of migration
and adaptation to regional environments and potential routes of colonization or
diffusion across the continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Early Paleoindian
occupation of North America traditionally has been considered as one of rapid
colonization and cultural continuity across the diverse Late Pleistocene/Early
Holocene environments of the New World. Early Paleoindian fluted projectile
points were seen as broadly similar in form and technology across North America,
suggesting a stylistic relationship that represents evidence of a residual
cultural link connecting distant groups from Nova Scotia to Arizona. Current
models, however, emphasize Early Paleoindian regional adaptations, particularly
in diet choice and fluted projectile point distributions, suggesting a greater
time-depth of occupation in the New World and greater cultural separation of
groups living within distinct environmental regions. Buchanan's research
investigates these competing hypotheses through the reconstruction of
technological traditions, the lineages of technological knowledge that is passed
on across generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological traditions are defined
by determining the types of tools within assemblages and stylistic traits on
projectile points and investigated through cultural transmission models. To
explore Early Paleoindian cultural dynamics through technological traditions,
data on geographic distance separating assemblages will be used as a proxy for
diffusion and paleoenvironmental data will be used as a proxy for convergent or
parallel adaptation. The null model assumes that variability relates to distance
in cultural descent. The influence of ancestry on technological traditions will
be tested using cladistics, a method of determining phylogenetic relationships,
and the consistency to which Early Paleoindian technology follows a bifurcating
descent pattern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method of cladistics provides new
avenues for understanding human organization and behavior as well as providing a
new perspective on change and continuity in material culture. The ability to
define and trace cultural lineages in prehistory will have a significant impact
upon archaeology, particularly in cases where cultural migration, diffusion, or
change are difficult to discern in the record. This method may prove to be
invaluable toward the understanding of how human learning systems can be
identified and how cultural transmission functions in simple societies; it
should also provide an important tool for anthropologists working elsewhere with
such problems. This research brings these new perspectives to bear on a
contentious issue of great public interest and scientific importance: the
earliest period of cultural fluorescence in the New World. Defining the pattern
of Early Paleoindian cultural relationships in the initial widespread occupation
of North America addresses a topic of global interest in human evolution. The
results of this research will help unravel questions concerning the adaptive
processes of the last major human migration of a previously uninhabited
continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also assist in training a
promising young scientist.&lt;br/&gt;