* 0413795
* Glucagon-Mediated Ccontrol of Proliferation and Differentiation of Retinal Progenitors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Andy Fischer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 07/31/2008
* USD 360,000.00

Grant # 0413795

Glucagon-mediated control of proliferation and differentiation of retinal
progenitors

Summary Retinal stem cells and their ability to regenerate the retina have been
well-characterized in cold-blooded vertebrates. Recently, the identification of
neural stem cells within the eyes of warm-blooded vertebrates has raised the
possibility of retinal regeneration in humans. Dr. Fischer has recently
identified a zone of neural progenitors at the retinal margin of the chicken eye
that is similar to that found in frogs and fish. He proposes to study the
effects of the secreted factor glucagon on the proliferation and differentiation
of neural progenitors in the embryonic and postnatal chicken retina. Glucagon is
best known as a physiological antagonist to insulin in regulating serum glucose
levels. He has previously demonstrated that insulin and IGF-I stimulate the
proliferation of progenitors at the retinal margin. Interestingly, preliminary
data indicates that the dendrites of glucagon-containing amacrine cells within
the retina are heavily clustered in the zone of progenitors at the retinal
margin. In addition, preliminary data suggest that glucagon suppresses the
proliferation of neural progenitors at the retinal margin in opposition to the
effects of insulin; a striking parallel to the opposing roles of these factors
in blood-glucose homeostasis. The experiments outlined in this proposal aim to
identify the mechanisms by which glucagon regulates the proliferation and
differentiation of neural progenitors in the developing embryonic retina and at
the retinal margin of the postnatal chicken. These findings would ascribe a new
function for glucagon and for the first time implicate glucagon as a secreted
factor that regulates the development of the central nervous system. An
understanding of the factors and mechanisms that control the proliferation and
differentiation of retinal progenitors could provide a basis by which to
stimulate retinal regeneration from stem cells. Knowledge gained from studies on
retinal stem cells in the chicken could be applied to rational therapies for
sight-threatening disorders of the human retina.

