* 0413215
* Symmetry-based Representation of 2D and 3D shapes and images for category-level recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Benjamin Kimia, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 11/30/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This project investigates the development and use of 2D and 3D shape and image
representations for category-level recognition, as organized in four closely
related streams. First, low-distortion embeddings of the shape space that
capture both its local topology and its high order structure will be
investigated for efficient and practical indexing in a database of several tens
of thousands of shapes. Query search will then be guided in the embedding space
via hierarchically structured categories motivated by cognitive science notions.
Second, a novel free-form deformable template will be developed by constructing
a parametric space for generating shapes constrained to have a given shock-graph
topology and by sampling this space with a low-dimensional dense and complete
approximation. This will lead to a formal complete language for describing shape
via symmetry representations and has fundamental implications in a number of
areas including segmentation, shape averaging, and !&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;shape
design. Third, viewing symmetry-based representations primarily as the joint
representation of the spatial configuration of pairs of features, a formal and
complete symmetry-based representation of images will be developed based on a
partitioning of the image into patches called "visual fragments". The proposed
advantage of the visual fragments is that they allow for perceptual grouping
based on both boundary and regional attributes, and also for top-down feedback
from partially recognized portions of the grouping. Fourth, in a track parallel
to investigations of 2D shape representations, the local form and transitions of
the graph-structured shock scaffold as a representation of 3D shape will be
explored. Two graph matching techniques, graduated assignment and edit distance,
will be investigated for indexing into 3D shape models and applied to a large
database of 3D shapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research
activity spans a number of areas, such as tracking and recognition of vehicles
for surveillance, homeland security, and defense applications, generation of
computational atlases and registration of datasets in medical imaging, fragment
assembly and integration of multiple range datasets in archaeology, virtual
sculpting in visual arts, signature and fingerprint recognition in biometric
identification, indexing into large databases by shape content, key frame
animation for entertainment applications, among others. The concepts developed
here are also of interest for both modeling shape perception and cortical
activity as related to shape recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;