* 0413723
* USA-South Africa Collaborative Research Workshop on Emerging Manufacturing Technologies, October 4-8, 2004, held in South Africa
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2008
* James Mayor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 12/31/2008
* USD 67,500.00

This award is co-funded by the Division of Design, Manufacturing and Industrial
Innovation and the Office of International Science and Engineering. This award
supports a workshop focused on the development of strong collaborative research
and education programs between leading USA and South African research
institutions in the area of the research, development and education of advanced
emerging manufacturing concepts and technologies. A strong delegation of US
researchers and leaders in the manufacturing community, currently engaged in
emerging manufacturing research, will attend and participate in the
collaborative research workshop. The proposed timeframe for the workshop is
October 4-8, 2004, and will be held in South Africa at targeted venues
identified by the workshop planning committee comprised of South African (host)
counter-PI's and the Co-PIs of this proposal. The proposed timing of the
workshop has been carefully positioned for leveraging the maximum opportunity
for constructive academic exchange, networking and the development of strong
research partnership between prominent SA researchers and the members of the US
delegation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core workshop objective will be the
development of specific agenda for collaborative research and education programs
in emerging manufacturing areas, identified as a result of the workshop, that
will take full advantage of the many, diverse opportunities provided through
international collaboration. Immediate outcomes from the workshop will include a
workshop report providing recommendations and opportunities for collaborative
research with SA research organizations that will be presented to the NSF and
disseminated through the manufacturing research community via regular channels
provided by professional organizations, including the Society of Manufacturing
Engineers (SME), and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;