* 0413885
* Dissertation Research: Gender Ideology and Practice: Comparing Experiences of Alternative Modernities among Women in Cairo, Egypt
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Roy D'Andrade, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Religious revitalization movements tend to arise in contexts of social and
religious pluralism, cultural change and moral uncertainty. The social climate
in the Middle East in general, and in urban Egypt in particular, has many of
these characteristics. In modern-day Cairo, citizens encounter multiple and
competing messages about what forms of interaction, comportment and dress are
morally and socially appropriate. Traditional Egyptian conceptions of family,
work, gender relations, and public behavior come up against the conflicting
beliefs and norms of alternative (Western, Islamist and feminist) ideologies.
This dissertation research by a psychological anthropologist from the University
of California at San Diego examines the social and psychological worlds of two
groups of women living in Cairo today: participants in the modern Islamic
revival and members of a secular feminist group. It explores women's motivations
to join one movement or the other, the benefits and drawbacks of that
participation, and the adaptations women employ in dealing with ideological and
practical stresses within each system. Through participant observation; use of
cultural and religious media; social, health and psychological surveys; and
intensive (person-centered) interviews, the project seeks to understand the
competing cultural, political and religious ideologies and their impact on
women's perceived roles, behavior and psychological experience. It will examine
the ways in which contradictions and ambiguities within modern social movements
may simultaneously assuage and create new tensions for participants. The
research will contribute to diverse areas of anthropological inquiry including
gender, modernity and psychocultural adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the study is in its contribution to the education of a young social
scientist; in addition the advance in our knowledge of contemporary Islamic
society will be of broad interest to the public and to decision makers.
&lt;br/&gt;