* 0413381
* The Statistical Analysis of Bargaining
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Kristopher Ramsay, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Game theory has proven to be a useful tool for understanding the logic of
bargaining when actors have conflicting interests. Bargaining models have been
applied by political scientists to analyze everything from the effects of open
and closed rules on the distributive politics of legislative appropriation to
the study of war initiation and termination. In contrast to the theoretical
advances, the quantitative analysis of bargaining has progressed at a much
slower rate. Typically, scholars analyzing bargaining data employ "off-the-the-
shelf" OLS, FGLS, or Tobit models. However, Signorino's previous research on the
empirical analysis of strategic behavior showed that for inferences to be
correct, the statistical estimator must be structurally consistent with the
hypothesized theoretical process. In fact, the Principal Investigator
demonstrates in the current project that the above statistical models are
structurally inconsistent with respect to bargaining behavior. Signorino's
previous research dealt with strategic discrete choice models. Yet, in many
important contexts - e.g., bargaining involving territory, policy, or money -
the choice set available to actors is better represented as continuous, rather
than discrete. Therefore, new statistical models&lt;br/&gt;and estimation
techniques must be developed in order to analyze bargaining data.&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator has already made substantial progress in this area. However, much
remains to be done.&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research project are the
following:&lt;br/&gt;o Create statistical techniques for analyzing ultimatum
bargaining games, such as the divide the-dollar game and the Romer-Rosenthal
agenda setting models; and, create statistical techniques for analyzing
axiomatic bargaining models.&lt;br/&gt;o Use these models to analyze existing
data (which they already have) on&lt;br/&gt;1. Bargaining in territorial
disputes and in international political economy.&lt;br/&gt;2. Bargaining in
Congressional politics.&lt;br/&gt;3. Bargaining in society,
including&lt;br/&gt;(a) Among Indians of the Amazon.&lt;br/&gt;(b) Among U.S.
citizens and Russian citizens.&lt;br/&gt;o Incorporate these new estimators into
STRAT, a program for estimating statistical strategic models, and produce
modules for the techniques in STATA and in R.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. This research has the potential to influence multiple subfields of
Political&lt;br/&gt;Science, as well as Economics and Anthropology. The research
effort will also assist in graduate training, since graduate students will
provide research assistance. The research will be presented in class lectures,
seminars, and at conferences. Finally, the results of this research will be made
publicly available not only through research publications, but also as part of
statistical software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;