* 0413623
* Femtosecond Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering for Time-Resolved Measurements of Temperature and Species Concentrations in Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Robert Lucht, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 01/31/2009
* USD 259,999.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT: Femtosecond Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering for Time-
Resolved Measurements of Temperature and Species Concentration in Flames Robert
P. Lucht and Xianfan Xu School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, W.
Lafayette, IN 47907-2088

The primary objective of the proposed work is the development and application of
ultrafast-laser-based coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) techniques
for single-shot measurements of temperature and species concentrations at data
rates of 1 kHz or greater. The acquisition of fully time-resolved data from
turbulent media will provide more rigorous and meaningful tests of turbulent
flame models, leading eventually to combustors that are more efficient and have
lower levels of pollutant emission. The 1-kHz data rate of the measurements will
be a great advantage during testing of practical combustors, especially when the
test duration is limited by facility considerations. The work represents a first
step toward enabling femtosecond CARS based sensors for energy and environment
applications. The proposed research will provide excellent training for graduate
students in mechanical engineering. The femtosecond (fsec) CARS project will
provide numerous opportunities for multidisciplinary activities for mechanical
engineering graduate students, because operation of the fsec laser systems
requires considerable expertise in optical physics and electronics. The subjects
of fsec laser systems and fsec laser physics will be incorporated in a graduate
class on advanced laser diagnostics. Students from underrepresented groups will
be actively recruited for this research, at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels. To assist in undergraduate and graduate recruitment, a fsec CARS project
web site will be created. The femtosecond CARS measurements will be performed
using an existing laser facility at Purdue University; laser pulses at 780 nm
with a nominal pulse length of 80 fsec can be generated with pulse energies in
excess of 1 mJ at a repetition rate of 1 kHz. Pump and probe pulses will be
produced using an optical parametric amplifier. To measure temperature and/or
species concentrations at data rates of 1 kHz or greater, a chirped-pulse probe
beam with a pulse length of 2-3 psec will be used to map the temporal behavior
of the Raman coherence onto the frequency spectrum of the CARS signal. The CARS
signal will be dispersed using a spectrometer and detected using a back-
illuminated electron multiplying CCD (EMCCD). This EMCCD camera has been
developed as a frame transfer camera and CARS spectra can be extracted at data
rates of 1 kHz or greater. Unique numerical methods for calculation of the fsec
CARS signal generation process will be used to both explore the physics of the
fsec CARS process, including the details of the interaction of the pump and
Stokes beams to create the Raman coherence, and to develop computer codes for
determination of temperatures and species concentrations from experimental data.

