* 0413284
* Understanding Image-feature and Decision-procedure Choice for Human Face Detection
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* J. Ross Beveridge, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2008
* USD 160,000.00

Understanding Image-feature and Decision-procedure Choice for Human Face
Detection&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal
0413284&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Face
detection algorithms have improved significantly in the last five years, in part
because of a shift away from handcrafted systems to supervised learning systems
that discover effective feature combinations from large amounts of training
data. This broad characterization covers three prominent algorithms: the Viola
and Jones Ada Boost algorithm, the statistical model approach of Schneiderman,
and the SNoW algorithm of Yang et al. However, beyond this broad
characterization, these algorithms differ greatly in detail. In particular, they
use different image-features and different decision-procedures for determining
whether a face is present. Why do these very different algorithms all perform
relatively well, and how do the image-feature and decision-procedure choices
implicit in these algorithms interact? This study will reveal the underlying
fundamentals of these three approaches and others by establishing a common
framework for combining and comparing image-feature extraction and decision-
procedures. Empirical advances will be made in characterizing face detection
tasks in an algorithm independent fashion critical to the development of better
face detection algorithms. The practical impact of this research is two-fold.
New open source versions of three prominent face detection algorithms will be
developed and integrated into the current CSU Face Identification Evaluation
System. Downloads of the current system exceeded 7,000 in November 2004, and the
inclusion of face detection will enhance this tool. More broadly, better, more
reliable face detection is a key stepping stone to better face recognition.
Competent, reliable face recognition is highly valuable for many applications
such as security. However, the practical value of good face recognition
transcends security applications -- computers are more likely to interact
helpfully with people they can
recognize.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;