* 0413961
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Synthesis of Nanocrystalline Sensing Oxides
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Hendrik Verweij, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0413961 Verweij

Description: This award is to support a cooperative research project between Dr.
Hendrik Verweij, Department of Materials Sciences and Engineering, Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio and Dr. Emad El-Meliegy, Department of Ceramics,
National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. They aim to synthesize nanocrystalline
gas sensing oxide, particularly doped titanium oxides via sol-gel route. The
morphology and microstructure of oxides will be controlled to suit their use as
a sensor for internal combustion engine exhaust gases. The sensing oxides will
be used to determine the air/fuel ratio or the oxygen/unburned or partially
burned hydrocarbon ratio in the exhaust emissions in order to improve the
automobile efficiency. The synthesized nanocrystalline sensing oxides are
expected to be on the order of 1-100 nm. They are expected to be of high purity
and agglomerate free with narrow to uniform particle size distribution and can
be sintered to ideal compact with uniform three-dimensional structure. The
investigators plan to address problems in traditional sensors that occur as a
result of the severe conditions in the internal combustion engine exhaust gases,
such as chemical stability, mechanical shock, and cracking. Also, the problems
that arise during the synthesis of nanocrystalline sensing oxides, such as high
costs, low yield, lack of morphology control (grain size, shape and size
distribution), purity of nanopowders, powder agglomeration and environmental
safety, will be addressed to optimize synthesis conditions. Essential sensor
performance parameters such as stability, sensitivity, and selectivity are
expected to be greatly improved by the use of the nanocrystalline sensing oxides
with novel characteristics in sensors construction. This research will address
the need for synthesis of nanocrystalline sensing oxides and the need for
further detailed analysis of the morphology, microstructure and chemistry of
these oxides.

Scope and broad impact: The project is expected to lead to sensing devices that
will help the automobile industry cut air pollution emissions from automobiles.
It is expected that more stable and less expensive sensors for air and other
gases will be developed which can be used for similar applications. This project
is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.