* 0413616
* Investigation of the Roles of Strain Rate and Twinning in the High Ductility of B2 Intermetallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* L. Scott Chumbley, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 280,000.00

This award by the Division of Materials Research to Iowa State University is to
test two theories that attempt to explain the high ductility of the RM
intermetallics, where R is a rare earth metal and M is a metal from Groups 2,
8-13. The chemical, physical, magnetic, and mechanical properties of
intermetallic compounds are often superior to those of other metals, but
enormous potential of intermetallics to improve engineering performance remains
underutilized because they are brittle and fracture easily at room temperature.
Recently there has been the discovery of high ductility and high fracture
toughness at room temperature in fully ordered, stoichiometric B2 intermetallic
RM compounds, This research project explores two theories that might explain the
high ductility of the RM intermetallic compounds. One theory attributes the high
ductility to grain boundary effects. Arc-melted and hot rolled RM alloys studied
to date form with average grain sizes of about 0.2 mm. Strain rate sensitivity
will be measured by tensile "jump tests" to determine whether phenomena such as
grain boundary sliding contribute to the ductility. Tensile tests will be
performed at cryogenic and elevated temperatures. The second theory attributes
the high ductility to twinning effects. Preliminary studies show indications of
twinning in single crystal RM intermetallics. Transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) of deformed RM specimens will be used to search for twins. If twins are
found, TEM will determine twinning planes and shear directions. These findings
will either support or refute each of the two theories. With the basic mechanism
of ductility established, the performance of new RM intermetallics can then be
hypothesized, guiding future alloy development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
approximately 130 RM intermetallics prepared from a rare earth metal R and a
metal (M) from Groups 2, 8-13, and some of these intermetallics have potential
use in engineering structural applications. A few RM intermetallics have low
densities or possess high oxidation resistance, suggesting possible applications
in aerospace structures and turbomachinery. Other RM intermetallics have
interesting magnetic and magnetocaloric behavior. Room temperature ductility and
high fracture toughness would aid fabrication of these alloys and improve
performance. However, the greatest value of studying the RM compounds could lie
in advancing the understanding of the factors facilitating their plasticity.
Insights gained from this study will be helpful in guiding future efforts to
improve the ductility of other intermetallic compounds. The research involves
both graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;