* 0413709
* Dynamic Generation of Individualized Digital Learning Materials for Learners with Disabilities through Automatic Analysis of Pedagogic Intent Semantics and Learner Requirements
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Chris Wilder-Smith, CAST, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 641,740.00

Print-based textbooks and educational materials supporting the general
curriculum present an accessibility barrier for many students, especially those
with disabilities. Digital curricular materials and technology-based learning
environments provide alternatives by presenting the same content as printed
materials, but in formats that are flexible and accessible. In order provide
students with appropriately customized learning experiences in a timely fashion
and at scale, automatic generation of adapted content is
essential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces the concept of a
pedagogical intent ontology to drive the semantic annotation of XML-based
digital educational content. The formal description of the pedagogical semantics
of individual chunks of educational content and the relationships among those
chunks of content, together with a student model, will drive the selection,
sequencing, layout and presentation of educational content. The project will
develop foundational knowledge and infrastructure components including (1) a
pedagogical intent ontology, (2) semantic annotation schemes, (3) an
architecture for automated, rule-based adaptation of content, (4) introduction
of new models of curriculum design, and (5) research results to shape and
justify the adoption of new approaches to, and standards for, the design of
educational materials by the publishing community, such as the National
Instructional Materials Accessibility Standard.&lt;br/&gt;