* 0413463
* Composition Patterns in Nucleotide Sequences
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Gary Benson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 06/30/2004
* USD 86,623.00

PI: Gary Benson Proposal Number: 0073081 Institution: Mt. Sinai School of
Medicine

Project Summary

This project is an investigation of computational problems that arise for a new
type of discrete pattern in DNA sequences, the composition pattern. Composition
is a vector quantity describing the frequency of occurrence of each alphabet
letter in a particular string. Let S be a string over E.Then, C (S) =(f1; f2; pH
j _ j) is the composition of S, wherefore 2 _, fi is the fraction of the
characters in S that are i. A composition pattern is a string P = r1r2 _ _ _ rp,
where RI represents a composition region i.e. a substring of homogenous
composition which differs from that of its surrounding regions. Note that the
order of letters in RI is irrelevant, as it has no effect on the composition of
RI. To date, algorithms which characterize DNA functional sites have
concentrated primarily on identifying what this proposal terms position-specific
patterns, such as the consensus sequence or the more flexible, but less specific
weight matrix based pattern profile. Unfortunately, position-specific patterns
are usually not selective enough to distinguish actual occurrences of a feature
from false positives. Too often, when these patterns are used to search for
unknown matches, one to several orders of magnitude more false positives than
true positives are obtained. The composition pattern is a new approach which
embraces an important physical property, the potential for variation in
structural conformation (shape) of the DNA double helix, yet does so in the
context of a type of discrete pattern which has apparently not been previously
explored by the algorithmic community. DNA crystallization studies support the
idea that certain dinucleotides base-steps confer specific types of flexibility.
Further evidence is provided by studies of intrinsically curved and `kinkable'
DNA. Based on these observations, it is suggested here that for conformational
flexibility, the order of nucleotides in a sequence may be less important than
the effect, which certain nucleotide or dinucleotide base-step biases impart on
the sequence as a whole. In support of this assertion is an accumulating body of
evidence of important DNA features whose unifying characteristic is composition
bias rather than position-specific information. This research project
encompasses algorithm development for three related problem areas which form the
basis for understanding the functional importance of composition variation in
nucleotide sequences and the detection of composition patterns. These areas are:

Pattern matching. A composition pattern and sequence are given. Find all
occurrences of the pattern in the sequence. Occurrences may be exact or
approximate.

Pattern detection. A sequence or set of sequences is given. Find all recurring
composition patterns. Occurrences may be exact or approximate. The patterns are
not specified or only partially specified Sequence segmentation. A sequence is
given. Partition it into statistically distinct regions of homogenous
composition. These problems have theoretical interest in their own right,
independent of biology and have received almost no attention from the
algorithmic community.