* 0413529
* Medium-Lift, Fixed-Wing Flight Services to Support National Science Foundation Polar Research Programs
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Stephen Penikett, KENN BOREK AIR LTD
* Contract
* Paul Sheppard
* 02/28/2007
* USD 1.00

Through a competitive bidding process managed and coordinated by the Division of
Acquisition and Cost Support (DACS), Kenn Borek Air Ltd. (KBA) of Calgary,
Canada has been selected as the provider of medium lift, fixed-wing flight
services to the NSF Office of Polar Programs. KBA will operate a fleet of up to
three twin otter aircraft from McMurdo Station, Antarctica and remote locations
in the Antarctic from October to February of each year. The base contract is for
two aircraft - one utility and one "science" aircraft - the latter being capable
of supporting a variety of airborne remote sensing applications when required.
This contract also contains provisions for the addition of a third utility
aircraft, if required, in support of NASA-sponsored meteorite collection
activities. The contract also contains negotiated pricing, on a call-purchase
basis, for the provision of utility or science aircraft for use in the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The value of the contract is estimated at a not-to-
exceed level of $13,957,050 over an approximately seven-year period consisting
of three years base award with four one-year option
periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Interior, National Business
Center, Aviation Management Division, through a memorandum of understanding with
the National Science Foundation, Office of Polar Programs, provides support for
aviation-related activities in support of United States Antarctic Program (USAP)
activities in Antarctica and will manage and administer this contract on behalf
of NSF. All subsequent funding actions against this award will be made through
the Department of Interior Award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
nominal award of $1 is to: 1) bind the contract with KBA, and 2) establish the
contract in the NSF financial accounting system for purposes of future awards
that will be made over the period of performance of the
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;