* 0413161
* Incorporating Prior Domain Knowledge into a Support Vector Machine Classifier with Explanation-Based Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Gerald DeJong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 07/31/2008
* USD 342,101.00

This project addresses a central problem in machine learning: Can background
knowledge, even though approximate and imperfect, improve learning accuracy and
efficiency? This project combines inductive learning using Support Vector
Machines (SVMs) with a new variant of explanation-based learning (EBL).
Recognizing handwritten Chinese characters is the test domain. A limited
training set is augmented with background knowledge of pen strokes: how they
generate characters and how they can result in image pixels. EBL and SVMs are
combined in two ways: (1) "phantom examples" are generated to enable learning
with fewer input examples, and (2) EBL is used to generate new kernel functions
for the SVM. The expected scientific advances include machine recognition of
pictogram characters, concept learning in domains where training examples are
scarce, and explanation-based learning with imperfect domain theories. Potential
broader impacts include more automated preservation and dissemination of
historical Chinese texts through the production of clean machine-readable copies
and easier application of conventional machine translation systems to pictogram
languages without the stumbling block of image input; automatic processing of
pictogram and other line-drawing input may in turn enable new computer-based
educational applications and opportunities. Integrating prior knowledge and
inductive machine learning may lead to more cognitively plausible algorithms
utilizing training experiences of a more human scale.