* 0413982
* Quantitative Analysis of Viral mRNA Translation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2009
* USD 682,074.00

Plant viral diseases affect a significant number of food crops world-wide and
can have severe impact both on economic conditions and food supply. Protein
synthesis is a key step in viral infection yet is not well understood. This
research will increase our understanding of plant viral protein synthesis and
how this important biochemical process can be regulated. Structural information
about IRES and initiation factors is providing information about the complexes
formed. However, quantitative data are necessary to determine how initiation
factors compete for different mRNA sites, the formation of intermediates, and
the kinetic and thermodynamic stability of complexes. This research will utilize
fluorescence spectroscopy, stopped-flow kinetics and circular dichroism to
determine the role of individual initiation factors in plant viral mRNA internal
initiation, the interaction of these factors with each other and known IRES
elements, and how these factors modify mRNA structure. These data will be used
to determine a model for selection of mRNA under various physiologic conditions.
Quantitative information and determination of the cooperativity of interactions
will yield detailed information on the assembly of the 48S initiation complex
and binding to viral IRES. This information can potentially be used to shut off
viral protein synthesis either through genetic engineering or biochemical
agents. Further, viral protein synthesis in general is simpler than host cell
protein synthesis so there is potential to use the information from this
research to develop systems to produce desired proteins which are nutritionally
beneficial, antibodies, or have other economic uses.