* 0413936
* Modulation of Transmitter Release
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Robert Zucker, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 07/31/2008
* USD 564,000.00

Lay Summary

NSF Grant 0413936 Neural and Glial Mechanisms Program Division of Integrative
Biology and Neuroscience Directorate for Biological Sciences

Synapses are the points of information transfer between neurons and their
targets. Synaptic transmission is regulated by neuromodulators and prior
activity. This synaptic modifiability greatly increases the complexity of
information processing at synapses, it underlies the adaptability of the nervous
system to changing circumstances, and it is responsible for its ability to
learn. Crayfish neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) are used to study the effects of
prior activity and extrinsic modulation. This preparation offers many
advantages, including ready availability and minimal cost, easy preparation, and
suitability for electrophysiological recording, and physiological and
biochemical properties identical to those of mammalian brain synapses Serotonin
is a circulating hormone that regulates the amount of the chemical transmitter
(glutamate) released by motor nerve terminals when they are electrically active.
The biochemical pathways involved in serotonergic regulation will be explored.
In particular, the project will test the hypothesis suggested by preliminary
evidence that serotonin operates in part by causing the production of cyclic
adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate, which in turn activates an enzyme called exchange
protein activated by cyclic AMP (Epac) to modify vesicular proteins involved in
making synaptic vesicles containing glutamate available for release. Normally
cyclic AMP must also activate another protein (hyperpolarization and cyclic
nucleotide-activated ion channels or HCNCs) to enhance transmission, but
following extensive electrical activity, HCNCs are not needed for serotonin to
have an effect. The hypothesis that under these circumstances serotonin acts
only via the Epac pathway will be tested. It is also planned to extend these
experiments to fruit fly (Drosophila), because this would allow genetic
manipulations not feasible with crayfish. A final aim of this project is to
understand the mechanisms responsible for differences between phasic motor
neurons, which are very effective in releasing a lot of glutamate to single
action potentials, versus tonic synapses, which are unresponsive to single
action potentials but show tremendous synaptic facilitation in releasing
glutamate to a train of action potentials. Biophysical experiments using
photosensitive chemical probes of molecular function ("caged calcium" chelators)
will be used to distinguish these synapses. The project will involve training
junior scientists for future careers in teaching and research, with an emphasis
on recruiting women and minority participants as has been done in the past.