* 0413967
* IMR:  Acquisition of a Twin Screw Extruder for Polymer/Bio Nanocomposite Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Dinesh Katti, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 103,308.00

This is an instrument acquisition award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program to North Dakota State University (NDSU). The instrument will
provide a polymer processing capability for polymer/bio nanocomposite research
and education at NDSU. The equipment is an 18 mm twin-screw extruder for intense
polymeric and composite shearing, mixing and reacting. The extruder is ideal for
highly exfoliated nanoplatelet dispersion in a polymer matrix and for polymer-
hydroxyapatite mixing for scaffold applications. Several active NSF funded
research in materials processing and biomaterials will benefit from the new
instrument. Theses are multidisciplinary research in: (1) processing and
materials characterization of polymer blends and composites, (2) fabrication of
cost-effective substitutes for carbon nanotubes; (3) polymer processing; (4)
multiscale modeling of smectite clay nanocomposites; (5) structural biomimetic
nanocomposites (nacre); (6) processing of nanomaterials, nanofibers and
nanocomposites; and (7) composite processing, and herringbone reactive graphitic
carbon nanofiber. The instrument will also have impact on biomaterials research
at the Mayo Clinic and mechanical engineering at 3M. The cost of the instrument
development is partially supported by 3M. The award will have significant impact
on education and outreach to minorities and will help prepare students for
employment in local industries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is an instrument
acquisition award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program to
North Dakota State University (NDSU). The instrument will provide a polymer
processing capability for polymer/bio nanocomposite research and education at
NDSU. The equipment is an 18 mm twin-screw extruder for polymers and nano-
composite. Several active NSF funded research in materials processing and
biomaterials will benefit from the new instrument. The equipment will contribute
to the broader educational and industrial developments of polymer processing,
polymer science and engineering in the upper Midwest region. It will also have
an impact on biomaterials research at the Mayo Clinic and mechanical engineering
at 3M. The latter provides partial support to the instrument development. The
award will have significant impact on education and outreach to minorities and
will help prepare students for employment in local industries.at 3M. The latter
provides partial support to the instrument
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;