* 0413820
* Dissertation Research--Highway Paving, Governance and Deforestation in the Brazilian State of Acre
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Marianne Schmink, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2005
* USD 7,060.00

While the construction of new roads promises to improve access to goods and
services among previously isolated rural and urban communities, it also can
bring about negative environmental and social consequences, including
deforestation and the displacement of rural smallholders under pressure from
external colonization and land-speculation. Development theorists debate the
capacity of governance to prevent these potential repercussions from highway
paving. This dissertation research project by a cultural anthropologist will
combine spatial and ethnographic techniques to study the relationships between
road paving, governance and land use in Acre, Brazil. Through the use of remote
sensing methods, the project will demonstrate how satellite imagery can be
combined with ethnographic research. The field of political-ecology generally
aims to link political-economic processes and environmental change, yet is often
better equipped to explain the political-economic than the environmental side of
this relationship. The research project will demonstrate ways in which remote
sensing can help to overcome this imbalance, allowing political-ecologists to
better account for and measure environmental change in the research process.
Broader Impacts: deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon has stemmed largely from
government investments and incentives. This research asks whether new government
policies and programs aimed at stemming deforestation can counteract previous
and continuing programs that have promoted it. If the project finds this to be
true along Acre's Trans-Oceanic Highway, it will support arguments that frontier
governance can be an effective way to manage land use and land cover change in
highway corridors. If the research fails to find a relationship between
governance and sustainable land use, it will support counter arguments against
governance as an effective means of managing land use change. In this case, the
research would support either the argument to halt road paving in the Brazilian
Amazon or, more realistically, to invest in new strategies to manage land use
change along paved roadways. In any case the new knowledge will be useful for
development planners. In addition the project supports the education of a young
social scientist.