* 0413727
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Struggle for Water Rights in a Contested Commons:  Changing Institutional Landscape in Upper Mustang, Nepal
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Robert Rhoades, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Water for rural societies is not only a utilitarian reserve but also a symbolic
resource and a medium through which social relations are constructed. The norms
for irrigation management form the backbone of community systems in water-
scarce regions. Irrigations systems, while reflecting the existing power
structures of a society, also influence these structures by reproducing or
transforming societal relationships. In addition to defining access, water
rights in an irrigation system constitute societal relations. Consequently,
water rights are constantly contested and negotiated. This dissertation research
project by a cultural anthropology student from the University of Georgia
explores how the struggle for water rights modifies the institutional landscape
of agricultural resource management in a cold, arid region of upper Mustang,
Nepal. Combining ethnographic, survey, comparative and historical approaches,
the student will study the dynamics of struggle over water rights both within
and between settlements. The study will explore how water rights are defined;
how such definitions are contested; and how such contestations influence
institutions, testing hypotheses relating rights to other economic and social
resources. Broader impacts: in addition to furthering the education of a
doctoral student, the research will produce knowledge to help resolve practical
issues of water rights. This knowledge will be of interest for developing water
policies, legislation, rural development initiatives, and conflict resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;