* 0413037
* Dissertation Research : The Nutritional Context of Hunting Decisions in the Bosawas Biosphere Reserve, Nicaragua
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Stephen Beckerman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2005
* USD 10,960.00

Apart from deforestation, the over-hunting of game species is
&lt;br/&gt;considered the greatest threat to tropical biodiversity. Much of this
&lt;br/&gt;hunting is conducted by rural people who rely on hunted game to meet
their &lt;br/&gt;daily subsistence needs. This dissertation research by a
cultural &lt;br/&gt;anthropologist at Penn State University examines the
economic, nutritional, &lt;br/&gt;and environmental effects on hunting decisions
in the Bosawas Biosphere &lt;br/&gt;Reserve, Nicaragua. The researcher will
accompany indigenous Mayangna and &lt;br/&gt;Miskito hunters on their forays
into the forest, and local field assistants &lt;br/&gt;will concurrently collect
data on unobserved hunts and alternative economic &lt;br/&gt;activities. These
data will be used to test hypotheses about the ways in &lt;br/&gt;which hunters
respond to household needs, climatic fluctuations, and &lt;br/&gt;wildlife
abundance. In addition to furthering the education and training &lt;br/&gt;of a
young social scientist, this project will contribute to theoretical
&lt;br/&gt;issues in human ecology, particularly issues related to human
adaptive &lt;br/&gt;strategies in tropical rain forest environments.&lt;br/&gt;
Broader impacts: This research has practical applications for
&lt;br/&gt;conservationist agendas throughout Latin America. Results of this
research &lt;br/&gt;will enhance the feasibility of scientifically-based
wildlife management &lt;br/&gt;plans for rain forest inhabitants, thereby
promoting the long-term &lt;br/&gt;conservation of tropical forest ecosystems.