* 0413724
* Prediction of Texture and Formability of Continuous Cast Aluminum Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* James Morris, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 93,869.00

This award by the Division of Materials Research to University of Kentucky is to
develop a mathematical model for quantification of texture evolution in
continuous cast (CC) aluminum alloy sheets as a function of processing
parameters. This model will show the effect of alloy composition, hot rolling
procedure and homogenization practice on the evolution of texture during cold
rolling and annealing. With this award, Professor Zhai will study quantitatively
the evolution of texture and microstructure during cold rolling of continuous
cast AA 3000 series aluminum alloy sheets, and during their annealing. The
effect of alloy composition, initial texture and microstructure on the evolution
of texture in these aluminum alloys will be quantified. In addition,
quantitative analytical relations that describe the evolution of texture and
microstructure during the continuous cast processing of aluminum alloy sheets,
with a view to predicting their formability will be studied. It has been a
challenge in texture and formability studies to predict with sufficient accuracy
the evolution of crystallographic texture during thermomechanical processing of
metal sheets, and to quantify their formability by taking into account texture
and microstructure parameters. Attempts have been made to quantify texture
evolution during annealing of aluminum alloys using a physically based model or
an empirical equation, but large discrepancies between theoretical predictions
and experimental results remained. Improved methods will be used to quantify
texture volume fractions by uniquely defining the region of each texture
component in Euler space, and accurately quantify the evolution of texture
during annealing as well as cold rolling of continuous cast aluminum alloys. The
success of this modeling project would pave the way to accurately predicting
formability both from a mechanical anisotropy point of view as well as from a
limit strain consideration, and would be valuable in the optimization of the
processing of continuous cast aluminum alloys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project would help the U.S. aluminum industry to significantly improve
the formability of continuous casting aluminum alloys by enabling the
quantification of texture evolution and sheet formability during and after
thermomechanical processing, respectively, and by optimization of processing
parameters. Undergraduate and graduate students trained by this research and
education program would prepare them for careers in aluminum industry.
Integration of research into teaching and laboratory projects would benefit the
students and prepare them for opportunities in careers or higher education in
science and technology.