* 0413919
* Dissertation Research:  Does Off-Farm Work Encourage or Discourage Soil-Fertility Enhancement Practices throughout Western Kenya?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Christina Gladwin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2007
* USD 12,000.00

Soil conservation has long been a fundamental component of sustainable
livelihood systems. Yet recent economic changes brought on by trade
liberalization, decentralization, elimination of public subsidies and reduction
of services to agriculture have rendered off-farm employment a critical rural
livelihood strategy that often discourages soil conservation practice. In Kenya,
where most farms are less than 3 hectares, the majority of households must
supplement farm production with off-farm work in order to subsist. Off-farm
work, however, reduces the availability of household labor for on-farm
activities, such as soil conservation. Unless farmers have abundant household
labor or can afford to hire additional labor, they neglect their land as they
increasingly pursue off-farm work. Throughout Western Kenya, where only men tend
to work off-farm and women have taken on additional farming responsibilities,
soil conservation practice is further affected by household composition. Yet if
the added income generated off the farm is sufficient and applied towards on-
farm improvements, off-farm work can lead to increased soil conservation
practice. This dissertation research project, conducted throughout the highlands
of western Kenya by a cultural anthropologist from the University of Florida,
examines the effects of household composition, resource access, and off-farm
work on the practice of on-farm soil conservation. The research tests the
hypothesis that farming households comprised of members employed in higher
paying, industrial or service sector off-farm jobs practice more soil
conservation than those comprised of members employed in lower paying,
agricultural off-farm jobs. Participant observation in two rural villages,
ethnographic interviews of 120 farming households, decision-modeling, and
statistical analysis are used to understand the opportunities, constraints, and
rationale motivating West Kenyan farmers to practice or not practice soil
conservation. The broader impacts of the project, in addition to the
contribution to the education of a young social scientist, rest on its
contribution to local agricultural development programs. The results of the
project are also significant to Kenyan policymakers interested in directing
scarce funds and services towards the sectors and activities that hold the most
promise for both poverty alleviation and resource conservation.