* 0413540
* Development of Historical and Future Land Cover and Land Use Change Datasets for the Community Climate System Model
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Johannes Feddema, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 05/31/2007
* USD 169,096.00

This project will produce a comprehensive dataset to represent multiple time
series of specific human activities that are known to have impacts on climate.
Activities included are: human induced land cover change, agricultural change,
irrigation practices, urbanization, and human induced soil degradation. By
treating these activities independently the PI will isolate the impacts of each
of them and also consider their integrated impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
each of the human impacts evaluated in this project, a time series dataset
representing the spatial extent and severity of the human impact will be
assessed for the time period 1750 to 2100. The datasets will be specifically
constructed for use in the Community Climate System Model, but they are intended
to become a public resource for scientists to use to implement land cover change
experiments constant with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
scenario guidelines. By using high-resolution data in creating the datasets the
PI will make them easily scalable so they can be used at multiple model
resolutions and by different modeling groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
potentially several broader impacts associated with this project: First,
bringing together a number of disparate datasets and putting them in
standardized time and spatial scales, will facilitate comparison of and access
to human land cover information. Second, combining datasets of present day
conditions with historical datasets and future scenarios of change (e.g. IPCC
climate change scenarios) will provide researchers a common dataset for
evaluating human impacts over time. This will allow for the creation of
standardized climate model simulations and for inter-model comparison projects.