* 0413606
* Workshop on Simulation-Based Engineering Science; April 15-16, 2004; Arlington, VA
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Jacob Fish, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/28/2007
* USD 39,935.00

Workshop on Simulation-Based Engineering Science Chairs: Ted Belytschko
(Northwestern), Jacob Fish (Rensselaer), Tom Hughes (U Texas), Tinsley Oden (U
Texas) ABSTRACT Advances in computational engineering science offer hope for
resolving a variety of fundamental problems that affect every branch of
engineering and science, the health and security and the quality of life of all
Americans. These new advances are encompassed in the emerging field of
Simulation-Based Engineering Science, wherein modern computational methods and
devices and collateral technologies can be combined to resolve fundamental
issues far outside the reach of traditional scientific and engineering methods.
By integrating the fields of engineering science, computational and applied
mathematics, computer science, various imaging and sensor technologies,
visualization, and distributed and grid computing, a new level of capabilities
can be reached that will benefit society in many ways, such as improved products
at reduced cost, improved health and environment, and enhancements in security
and safety. Efficient mechanisms for managing and funding the research needed to
advance the discipline of Simulation-Based Engineering Science (SBES) may not
exist within NSF or other agencies, due to the interdisciplinary character of
the subject and due to the absence of programs specifically aimed at simulation
science and engineering. The primary objective of this workshop is to explore
this issue, to provide a more detailed definition of the field and its place in
contemporary engineering. The broader impact resulting from the proposed
activity is to determine how the research in the Simulation-Based Engineering
Science can be accelerated and brought to bear on pressing problems of broad
national interest.