* 0413015
* Academic Employment Initiative
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2004,09/30/2006
* Jerry Bell, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Randall Christnert
* 09/30/2006
* USD 75,000.00

This award will fund an Academic Employment Initiative by the American Chemical
Society. The pilot project is aimed at broadening the process which colleges and
universities recruit faculty in the chemical sciences. The intent is to give
colleges and universities exposure to a larger pool of candidates for faculty
positions than is possible through current recruitment practices, and to give
candidates the opportunity to convey their teaching and research goals to a
wider audience. The initial phase will cover a two-year period of programming at
each of four national meetings of the American Chemical Society. It will begin
with a Presidential Event Symposium at the March 2004 ACS meeting in Anaheim on
"Recruiting Faculty". Workshops will be developed for prospective faculty
applicants and held at these meetings. Poster sessions involving the faculty
candidates will be held to allow facile candidate-recruiter interactions. The
goal is to create a more inclusive system of faculty recruiting that will
ultimately strengthen research and teaching in the chemical sciences. Assessment
will include input from both faculty candidates and chemistry departments, ACS
committees and co-sponsoring organizations. This award is co-funded by the
Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities/Mathematics
and Physical Sciences Directorate.