* 0413062
* Elastic and Plastic Deformation in Binary Alloy Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Kenneth Elder, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2009
* USD 203,000.00

This award is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research and Mathematical
Sciences under the umbrella of the NSF-wide Mathematical Sciences Priority Area.

A phase field crystal (PFC) model has been developed to study elastic behavior
in the crystallization of pure materials. This was achieved by modeling the mass
density on diffusive time and atomic length scales. The PFC approach naturally
incorporates elastic and plastic deformations, multiple crystal orientations and
free surfaces and was used to study grain boundary energy, liquid phase
epitaxial growth and the yield strength of nano-crystalline solids. One
ingredient not included in the original work was concentration which is
particularly important since most materials contain at least two elements and
the relative concentration of the elements can significantly impact the non-
equilibrium processes and resulting microstructures. In addition, since all
elements have different lattice structures and sizes, elastic and plastic
deformations are strongly influenced by concentration. The goal of the proposed
research is to develop a computationally efficient model of microstructure
formation and stability in binary alloy crystallization phenomena and to use
this model to study technologically important applications such as dendritic
growth, eutectic crystallization and liquid phase epitaxial growth in binary
alloys.

The model will be developed by introducing a density field for each element,
constructing an appropriate free energy functional F of these fields and
assuming the dynamics are dissipative and driven to minimize F. The PI has
extensive experience in constructing such models and has developed, in
collaboration with others, models of eutectic solidification, driven charge
density waves, polymorphic crystallization and imbibition. For the purposes of
this research the PI has developed a preliminary model of binary alloy
crystallization that includes elastic and plastic deformation. This model
combines the PFC approach with a model of eutectic solidification. Initial
calculations indicate that this preliminary model incorporates the generic
features of a eutectic phase diagram and many of the typical patterns observed
in non-equilibrium phenomena such as dendrites and eutectic crystallites with
lamellar structures. In addition to these standard features the model includes
all the elastic behavior incorporated in the original PFC model discussed above
and was designed so that the concentration dependence of the lattice and elastic
constants can be easily adjusted. While this preliminary model may need to be
fine tuned, these initial calculations indicate a high likelihood that the PI
will accomplish the primary goals of this project.

The research will have broad impact on both fundamental and applied science.
Undergraduate students will be involved in the projects. %%% This award is co-
funded by the Divisions of Materials Research and Mathematical Sciences under
the umbrella of the NSF-wide Mathematical Sciences Priority Area.

A new model has been developed to describe microstructural evolution of binary
alloys that also includes their elastic and plastic behavior as a function of
their relative concentration. The research will have broad impact on both
fundamental and applied science. Undergraduate students will be involved in the
projects. ***