* 0413611
* Bridging the Gap Between Surface Science and High-Surface-Area Chemistry: A NMR-Based Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Bruce Parkinson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2008
* USD 459,000.00

Abstract CHE-0413611 Maciel/Colorado State

With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professors
Maciel, Grainger, and Parkinson at Colorado State University are collaborating
to develop the use of solid state NMR methods to provide detailed NMR
spectroscopic information about highly ordered, low surface area single crystal
surface science samples. This research project is developing the Magic Angle
Hopping probe for solid state NMR studies developed by Maciel to studies of the
surface chemistry of stacked thin film silica or gold wafer sample substrates. A
combination of instrument method development, and examination of important
questions in molecular self assembly at surfaces, is the focus of this research.
The collaboration brings together expertise in solid state NMR, self-assembled
monolayers, and scanning probe microscopic characterization of surfaces to
attack this important problem.

The ability to carry out high resolution NMR studies of surface chemical
processes on well characterized substrates would revolutionize surface science
studies. The work of this collaborative project at the University of Colorado
focuses on the design and implementation of state of the art solid state NMR
methods to probe low surface area highly ordered samples. Drawing on expertise
in solid state NMR methods, surface chemistry of self-assembled monolayers, and
surface characterization by scanned probe microscopy, the collaborators are
developing new approaches to bridge the information gap between surface science
and high surface area materials characterization.