* 0413628
* SGER:  Geomorphic Effects of a Jokulhlaup
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Ellen Wohl, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2006
* USD 61,474.00

0413628 Wohl

Jokulhlaups are glacial outburst floods that occur may occur repeatedly during
the existence of an individual glacier when sufficient meltwater ponds beneath
glacial ice. These periodic outburst floods, although of short duration, are of
higher magnitude and stream power than normal, seasonal high flows generated by
glacial- or snow-melt. As a result, jokulhlaups can exert a disproportionately
large influence on downstream geomorphic features. Numerous studies have
described the hydrology, hydraulics, and geomorphic effects of jokulhlaups
occurring in high-latitude environments such as Iceland. Jokulhlaups are also
likely to be geomorphically significant in high-altitude environments, but no
studies have examined the geomorphic effects of jokulhlaups in mountainous
regions. The primary objective of the proposed research is to examine the flow
path of a recent jokulhlaup in Wyoming's Wind River Mountains in order to test
the idea that, in some high-altitude stream channels, jokulhlaups supply the
discharge that predominantly shapes channel and valley-bottom geometry. A
jokulhlaup burst from an ice-dammed lake at the head of Grasshopper Glacier in
Wyoming's Wind River Mountains during early September 2003. The 12 ha lake
drained an estimated 3.2 million m3 of water downslope, underneath the glacier,
and down tributary valleys into the Wind River valley. The outburst flood was
recorded at a USGS gage approximately 33 km downstream from the ice-dammed lake.
We will examine 5 sites along the path of the jokulhlaup. At each of these sites
we will (i) survey pre- and post-flood channel geometry and high-water marks
from the jokulhlaup, (ii) survey large depositional features in order to
calculate volume of deposition, and to relate locations of substantial
deposition to valley gradient and geometry, which will be characterized using
topographic maps, (iii) survey large erosional features, where these are
present, and relate their locations to valley gradient and geometry, and (iv)
calculate discharge and stream power of normal seasonal peak flows and of the
jokulhlaup. Using these field data and calculations, we expect to create a map
of jokulhlaup erosional and depositional features, and to quantitatively relate
the location of these features to variations in valley geometry and jokulhlaup
stream power. We will also calculate the ratio of jokulhlaup stream power to
normal seasonal peak flow stream power along the length of the jokulhlaup. These
data will allow us to quantitatively infer the geomorphic effectiveness of the
September 2003 jokulhlaup relative to normal seasonal high flows in Grasshopper
and Dinwoody creeks. The rapid recession of glaciers worldwide is well
documented. Satellite images of the Wind River Mountains show particularly
dramatic recession since 1986. The Wind River Mountains are not unique in this
respect, and it is likely that warming at high elevations throughout the U.S.
and the world will trigger increasingly frequent jokulhlaups. Detailed and
quantitative geomorphic characterizations of the type proposed here are needed
in order to effectively address the hazards and geomorphic effects associated
with these jokulhlaups. The PI only learned of the existence of the September
2003 jokulhlaup in December 2003. The need to characterize jokulhlaup-related
erosional and depositional features as soon as possible, before subsequent river
discharges modify these features, makes proposing and conducting this research
awkward within the normal cycle of NSF funding. Hence, we are seeking an SGER
grant to respond quickly to the unique opportunity presented by the occurrence
of this jokulhlaup.

