* 0413515
* Education Workshops, 18th Annual Symposium The Protein Society to be held August 14-18, 2004, in San Diego, CA
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* C Robert Matthews, The Protein Society
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2005
* USD 5,000.00

This award is to support the activities of the Education Committee and the Young
Protein Scientists Committee at the 18th Annual Symposium of The Protein
Society, August 14-18, 2004, San Diego, California. Two workshops will be
organized. The first workshop is titled, "Computational Approaches in Protein
Chemistry." The speakers will review both fundamental principles and practical
aspects of various computational packages for investigations in protein science
that will aid graduate and undergraduate students in their research and
education. The second "A CAREER Workshop" will not only address career
opportunities after graduation but also will provide undergraduates with summer
monitoring opportunities doing research in industry and government. This will
not only open opportunities other than academia but it will also provide a
window into the excitement of research and development in industry and
government. In addition other activities for which support from NSF is not
requested include an opening reception at the University of San Diego. This will
provide an opportunity for undergraduates and their advisors to meet one another
and participate in an informal setting to discuss the role of protein science in
undergraduate courses. One of the regular sessions organized by these committees
is oral presentations by undergraduate and graduate students chosen from the
posters and in 2004 the Society will choose two undergraduate students to
receive a poster award ($300) in addition to 8 for graduate students.