* 0413242
* Segmented Binary Control of Solid-State Shape-Memory-Alloy Array Actuators for Biologically Inspired Robotic Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Haruhiko Asada, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 08/31/2007
* USD 348,667.00

NSF/RCV- 0413242

Segmented Binary Control of Solid-State Shape-Memory-AlloyArrayActuators for
Biologically Inspired Robotic Systems

H. Harry Asada, P.I. Massachusetts Institute of Technology

A new approach to the design and control of shape memory alloy (SMA) actuators
is presented. SMA wires are divided into many segments and their thermal states
are controlled individually as a group of finite state machines. Instead of
driving a current to the entire SMA wire and controlling the wire length based
on the analogue strain-temperature characteristics, the new method controls the
binary state (hot or cold) of individual segments and thereby controls the total
displacement proportional to the number of the heated segments, i.e. austenite
phase. Although the inherent property of SMA is highly nonlinear and uncertain
with a prominent hysteresis, this Segmented Binary Control (SBC) is robust and
stable, providing characteristics similar to a stepping motor. Three major aims
of the projects are: An efficient method for improving speed of response and
power consumption is developed by exploiting the inherent hysteresis of SMA.
Instead of keeping high temperature continually, the temperature is pulled back
to an intermediate "hold" temperature that is substantially lower than the
Austenite Finish (Af) temperature but is high enough to keep the austenite
state. Coordination of the multitude of segments having independent thermal
states allows for fast response with zero latency time even for thick SMA wires.
The segmented architecture of SMA wires is extended to a multi-axis actuator
array by arranging them in a two-dimensional array. The multi-axis control is
streamlined and coordinated using a two-dimensional segmentation method in order
to activate multiple links of a robot mechanism in a coordinated manner. The
method is applied to a five-fingered robotic hand capable of taking a variety of
postures with a 10-axis SMA actuator array using Peltier effect thermoelectric
devices for selective local heating and cooling of SMA wires. An inter-
departmental research team of undergraduate students (from mechanical,
electrical, and materials engineering departments) will be formed to conduct
this interdisciplinary project. One doctoral student specializing in robotic
actuators will bring the new actuator technology and biologically inspired
robots to a new undergraduate robotics course.