* 0413321
* Automatic Synthesis and Optimization of Controllers for Multi-Robot Coordination
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2008
* Kristina Lerman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 10/31/2008
* USD 468,000.00

The goal of the project is to develop a formal foundation for the synthesis and
analysis of implicit multi-robot coordination mechanisms. Such a formal
understanding will allow the multi-robot community to move away from ad-hoc
solutions and toward the principled design and analysis of coordinated multi-
robot systems. This will be achieved by introducing a formal language to
describe the entities interacting in a coordinated multi-robot system, and apply
this framework to the principled synthesis of robot controllers using logic-
based induction. At the same time, this project will develop a methodology for
modeling the coupled robot-environment system and derive the equations
describing dynamics of the system. Finally, these procedures will be combined,
so that results of analysis can be used to drive performance-enhancing
modifications in the robot controller. To validate the formal concepts of the
proposed research, these methods will be applied to the design and analysis of
multi-robot coordination methods for a real-world sensor/actuator network
deployment and maintenance task. The proposed research is novel in that it
combines formal techniques from Computer Science, Mathematics, and Physics. As
such, the work will serve as a vehicle for raising the profile of mathematical
analysis in the robotics community. Undergraduate and graduate robotics courses
will benefit from the inclusion of the developed formal analysis techniques. In
addition, twice a year demonstrations will be given at local high schools to
teach the students the concepts of collective behavior and give them the skills
to better understand and approach complex
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;