* 0413524
* Exploring the Concentrated Lyotropic and Dilute Solution Assembly of Linear-Dendritic Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Paula Hammond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2007
* USD 312,000.00

Dendrimers are unique and relatively new macromolecular systems whose
exponentially branched interiors and dense exterior functional groups offer a
number of advantageous properties. The interior or exterior regions of
dendrimers can be functionalized with specific binding groups, ranging from
crown ethers to hydrogen bonded complexes, to selectively adsorb a desired guest
system, and the high density of functional groups in the dendrimer molecule
allows for highly efficient targeted binding of biological substrates. Dendritic
materials systems have also been shown to act as nanoreactors for the formation
of metals and metal oxides, and as agents in solubilization and separations
applications. Dendritic &lt;br/&gt;architectures can be tailored for specific
interactions, or for electrical, optical or biological functionality. For these
reasons, dendrimers represent a unique macromolecular system with novel and
interesting properties. In recent years, a number of important synthetic
developments have led to the creation of novel linear-dendritic hybrid block
copolymers with a wide variety of chemical and structural properties. Linear-
dendritic hybrid copolymers offer a clear opportunity to take advantage of the
properties of dendrimers and the phase segregated morphological self-assembly of
traditional block copolymers, which have been shown to self-assemble in solution
to form concentrated lyotropic phases such as lamellae and columnar phases, and
micellar phases consisting of spherical and cylindrical micellar systems.
Although the amphiphilic behavior of linear block copolymers has been studied
extensively, resulting in an understanding of the lyotropic phases presented by
these systems, there has not been an extensive study of amphiphilic linear-
dendritic hybrid block copolymers, and their assembly behavior in solution.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is the objective and intellectual merit of this work
to undertake the first systematic and inclusive examination of linear-dendritic
block copolymer self-assembly in the solution state, from concentrated to dilute
polymer solution, and the investigation of the stabilized nanostructured
materials resulting from this assembly. The architecture and topology of the
highly branched dendritic block is expected to lead to changes in the preferred
curvature at the block copolymer interface, and variations and shifts in the
solution phase behavior of these systems, as has been observed in studies of the
bulk morphology of these systems in funded by the previoius related grant
creativity extension. Linear-dendritic block copolymers represent a new form of
macromolecular amphiphile which may exhibit novel phase behavior; this work will
contribute significantly to a fundamental understanding of these
macroamphiphiles, and the effects of generation, linear block length and
solvent-polymer interactions on the assembly in solution. It is anticipated that
the phase behavior of these systems will introduce a new paradigm to the area of
macromolecular amphiphiles . rather than the traditional hydrodynamic radius of
a coil-coil block copolymer, it is possible to examine the arrangement of a
block consisting of the coil and a much more geometrically constrained polymer
block. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this study include the
creation of novel self-assembled dendritic &lt;br/&gt;nanostructures ranging
from continuous phase nanoporous media to highly functional dendritic
nanoparticles and other nanoscale objects. The potential use of such linear-
dendritic hybrid block copolymers as templates for the formation of
nanostructured materials and nanoscale objects is yet to be explored, and is
expected to impact the design of nanostructured materials systems. Utilizing the
principles of amphiphilic block copolymer assembly, micellar systems containing
dendritic exteriors and linear chain interiors will be created and stabilized
with crosslinking, resulting in nanoparticles for which the exterior
functionality is 10 to 100 times greater than that of the original dendron. The
presence of the dendritic block will be advantageous for a number of
applications, including the creation of nanostructured porous materials formed
from the lyotropic phase in which, for example, the dendrimer end groups are
exposed within the interiors of nanopores that provide a highly reactive surface
region for catalytic or interactive pores. A number of new and novel materials
structures can result from the careful design and synthesis of functional
linear-dendritic systems which may undergo crosslinking, encourage or support
metal oxide synthesis, or serve as a template for a second organic material.
Finally, the research described here is an integral part of the investigator's
research and teaching plan, and includes the education and training of
undergraduate and graduate students in the laboratory environment, the
integration of concepts of self-assembly in the teaching of polymer science in
under-graduate and graduate courses. The mentorship of students takes place on
every level, including academic and career issues, work and family concerns, and
includes a number of women and minority students. Outreach of the PI includes
teaching of students aged 9-12 in a Math and Science Saturday Program in
Cambridge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;