* 0413824
* Bow Echoes and Mesoscale Gravity Waves - The Role of Microphysical Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Mohan Ramamurthy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 06/30/2009
* USD 746,282.00

Long-lived mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) generate a significant fraction
of the warm season rainfall in the central United States and frequently produce
severe straight-line winds and tornadoes. The Bow Echo and Mesoscale Convective
Vortex Experiment (BAMEX), conducted over the central United States in the late
spring and early summer of 2003, investigated the processes leading to the
formation of bow echoes, severe windstorms, tornadoes, and mesoscale vortices
that are often part of MCS circulations. The overarching goal of this research
is to provide a quantitative understanding of the temporal and spatial scales,
source air, and dynamic and thermodynamic forcing for downdrafts generated
within MCSs and to relate the downdraft circulations to severe surface winds in
the case of the MCS and mesoscale gravity waves in the case where squall lines
occur above a deep stable layer. The research involves analysis of airborne dual
and quad Doppler radar, microphysical data collected in the trailing stratiform
region of MCSs using laser optical array probes, dropsonde data taken throughout
MCS systems, and WSR-88D Doppler radar data, as well as numerical modeling
studies using the Weather Research and Forecasting
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives include: 1) characterize the
microphysical structure of the trailing stratiform region of warm season MCSs
using BAMEX analyses to further understanding of the roles of microphysical
processes in MCS evolution; 2) determine the degree to which severe surface
winds are a manifestation of downburst circulations generated by intense
evaporative cooling near the trailing edge of convection, or a manifestation of
high momentum air within the rear inflow jet descending slantwise to the earth's
surface; 3) use numerical modeling studies to understand the dynamical vs.
microphysical contributions to the formation, structure and evolution of
mesoscale and convective downdrafts and elevated and descending rear inflow
jets; and 4) complete ongoing idealized numerical modeling studies of mesoscale
gravity wave generation to test the hypothesis that the processes that create
mesoscale gravity waves in elevated squall line environments are dynamically
similar to processes creating wake lows in MCSs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research derives from the new understanding it will
provide concerning severe weather phenomena including bow echoes, downbursts,
and mesoscale gravity waves. The research is designed to develop a new link and
clear understanding of the interaction between cloud microphysical processes and
storm dynamics in these phenomena. The novel approaches and unique measurements
from BAMEX will provide basic new scientific understanding of mesoscale
convective systems. The research likely will lead to new discoveries, since the
processes to be investigated have been poorly observed in the past and the
specialized observations taken in MCSs in BAMEX are truly
unique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are
substantial. Observational analyses and modeling of the generation of strong
surface winds will contribute to improvements in operational weather forecasting
and nowcasting techniques, warning lead times, and understanding of severe
weather systems. The understanding of the fundamental physics associated with
MCSs that will result from this research may lead to improved prediction of the
high-impact weather associated with MCSs, bow echoes and severe windstorms,
contributing substantially to the goals of the U.S. Weather Research Program. At
least four graduate students at the University of Illinois will have a
significant role in the research to be performed. Furthermore, BAMEX data will
be incorporated into courses including Mesoscale Meteorology, Radar Meteorology,
and Precipitation Physics, survey courses such as Severe and Unusual Weather,
and the 2nd edition of a general education textbook Severe and Hazardous
Weather. Findings will be communicated to the research and operational
communities through meetings and symposia.