* 0413249
* Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System(CSDMS) Implementation Plan Workshop
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2004,03/31/2006
* Christopher Paola, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2006
* USD 40,743.00

Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS) Implementation Plan
Workshop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chris Paola, University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0413249&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests
funds for a workshop to develop an implementation plan for the Community Surface
Dynamics Modeling System. The goal of CSDMS is to develop a suite of community-
based models for the main process sets that shape the Earth's surface and create
its stratigraphic record. An initial "community sediment model" workshop held in
February 2002 attracted strong support for the initiative and led to a white
paper outlining the rationale, goals, and structure of the CSDMS project. The
results and recommendations of this white paper were later presented to NSF
personnel and NSF feedback recommended that a strategic implementation plan for
CSDMS needed to be developed before further progress toward funding could be
made. As CSDMS is a community-wide initiative, this would be best accomplished
through a community workshop and thus the rationale for this request. A
functioning set of community based, continuously improving models for the
dynamics of the Earth's surface would be a cornerstone of environmental
management and forecasting, just as atmospheric models are the bases for weather
forecasting. Thus CSDMS would support land management, river and landscape
restoration, stewardship, of scenic and recreational landscapes, assessment of
terrain-related natural hazards like floods and landslides, and responsible
development of resources from upland forests to hydrocarbons in sedimentary
strata.