* 0413501
* Dissertation Research: The Semiotics of Socialization: Gaelic-Medium Education and Language Revival in Scotland
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Judith Irvine, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2007
* USD 8,602.00

&lt;br/&gt;Schools play a central role in efforts to preserve minority languages
all over the world, including the Gaelic language revitalization movement in
Scotland. With funding from the National Science Foundation, Ms. Vanessa Will,
under the direction of Dr. Judith Irvine, will conduct fieldwork in a Gaelic-
English bilingual community on the Isle of Lewis in Scotland, where most
children learn Gaelic in a language immersion program in the first years of
elementary school.&lt;br/&gt;Acquiring a language is more complex than the
learning of words and grammar rules alone. The Gaelic spoken by these school
children may not sound like the local form of Gaelic, may exhibit grammatical
differences, and may contain words that are not recognized by other speakers or
are considered inappropriate. Students learning the language in the school
setting may use Gaelic correctly in grammatical terms, but older speakers often
think that they are not speaking appropriately, and therefore do not use the
language with these new speakers. This dissertation research project will
investigate what aspects of the language learned by students in school create
these communicative stumbling blocks, what effects they have on the students'
interactions with other Gaelic speakers, and how students and other speakers
negotiate these linguistic conflicts. &lt;br/&gt;The research will utilize long-
term participation in and observation of language use in the community,
interviews and surveys of Gaelic-speakers, and a role-playing task for Gaelic
immersion-educated children to understand how children learn to use language in
socially accepted ways. There will be extensive audio- and video-recording of
interactions between the children and adult Gaelic speakers in the school as
well as at home and at play. The analysis of these recordings will pay close
attention to the content and shape of these interactions to see if and how adult
speakers help children understand how to speak Gaelic properly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help linguists and other researchers
interested in language to better understand how children learn to use language
in socially acceptable ways. It will uncover social and cultural aspects of
language-learning that are crucial to the success of minority-language education
programs. This research will also help in the design of education programs to
ensure that students will be able to use the language outside the school - an
important goal of language revitalization efforts. &lt;br/&gt;