* 0413872
* CAREER: Development of Computational Methods for the New Generation of Air Quality Models
* CSE,CCF
* 08/10/2003,08/31/2007
* Adrian Sandu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 228,265.00

Air quality computer models are widely used investigation tools in environmental
research;&lt;br/&gt;many physical and chemical processes are modeled and their
integrated impacts on atmospheric pollutant&lt;br/&gt;concentrations studied.
These models are also important tools for regulatory and policy communities,
and&lt;br/&gt;are used to develop optimal emission control strategies for
atmospheric pollutants, as required by&lt;br/&gt;the National Ambient Air
Quality Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The level of confidence in modeling
results depends critically on the accuracy of numerical
methods&lt;br/&gt;employed, as well as on the robustness of the underlying
implementation. This research will&lt;br/&gt;develop state-of-the-art
computational methods and software techniques for use in air quality
modeling&lt;br/&gt;work on time stepping methods. Special purpose algorithms
will be developed for simultaneous treatment of box model processes, including
aerosol dynamics, gas and liquid phase chemistry and interphase mass transfer.
Higher accuracies and lower computational times are
targeted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particulate matter (aerosol) processes have
recently became a priority focus area in environmental science. Incorporating
aerosol processes in the models leads to an order of magnitude increase in the
overall computational time. The research will extend into the area of solving
the integro-differential equations that&lt;br/&gt;govern particle evolution;
specifically, the proposed work will improve the theoretical framework and
will&lt;br/&gt;build fast and reliable numerical techniques for aerosol
dynamics-chemistry simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together with the
physical/chemical process understanding and numerical algorithm design, software
tech-&lt;br/&gt;nology is an important component of these models. Another
objective of the project is to explore software&lt;br/&gt;design techniques and
tools that will make the modeling software easier to use, to maintain and to
develop.&lt;br/&gt;The resulting object-oriented version of a generic Eulerian
model will illustrate the new approach to soft-&lt;br/&gt;ware construction and
will constitute an ideal environment for developing and testing specialized
numerical&lt;br/&gt;methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goal is to
enhance interdisciplinary education in computationally-oriented
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;Since much of the science and technology of the future
and many of the new industries will cross the&lt;br/&gt;boundaries of
traditional disciplines, interdisciplinary education becomes increasingly
important. Some of&lt;br/&gt;the newest high demand areas involve computing and
information technology together with other fields:&lt;br/&gt;teaching and
research will support the development of cutting-edge computationally-involved
B.S. programs at Michigan Technological University, and continue to contribute
to the Ph.D. program in Computational Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;