* 0413395
* Theory of Superconducting and Electromagnetic Properties of Some Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* David Stroud, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 330,000.00

This grant will support theoretical research in two related areas of condensed
matter physics. The first involves the study of Josephson junctions and groups
of Josephson junctions, especially when coupled to a single-mode resonant
cavity. We will investigate these systems both classically and quantum-
mechanically. In the classical regime, such systems are described dynamically by
coupled nonlinear differential equations which we will analyze both numerically
and analytically, with particular attention being paid to coupling via the
magnetic field of the cavity mode. In the quantum regime, groups of junctions
(whether or not coupled to a cavity) can often be treated as groups of two-level
systems which can be experimentally controlled, initialized, and read out. In
the second area of research, we will study the electromagnetic properties of a
wide range of granular materials. Among the specific problems planned for study
are plasmon wave propagation in one-and two-dimensional arrays of metallic
nanoparticles, electromagnetic response of random nanocomposites of metal and
anisotropic hosts, optical and structural properties of composites of gold
nanoparticles and DNA, nonlinear light scattering from granular materials,
forces in suspensions of dielectric particles, and electromagnetic response of
cuprate superconductors arising from intrinsic inhomogeneities. These problems
have the common theme that they involve the study of materials which are
structured at a scale of 10-1000nm.

The project will have an extensive educational impact by training graduate
students, postdoctoral associates and undergraduates in a range of techniques in
theoretical condensed matter physics, and will thus increase the pool of highly
trained scientists in the U.S., including women and members of underrepresented
groups. The scientific advances developed will be presented in courses offered
at Ohio State, and in seminars elsewhere. %%% This grant will support
theoretical research in two related areas of condensed matter physics. The first
involves the study of Josephson junctions, coupled superconducting thin films,
and groups of Josephson junctions, especially when coupled to a single-mode
resonant cavity. In the second area of research, we will study the
electromagnetic properties of a wide range of granular materials. Both of these
systems will be studied on the nanoscale. The research will have an extensive
educational impact by training graduate students, postdoctoral associates and
undergraduates in a range of techniques in theoretical condensed matter physics,
and will thus increase the pool of highly trained scientists in the U.S.,
including women and members of underrepresented groups. The scientific advances
developed will be presented in courses offered at Ohio State, and in seminars
elsewhere. ***