* 0413981
* RUI: Population Ecology of a Salamander Species in Relation to its Bacterial Symbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Reid Harris, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2008
* USD 378,000.00

A central goal of population biology is to understand how variation within
populations originates and is maintained. This project will test the hypothesis
that susceptibility to fungal infections varies among individual amphibians and
their eggs. Dr. Reid Harris will investigate the role of beneficial bacteria on
the skin in protecting individuals and their egg masses from fungal disease.
Many species of bacteria produce antifungal compounds, as do at least three
species of bacteria that live on the skin of salamanders. One goal of the
research is to determine whether individuals with the beneficial bacteria
transmit the antifungal compounds to their eggs and therefore have higher
nesting success. Methods will include field sampling, experiments in large
indoor amphibian habitats, culturing of bacteria and fungi, and identification
of microorganisms with DNA sequencing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amphibians are an important part of many
ecosystems, yet many amphibian populations have declined or gone extinct and
others are at risk. This project will provide information that will help in
ongoing conservation efforts of frog and salamander populations. For example,
one recommendation may be to inoculate populations at risk from pathogenic fungi
with beneficial antifungal bacteria. The research will also teach undergraduates
how to conduct scientific projects, thus preparing them for graduate and
professional schools. Underrepresented groups in science will be encouraged to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;