* 0413954
* Doctoral Dissertation Resarch: Local Perceptions of Salmon Habitat Restoration: An Ethnographic Study of Science-Based Conservation and Social Conflict in the Pacific Northwest
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Eugene Hunn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,985.00

Despite a century of protection efforts, salmon populations have declined 80%,
from an order of billions to an order of millions of fish returning annually to
Pacific Northwest rivers, resulting in the 1999 "threatened" listing of Chinook
and Coho stocks under the Endangered Species Act (ESA). In its effort to address
ESA regulations and protect its $1.3 billion fishery, Washington State requires
salmon habitat restoration plans to be based on "Best Available Science,"
legally defined as natural scientific data, to the explicit subordination of
cultural, historical and political information. This policy reflects the
overwhelming reliance on the natural sciences and instrumental analyses in
environmental research, management and policy-making. Yet implementing this
science-based policy is proving to be far more challenging and controversial
than policymakers predicted. This study by a doctoral student in environmental
anthropology at the University of Washington will explore the hypothesis that
the state's requirement to base protection plans on "Best Available Science"
obscures deeper historical, cultural, political and economic divisions that are
impeding salmon habitat restoration in the Skagit Valley of northwest
Washington. Using a combination of open-ended interviews, participant
observation and a survey, the study will aim to understand how diverse groups,
including farmers, tribal and non-tribal fishers, environmentalists, scientists
and policymakers, perceive the problem of fish protection. The project will
attempt to explain the variation in perceptions through evaluating the
importance of different senses of place, history, science, and each group's
understanding of the others.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By illuminating the
social forces contributing to an environmental problem and controversy, this
study aims to model and highlight the need for alternative, locally inclusive
and culturally sensitive approaches to environmental research that could lead to
more effective and equitable environmental policies. In addition, the research
aims to contribute to the resolution of the Skagit controversy by
collaboratively exploring the complicated cultural meanings at stake for all
people involved in the conflict. Finally, this study will contribute to the
education of a doctoral student and the development of the new field of
environmental anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;