* 0413917
* Dissertation Research--The Inequality of Social Capital:  A Comparative Approach to Assess the Usefulness of Social Capital Measures in Economic Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Anthony Oliver-Smith, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2005
* USD 11,300.00

In recent years, international development institutions such as the World Bank
have invested considerable resources to understand non-economic factors that
encourage communities to organize collectively, and which in turn foster
economic development. Researchers have found that higher levels of trust and
reciprocity in social relations translate into successful cooperatives,
microcredit associations, communal reforestation projects, and other collective
institutions that bring benefits to society. The ability to build and strengthen
ties of reciprocity and trust, which in turn generate benefits of the community
as a whole, has been called social capital. The purpose of this dissertation
research in cultural anthropology is to complement current methods and theories
that inform the concept of social capital. The project asks if the way social
capital has been conceptualized, and the way data is gathered in order to assess
its importance in economic development, ignores differences in political power
and wealth that individuals enjoy at the community level. Currently, research in
economic development holds that if a person enjoys healthy social relations in
his/her community he/she has social capital. The goal of this research is to
test this idea by hypothesizing that social capital is dependent on the levels
of wealth and political power an individual enjoys. Research will be carried out
with members and non-members of rural producers associations in the southern
coast of Ecuador, with particular attention to differences and possible
correlations between wealth, political power, and social capital indicators.
Methods include participant observation, a structured questionnaire and
intensive interviews about social networks. The broader impact of this research
rest on its ability to inform economic development planners and practitioners to
affect policy in rural areas in the world. As development institutions press on
to include social capital in their agenda, a richer understanding of differences
in wealth and power at the local level might prove beneficial for economic
development policy. In addition the project will support the education of a
young social scientist.