* 0413187
* Traffic Management in IP Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Arjan Durresi, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2005
* USD 27,619.00

There is an immense demand for quality of service (QoS) in the Internet. One key
element of quality of service is traffic management. Since the network traffic
is bursty, it is difficult to make any QoS guarantees without proper control of
traffic. Currently, Internet Protocol (IP) has only minimal traffic management
capabilities. The packets are dropped when the queue exceeds the buffer
capacity. The transmission control protocol (TCP) uses the packet drop as a
signal of congestion and reduces its load. While in the past, this strategy has
worked satisfactorily, there is need for better strategies for two reasons.
First, a large part of the traffic, particularly, voice and video traffic does
not use TCP. Continuous media traffic uses User Datagram Protocol (UDP). The
proportion of UDP traffic is increasing at a faster pace than TCP traffic. The
UDP traffic is congestion insensitive in the sense that UDP sources do not
reduce their load in response to congestion. Second, the bandwidth of the
networks as well as the distances are increasing. For very high distance-
bandwidth product networks, packet drop is not the optimal congestion
indication. Several megabytes of data may be lost in the time required to detect
and respond to packet losses. Therefore, a better strategy for traffic
management in IP networks is required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing the need
for direct feedback of congestion information, the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF) has come up with an Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) method
for IP routers. A bit in the IP header is set when the routers are congested.
ECN is much more powerful than the simple packet drop indication used by
existing routers and is suitable for high distance-bandwidth networks.
Unfortunately, to realize the full potential of ECN, several questions need to
be answered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research proposal, the PIs propose a
comprehensive program of research on traffic management in IP networks. They
propose to develop a new set of traffic management algorithms for IP networks
based on Explicit Congestion Notification mechanism. A total of 18 different
issues will be analyzed. The PIs have identified potential solutions and
approaches for each of these issues. Specifically, they propose to work on a new
congestion detection and buffer management scheme for routers, a mechanism for
TCP to react to ECN messages from the network. One of the important goals of
this research is to make TCP traffic management algorithm free of any bias based
on round trip time and number of congested gateways
traveled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be based on
theoretical analysis and simulations. The PI's approach will be a formal
analysis of simple scenarios, heuristic analysis of more complex scenarios and
validation using simulations. The emphasis will be to develop simple solutions.
However, the performance lost in exchange of simplicity will be theoretically
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traffic management is the key in providing QoS.
Currently, a significant amount of NSF, DARPA, and other research funding as
well as energy in networking is being spent on QoS issues. When QoS based
solutions (integrated services, differentiated services, or multiprotocol label
switching) are deployed, the need for traffic management will become apparent
and the PIs expect to see an immediate need for proper methods for traffic
management. This proposal is, therefore, timely and important.&lt;br/&gt;