* 0413653
* CMG:     Statistical Wavelet Analysis and Indices Development of the Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Current System Observed by the Terrestrial Magnetometers
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Piotr Kokoszka, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2009
* USD 679,155.00

The currents flowing in the magnetosphere-ionosphere (M-I) form a complicated
multi-scale geosystem that contains temporal and spatial scales from seconds to
days over meters to global lengths. Ground-based magnetometers have long been
the main tool to observe the M-I current system and a number of indices have
been introduced to characterize the variations of specific current components.
Due to the nature of this current system, the magnetic effects recorded on the
magnetograms are multi-scaled, impulsive, and asychroneous with non-stationary
frequency spectra. This leads to cross-talk among the traditional geomagnetic
indices. In this statistics-geosciences collaborative research, the
investigators develop new statistical techniques based upon wavelet analysis,
which is especially suitable for analyzing signals that are impulsive and multi-
scaled and have time-dependent spectra. Their new methodology is based on the
analysis of a global distribution of magnetograms in the INTERMAGNET database.
This investigation develops a technique for filtering multivariate time series
with an objective of removing cross-talk signatures that contaminate the
present-day geomagnetic indices. New approaches are developed for modeling time
series with complex scaling and temporal structures, which may offer a simpler
alternative to or complement various multi-fractal models. In addition to
providing new insights into the structure of the magnetometer records, their
methodology will be applicable to similar problems in which multivariate time
series with intricate time-varying scaling and distributional properties need to
be understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar storm impacts in space and on Earth
are usually adverse to humans due to enhanced radiation levels and also
technology via electromagnetic charging-discharging and induced currents. These
adverse effects are categorized as space weather. Civilian and defense weather
centers specify and forecast the magnitude of their impacts to a broad range of
commercial, military, and scientific users. Geomagnetic indices are the main
measure of the strength of these impacts. For the first time in over 50 years,
modern statistical and computational techniques are applied to resolving spatial
and temporal structures in these indices on a global scale. This investigation
develops improved magnetic indices of a significantly higher resolution. These
new indices will be made available to the scientific and space weather forecast
communities. &lt;br/&gt;