* 0413328
* SCIWORK: SCI PI Workshop; Washington, DC; First Quarter 2004
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Herbert Schorr, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 01/31/2006
* USD 119,206.00

The proposal plans, organizes and carries out a PI meeting for CISE's new Shared
Cyberinfrastructure (SCI) division, targeted for late February 2004. The
meeting's goals are: to enhance collaboration among PI's and the larger
community, increase information exchange, hear from PI's and their results to-
date, explore areas of leveraging work and outputs across awards, expose members
of the research community to status and direction of SCI, discuss new
opportunities and emerging areas of research, and hear from other programs at
NSF whose Cyberinfrastructure activities are closely related to SCI. This
meeting benefits NSF officers as much as the PI's: it is expected that SCI will
have a new Division Director on board by the time of this meeting, and this
event offers new and existing NSF officers the chance to quickly come up to
speed on a comprehensive portfolio of SCI activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A web
site will be made available to coordinate attendance, agenda, and logistics. The
site will also document meeting results and act as an archive of information and
material relating to the meeting. The majority of active awards in SCI will be
invited to give talks. All PI's will be invited to provide posters for a poster
session, and some demos are expected. The 3-day event will be organized
according to session tracks. Due to the volume of talks, parallel tracks will be
necessary. Major programs in SCI, such as PACI, Teragrid/DTF/ETF, and NMI will
be covered extensively. Technical categories of talks span networking and
computational infrastructure, and they include: Cyberinfrastructure programs,
advanced applications, network monitoring and measurement, optical networks,
network services and security, and middleware.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;