* 0413136
* Workshop: Future Generation Software Architectures in the Automotive Domain - Connected Services in Mobile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Ingolf Krueger, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2006
* USD 24,361.00

This workshop in real-time networked embedded systems focuses on future
automotive systems. The workshop will explore embedded system architectures,
automotive software services, platforms, on- and off-board ad-hoc networking,
networked automotive services, mobile sensor services, security and privacy
issues for automotive applications, and enabling technology for automotive
applications. The workshop brings together experts from industry and academia,
who work on highly complex, distributed, reactive software systems related to
the automotive domain. The expected outcome is deeper insight into the research
challenges and proposed solutions for future automotive embedded software. This
will help develop understanding by industry, academia, and Federal agencies of
the research needed to advance progress in this embedded systems
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this workshop is the
opportunity to stimulate communications between academia and industry, fuel
international collaboration, and enhance communication between diverse research
communities. Because of the pervasive demand for highly complex, dependable
software systems, the workshop results are also relevant in many application
domains beyond automotive, such as avionics, medical and telecommunications
systems.&lt;br/&gt;