* 0413152
* Learning Higher-Order Image and Scene Structure From Natural Image Statistics
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Michael Lewicki, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 12/31/2008
* USD 269,959.00

The research in this proposal will develop probabilistic models that learn
abstract images properties and invariant features from the statistical
regularities of natural images. The long-term goal of this research is to
understand the essential computational principles underlying the transformation
of visual sensory codes into increasingly abstract representations that reveal
the intrinsic properties of natural visual images and scenes. The specific aims
are to develop probabilistic models for learning efficient, hierarchical
representations of natural images; to extend these models to allow overcomplete
representations and additive noise; and finally to model the natural image
density variation in local spatial and temporal regions. This research will
provide a deeper understanding of the theoretical issues and computational
challenges involved in deriving abstract and invariant representations from
statistical regularities in natural images. Progress toward these goals will
have a broad impact in applications that require discovery and encoding of
intrinsic structures in complex visual images and scenes, such as image
compression, visual scene analysis, image processing, and machine vision. The
statistical models proposed in this research are broadly applicable and could
also have impact in many areas of signal processing, knowledge discovery, and
data mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;