* 0413836
* Doctoral Disseratation Research:  Living the "Latina Paradox": An Ethnography of Pregnant Latinas in Cleveland, Ohio
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Rachel Chapman, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2006
* USD 7,380.00

Even though Latin American women (Latinas) represent a low-income group,
maintain low education rates and low access to healthcare, their infant health
outcomes (e.g. infant mortality and birth weight) resemble those of whites who
generally have more education, higher income, and improved access to care.
Epidemiologists refer to Latinas' unexpected positive infant health outcomes as
the "Latina paradox." Studies suggest that immigrant Latinas and first
generation US-born Latinas are more likely to have positive birth outcomes when
compared to second generation US-born Latinas. In addition, with each US-born
generation and increasing rates of acculturation, Latinas' infant health
outcomes decline and no longer mirror those of whites. This dissertation
research by a medical anthropology doctoral student from Case Western Reserve
University will seek to understand what it is that protects Mexican women in
Cleveland, Ohio from poor infant health outcomes, and what it is that erodes
with each generation that places them at greater risk of having unhealthy
outcomes. Using data gathered from case studies, ethnographic interviews, and
structured questionnaires, this project will determine whether and to what
extent Mexican women's ethnic/minority identity, immigrant status, and
generation may impact their use of informal prenatal care (e.g. use of non-
biomedical providers, uncertified/lay midwives, family/friends, and herbalists)
and/or medically pluralistic pregnancy management practices (e.g. informal +
biomedical) which may in fact protect Mexican immigrant and first generation US-
born women from poor infant health outcomes. This proposed project will not only
contribute to the anthropological scholarship on reproduction, Latinos, and
migration, but it will also build upon previous work conducted in public health
and epidemiology A broader impact of this proposed research is that it will
provide a much needed and clearer understanding of how sociocultural factors
contribute to the "Latina paradox"; new knowledge that will be of great interest
to health care providers, policy makers, and the general public. Additionally,
this research will further the education and training of a doctoral student.