* 0413840
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Catalyzing Caregivers - The Mobilizing Effects of "Rights Talk" among Informal Family Caregivers
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Mark Suchman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 06/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation examines the efficacy of legal mobilization tactics for
developing political consciousness among informal family caregivers. The project
has three objectives: (1) To analyze how legal advocacy organizations utilize
the discourse of law and rights to mobilize individuals with strong normative
commitments to alternative, nonlegal systems of meaningmaking; (2) to identify
whether, and to what degree, legal rights discourse resonates with family
careworkers as a way of making sense of their experiences in long-term
caregiving; and (3) to assess the extent to which a disparity exists between
legal advocacy framing strategies and caregiver perceptions, and how such a
disparity might explain the observed weakness of collective action efforts among
informal caregivers. The project focuses on two types of participants: (1)
staffmembers of legal advocacy organizations dedicated to serving the caregiving
community and their patients, and (2) caregivers for individuals with cancer,
Alzheimer's disease, and AIDS, largely drawn from support groups. The project
employs a tri-partite methodology to assess how both groups construct the
problems and issues faced by informal caregivers. Data collection include: (a)
nonparticipant observation of staff meetings and support group meetings; (b)
peer group discussions (a researcher-led session of one or two meetings of the
same staff and support group members); and (c) one-on-one interviews with staff
and support group participants. The project contributes to the social movement
framing literature, and to the sociolegal literature on legal consciousness and
alternative normative systems, as well as having broader impacts for public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;