* 0413569
* Conference: Support for the 8th Cyanobacterial Molecular Biology Workshop to be held in St. Adele, Quebec on August 25-29, 2004
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* George Bullerjahn, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

The PI of this project requests support to pay part of the cost for participants
attending the 8th Cyanobacterial Molecular Biology Workshop. This workshop is to
be held in Ste. Adele, Quebec, August 25-29, 2004. Funds are to be used to cover
partial expenses for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and other junior
scientists whose roles as session chairs and speakers comprise the majority of
the program. Additionally, travel cost for four invited seminar speakers are
requested. This workshop is the main conference in North America focused on
molecular aspects of physiology, photosynthesis nitrogen fixation, and ecology
in cyanobactera. This conference traditionally attracts up to 120 participants
from the U.S., Canada, and Europe. The 2004 Workshop will be held as a satellite
meeting to the International Photosynthesis Congress in Montreal, which
commences immediately following the Workshop. A factor in scheduling the
conference at this time was to help keep conference cost affordable rather than
holding it at its previous location in Asilomar State Park
California.&lt;br/&gt; The workshop will be divided into session focuses on:
Nitrogen Fixation and Heterocyst Differentiation, Photosynthesis and
Photosynthetic Complexes, Carbon Fixation &amp; Concentration Mechanisms, Stress
Responses and Ecological Aspects. Four invited speakers will provide overview of
many of the chosen areas. The program, however, relies largely on junior
scientists as the main participants. A goal of the project is to attract their
attendance by lowering their financial burden. The program is to be assembled to
allow maximum participation by women and underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;