* 0413039
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Modularity of Pleiotropic Effects on Skeletal Morphology.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* James Cheverud, Washington University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,984.00

Many biologically important traits, including disease and size and shape, are
influenced by multiple genes. This project will locate and identify genes
affecting skeletal size and shape. We predict that mouse skeletal traits
affected by common developmental and functional processes will share common gene
effects and that traits affected by different processes will be affected by
distinct sets of genes. For example, the femur and tibia are separate bones but
are produced by the common outgrowth of the posterior limb bud so we expect
variation in these bones to be affected by many of the same genes. In this
project we survey the mouse genome for locations affecting 68 skeletal traits
distributed throughout the skeleton and examine common patterns of gene effects
for a hierarchical, modular structure. Digital photographs will be taken of 2250
mouse skeletons and traits measured using software for analyzing digital images.
Locations in the genome that affect these traits will be identified
statistically. Initial gene mapping is followed by a finer-scale map of selected
genomic locations to identify the specific genes involved. This project will
advance the understanding of the genetics of modularity for aspects of skeletal
size and shape and its consequences for population processes. It also creates a
resource of 50,000 skeletal digital images archived on DVD that will be
available to other researchers. Biomedical studies and treatments for bone and
growth-related diseases may also develop from this work in the future. Thus,
this project also investigates theoretical aspects of the genetics of complex
traits, thus contributing to health-related research as well.