* 0413369
* SGER: Quantitative Mapping of Se and Associated Proteins in the Brain: Effects of Dietary Deficiency
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Gary Glass, The University of Louisiana at Monroe
* Standard Grant
* John S. de Belle
* 06/30/2007
* USD 98,996.00

Selenium (Se) is a nonmetallic essential trace element that exerts numerous
biological effects through incorporation into distinct selenoproteins via the
amino acid, selenocysteine. In the brain, selenoproteins protect neural tissue
from oxidative stresses and maintain normal thyroid hormone function. Available
solely through dietary intake, insufficient ingestion of Se leads to numerous
physiological and psychological symptoms of deficiency, including abnormal
behavioral responses. Since wildlife, as well as domestic livestock, depend upon
environmental sources of Se, low soil levels puts these animal populations at
significant risk for adverse effects. The central nervous system (CNS) is unique
in that net levels of Se are maintained, not diminished during dietary
insufficiency, and that levels of select selenoproteins are enhanced during such
states. This evidence suggests that Se is critical for optimal neurological
function, and that adaptive mechanisms protect the CNS from environment
deficits. This SGER project will utilize complementary expertise in neuroanatomy
and nuclear physics to map the cellular distribution of Se and its proteins in
the brain, to determine if preservation of specific selenocysteine-containing
proteins of characterized function in region- and cell type-specific patterns
within this organ is correlated with maintenance of brain function during
deficiency. The unprecedented sensitivity of the wholly-unique in situ chemical
analytical approach developed here will permit this bioinorganic element to be
detected within the context of the complex cytoarchitectural organization of the
brain, and is expected to significantly advance fundamental knowledge and
stimulate new interest in the outcome of Se-deprivation on cellular- and systems
levels-level brain function and its related impact on CNS development,
plasticity, and senescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;