* 0413781
* SGER: Development of a Soluble Assay for the Yeast GPI Transamidase
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Tamara Hendrickson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2005
* USD 75,000.00

In eukaryotes, approximately 0.5% of all encoded proteins are (or are predicted
to be) modified at their C-termini with a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)
anchor. Attachment of this extended glycolipid occurs in the endoplasmic
reticulum, and modified proteins are ultimately tethered to the outer plasma
membrane via the lipid portion of the GPI anchor. GPI anchor attachment is
governed by the GPI transamidase (GPI-T), a pentameric, membrane-bound enzyme.
Extensive work, in vivo, has led to a qualitative picture of the protein
substrate requirements for GPI-T. At present, however, there is still no
convenient, high-throughput assay for GPI-T, and thus the ability to quantify
and manipulate interactions between GPI-T and its substrates in vitro remains
all but inaccessible. To this end, a fluorescence assay for GPI-T will be
developed using a small synthetic peptide as a substrate for GPI-T and replacing
the GPI anchor with hydrazine. The strategy for assay development is based on
the fact that GPI-T catalyzes a proteolysis reaction prior to anchor attachment.
This assay will represent the first quantifiable in vitro assay for GPI-T and
will consequently lay the foundation for future in vitro efforts to explore the
GPI-T enzyme complex and the chemical complexity of this modification in detail.
Development of this assay will open up diverse avenues of research in vitro into
GPI anchor formation.

Broader Impact The broader impact of this proposal is two-fold. First, the
results will be disseminated to the greater scientific community (via
publications and meetings by the PI and graduate students) so that other labs
interested in GPI-T will be able to incorporate the new GPI-T assay into their
own research programs. Second, students working on this project will receive a
multi-disciplinary training, spanning the fields of organic chemistry,
spectroscopy, enzyme kinetics and molecular biology.