* 0413438
* Southwestern Archaeological Tree-Ring Dating
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jeffrey Dean, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 234,486.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research (LTRR) at the
University of Arizona is the sole source of archaeological tree-ring dates in
western North America. With continuing National Science Foundation support, LTRR
operates a dating program for tree-ring samples collected by LTRR and other
archaeologists from Alaska to Peru and from the Pacific Ocean to the Mississippi
River. NSF support allows the program to keep pace with the ever growing demand
for archaeological tree-ring dating, information, and assistance and to maintain
high production levels and short turnaround times. On average, the laboratory
produces more than 1,000 dates from the 5,000+ archaeological tree-ring samples
submitted annually. These data are integrated into relevant archaeological
contexts to construct refined cultural sequences and examine important issues of
past human behavior that cannot be addressed without accurate, high resolution
temporal control. Among these topics are absolute site, locality, and regional
chronologies, social organization, intergroup interaction, and cultural
adaptation to physical and social environments. In addition, the program fosters
the expansion of archaeological tree-ring dating into new regions such as the
Southwestern deserts, Great Basin, Great Plains, Rocky Mountains, Alaska, and
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's exact dating and chronology building
are crucial to understanding human behavior, human-environment interactions, and
processes of sociocultural stability, variation, change, and evolution. Either
directly or indirectly (through tree-ring dated ceramics), tree-ring dating
underlies the chronology of Southwestern prehistory and many aspects of the
documented history of the region. The project also generates dendroclimatic
reconstructions that are combined with reconstructions produced by other
paleoenvironmental disciplines such as geology, pollen analysis, volcanology,
and trace element studies. In addition to illuminating past environmental
processes, these integrated reconstructions provide a solid empirical foundation
for examining the interrelationships between human behavior and environmental
variability. Finally, the project's efforts to expand research into areas
previously thought to be unsuitable for archaeological tree-ring dating are
beginning to pay off. Dates derived from samples collected many years ago
provide absolutely dated "hinge points" for archaeological chronologies in the
Sonoran Desert, and similar success is indicated for northern
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of the project are almost immediately
integrated into undergraduate and graduate classes in anthropology, geosciences,
and other disciplines at the University of Arizona and other academic
institutions. In addition, the project interacts with K-12 programs, provides
instruction for visiting scholars from around the world, and facilitates field
training for governmental, private, and Native American programs. The LTRR tree-
ring sample collections and data archives are unparalleled, easily accessed
resources for archaeological research. The laboratory has begun building a
digital database to enhance the research value of these resources. Increased
understanding of long-term human adaptation to cultural and environmental
variability and enhanced knowledge of past environmental processes help develop
and implement environmental and social policy. Project personnel have
contributed directly to formulating policy for managing cultural and natural
resources by federal, local, and tribal land management
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;