* 0413000
* Illinois Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation - Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2010
* Elnora Daniel, Chicago State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2010
* USD 7,004,500.00

Illinois LSAMP Phase III &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Illinois Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (ILSAMP) traces its origin to the
&lt;br/&gt;collaboration of several institutions in the Chicago area in 1993.
The ILSAMP is a diverse group &lt;br/&gt;of public and private institutions in
urban, suburban and rural settings: Chicago State University &lt;br/&gt;(CSU),
lead institution, University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), Northeastern Illinois
University &lt;br/&gt;(NEIU), DePaul University (DU), Illinois State University
(ISU), Southern Illinois University at &lt;br/&gt;Edwardsville (SIUE), Southern
Illinois University at Carbondale (SIUC), Illinois Institute of
&lt;br/&gt;Technology (IIT), and Governors State University (GSU). Nine
community colleges and &lt;br/&gt;Argonne National Laboratory, (ANL) complete
the Alliance. These institutions are bound &lt;br/&gt;together with a vision of
establishing a statewide coalition dedicated to increasing the number of
&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented minority students in science, technology,
engineering, mathematics, and &lt;br/&gt;science education (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;During Phase I and II the Alliance focused on establishing a
management structure and programs &lt;br/&gt;to implement a comprehensive plan
to increase the number of underrepresented minority &lt;br/&gt;students
successfully completing baccalaureate degrees in STEM by improving the quality
of &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate education. Significant progress was made in the
number of B.S. degrees awarded &lt;br/&gt;to underrepresented students by ILSAMP
institutions in STEM disciplines. From 1993 through &lt;br/&gt;2002 the number
of STEM degrees conferred upon minority students increased by 85% (228 to
&lt;br/&gt;423). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The success of Phase III will be
measured by the extent to which ILSAMP can: 1) completely
&lt;br/&gt;institutionalize the activities that proved successful during Phase I
and Phase II; 2) further &lt;br/&gt;increase the number of underrepresented
minority students who graduate from programs in &lt;br/&gt;STEM disciplines;
and, 3) intensify student progression to graduate school through preparation
&lt;br/&gt;and the development of pathways to the Ph.D. for STEM baccalaureate
recipients. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to accomplish Phase III objectives,
the Alliance will utilize strategies to strengthen 1) &lt;br/&gt;community
college bridge programs to ease the transition for transfer students and the
&lt;br/&gt;preparation of first time freshman; 2) faculty and peer mentoring to
help retain students in STEM &lt;br/&gt;disciplines; 3) supplemental instruction
(study groups, tutorials, workshops, study skills training) &lt;br/&gt;to
bolster students. academic preparation; 4) academic year and summer
undergraduate research &lt;br/&gt;and external internships to develop students
for graduate school; and 5) opportunities to develop &lt;br/&gt;students.
writing and oral presentations skills. Information concerning the program will
be &lt;br/&gt;disseminated via publications, presentations and web pages.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;