* 0413076
* New Synthetic Strategies for the Construction of Complex Molecules: Organoruthenium Based Approaches
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2004,09/30/2005
* Fred Pigge, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 09/30/2005
* USD 232,000.00

This project is focused on exploiting the unique chemical reactivity of
organoruthenium complexes for the stereocontrolled construction of polycyclic
heterocyclic compounds related to various alkaloid natural products. The
chemistry of eta-6-arene ruthenium(II) complexes will be explored, with the aim
of developing novel stoichiometric as well as catalytic synthetic applications.
Spirocyclization reactions will be developed and expanded to chiral
azaspirocyclic complexes, leading to general synthetic approaches to the
spirostaphylotrichins, a subclass of fungal metabolites possessing lipid-
lowering activity. Routes to tetrahydroisoquinoline-containing tricyclic ring
systems related to a variety of biologically active compounds and the
application of the new methodologies to Amaryllidaceae alkaloids, particularly
of the crinane and methanomorphanthridine families, will also be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Professor F. Christopher Pigge,
of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Missouri - St. Louis.
Professor Pigge's research efforts revolve around the discovery, development,
and exploitation of novel reactions effected by compounds containing bonds
between carbon and metal atoms. Such organometallic compounds offer promise for
efficient approaches for the synthesis of complex organic molecules as well as
the preparation of molecules that are virtually inaccessible in the absence of
metal atom intervention.