* 0414011
* Mathematical Modeling of the Chemotherapy, Immunotherapy and Vaccine Therapy of Cancer
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Lisette de Pillis, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 328,283.00

The investigators bring together expertise in the areas
of&lt;br/&gt;differential equations and numerics, differential geometry,
and&lt;br/&gt;optimal control with the goal of developing mathematical
modeling&lt;br/&gt;and analysis tools applied to the creation and testing of
new&lt;br/&gt;combinations of chemo-immunotherapies for treating cancer.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators, together with their students, carry out work
along&lt;br/&gt;three complementary paths. First, dynamical systems
population&lt;br/&gt;models are created and analyzed to determine fundamental
system&lt;br/&gt;behavior that helps guide the development of
combination&lt;br/&gt;therapies. Second, differential geometry approaches allow
for&lt;br/&gt;the analysis of idealized geometric forms approximating
physical&lt;br/&gt;structures of spherical, cylindrical, elliptic, and
harmonic&lt;br/&gt;spherical tumors, which can closely approximate certain in
vivo&lt;br/&gt;tumor geometries. Third, optimal control theory is used
to&lt;br/&gt;reveal paths to new optimal combination therapies
with&lt;br/&gt;implementation of a variety of constraints to minimize
tumor&lt;br/&gt;burden while keeping the patient's immune and normal
cell&lt;br/&gt;populations above a healthy threshold. The results of
these&lt;br/&gt;investigations have the potential to provide guidance in
the&lt;br/&gt;structuring of improved patient-specific treatment protocols.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The mathematical modeling of cancer growth and
combination&lt;br/&gt;treatment strategies adds to our basic understanding of
cancer&lt;br/&gt;response mechanisms in fundamental ways. The
simulations,&lt;br/&gt;geometric visualization, and optimization the
investigators&lt;br/&gt;undertake allow for an array of virtual experiments to
be run&lt;br/&gt;that can be performed quickly with no risk to living persons,
but&lt;br/&gt;that provide data that can significantly benefit medical
decision&lt;br/&gt;making. The modeling of cancer growth and treatment
requires&lt;br/&gt;skills from multiple disciplines. A major outcome of
this&lt;br/&gt;project is the development of software for simulating
and&lt;br/&gt;visualizing cancer growth and treatment pathways,
involving&lt;br/&gt;chemotherapy and immunotherapy, which can result in the
creation&lt;br/&gt;of new mathematically guided patient-specific
combination&lt;br/&gt;treatment strategies. This work lies at the intersection
of&lt;br/&gt;information technology and biotechnology, with mathematics at
the&lt;br/&gt;core. The investigators have the ability to funnel
discoveries&lt;br/&gt;for new treatment strategies suggested by the
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;directly to collaborating clinical oncologists through
the&lt;br/&gt;ongoing meetings of a California-based Mathematics of
Medicine&lt;br/&gt;Study group. In turn, the physicians in this group can
enhance&lt;br/&gt;the development of the mathematical models by sharing outcomes
of&lt;br/&gt;ongoing clinical trials. The investigators directly
involve&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates in the multiple facets of this cutting-
edge&lt;br/&gt;endeavor through research assistantships, courses,
and&lt;br/&gt;independent study. A unique aspect of this project is
the&lt;br/&gt;collaboration of three women investigators who are
attracting&lt;br/&gt;more women students to this area of research. The
investigators&lt;br/&gt;as a team can serve as role models on the forefront of
the fight&lt;br/&gt;against cancer, and in particular are in a good position
to&lt;br/&gt;affect breast cancer studies, which are of special importance
to&lt;br/&gt;women's health. The results from solving the
challenging&lt;br/&gt;mathematical, computational and biological problems of
this&lt;br/&gt;project are made publicly accessible through publications
and&lt;br/&gt;web-based postings. This collaborative effort has the
potential&lt;br/&gt;to help clinicians save lives and reduce the suffering of
cancer&lt;br/&gt;patients. &lt;br/&gt;