* 0414902
* Collaborative Research: Phylogeny and Evolution of American Taxa of Acacia Subgenus Acacia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Joseph Miller, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 208,615.00

0414902&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt; The genus Acacia consists of shrubs and
trees that are dominant in the arid vegetation of the tropical and subtropical
world, including the Americas. Despite economic and ecological importance of
acacias, the evolutionary relationships of the species (phylogenies) and
morphological trends of evolution among the hundreds of described species (such
as leaf, flower, and seed evolution) are poorly known. Collaborating researchers
Dr. David Seigler at University of Illinois and Dr. Joseph Miller at University
of Iowa will accumulate new DNA sequence data for plastid and nuclear genes from
numerous species samples of acacias from the Americas, Africa, Asia, and
Australia. Field work in Mexico and the Dominican Republic will complement
samples supplied by colleagues from Old World species, to construct a
phylogenetic framework for the largely American subgenus of acacias, and to
explore relationships with those African species suspected to be close
relatives, including some with symbiotic associations with ants remarkably
similar to the American ant-acacia symbionts. In turn, the phylogenetic
framework will help clarify issues concerning species delimitation, geographic
distribution, and nomenclature in the group.&lt;br/&gt; Improved understanding
of the systematics and phylogenetics of acacias will help agronomists,
conservationists, ecologists, and rangeland managers in their work, and will
sharpen questions to be addressed concerning pollination biology, rhizobial
nitrogen fixation, and biogeography of these plants. Interactions will be
strengthened with scientific colleagues in Latin America, Africa, Australia, and
Europe. Students will be trained in field and laboratory (herbarium) studies,
and will accompany the investigators on field collecting trips abroad.
Interactive identification keys will be posted to a website maintained by
Australian researchers for the study of acacia biology and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;