* 0414122
* Statistical Mechanics of Systems Far from Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Beate Schmittmann, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 555,000.00

This award supports theoretical research on the statistical mechanics of systems
far from equilibrium. The unifying theme is the characterization and
understanding of complex behavior in interacting many-particle systems driven
far from thermal equilibrium. The key challenge is to devise a reliable
theoretical framework which predicts macroscopic observables from the
microscopic dynamics of statistical systems. Currently, such a link exists only
for equilibrium systems, in the form of the extremely successful Gibbs ensemble
theory. Finding a similar methodology for the non-equilibrium counterparts is of
fundamental significance. Given the ubiquity of non-equilibrium phenomena in the
biological, physical, and engineering sciences, progress in this endeavor will
have broad, interdisciplinary impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has a
dual approach, focusing on simple models on one hand, and application-driven
studies on the other. In equilibrium statistical mechanics, minimal models such
as the Ising model have played a central role. Thanks to the availability of
exact solutions and the principle of universality, they have provided deep
insight into phase transitions as well as reliable predictions for many physical
systems. To serve as a successful proving ground for real non-equilibrium
systems, a good minimal model must capture their essential ingredient, namely
nontrivial energy fluxes. Lattice gases with one or several species of
particles, whose dynamics is biased by an external drive, achieve this goal: The
drive injects energy into the system and the thermal bath absorbs it, so that a
non-equilibrium steady state is established. Unlike its equilibrium counterpart,
this state breaks a key symmetry: detailed balance. As a consequence, much
richer phenomena emerge, offering profound challenges. Examples include
unexpected ordered structures, novel non-equilibrium transitions, and surprising
behaviors in low dimensions. These will be explored
here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the understanding of these proto-systems improves,
more complex features will be added, in order to model physical systems more
faithfully. Here, two applications with an interdisciplinary aspect are
proposed: Protein synthesis and gas diffusion through aged polymer membranes.
Both projects encompass the modeling of actual data, from biochemistry and
chemical engineering, expressed through a carefully designed non-equilibrium
dynamics. They extend the confines of minimal models by including two
characteristics which are critical in many real systems: disorder and open
boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final part of the project aims at the very
core of non-equilibrium statistical physics. Using an elegant graph-theoretical
representation of arbitrary non-equilibrium steady states, the PI's are
addressing a critical fundamental issue, namely, the topology of probability
currents in configuration space. While seemingly abstract, this analysis is also
geared towards a very practical goal: how to design much more efficient codes
for simulating desired non-equilibrium steady states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
aspects of the project promise to have broader impact. First, any progress in
developing a basic theoretical framework for non-equilibrium processes will
reverberate far beyond the borders of condensed matter theory. Second, the
applied projects address important problems in their respective fields. Finally,
the project offers many opportunities for student participation at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical award addresses fundamental
issues in non-equilibrium statistical physics. While equilibrium statistical
physics is on a relatively firm foundation, the same cannot be said of non-
equilibrium systems. Yet equilibrium systems are all around us, including life
itself. In addition to fundamental issues, the research will also address a
number of specific applications. Finally, the principal investigators have an
exemplary record of working with undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
postdoctoral associates. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;