* 0414029
* SGER: Developing a high-definition face modeling system for recognition and generation of face and face expressions
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Lijun Yin, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Face analysis and synthesis has become an inexhaustible research topic in both
the scientific community and industry, driven by applications in human-computer
interaction, security, and entertainment. State of the art 3D face models used
for recognition or animation cannot represent and identify subtle differences in
facial appearance or feature configuration necessary to uniquely discriminate
among individuals. In this project, the PI will develop a novel technique for
analysis and synthesis of the human face at a higher level of detail than it is
currently possible to achieve. A so-called 3D topographic representation is
proposed for labeling and modeling the facial surface, in which the face is
represented by an active mesh with a variable resolution based on the surface
curvatures and the topographic labels. The PI expects that tracing the behavior
of some features across multiple scales will reveal precious information about
the nature of the underlying physical process, and thus lead to establishing an
intrinsic relationship between facial features and surface properties (i.e.,
peak, pit, ridge, ravine, saddle, hill, flat, etc). This will, in turn, provide
a scientific understanding of how facial appearance and representation vary
along with expression changes, in an intuitive and detailed manner, and will
offer profound new insights into how 3D facial surfaces contain embedded
features that are not exhibited in 2D planar images. The PI anticipates that
this pilot research will eventually enable him to develop a "humanized" system
for recognizing human faces and their expressions (even emotions), as well as an
automatic system for generating life-like facial
expressions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will improve
our understanding of the cognitive processes involved in human vision, and
impact the development of next generation human-computer interfaces in which
machines can recognize facial expressions. The work will also have important
applications in law enforcement (mug shot searches, security surveillance, and
lie detection), access control (biometric authentication), entertainment (films,
media, and games), videoconferencing (including support for lip-reading), and
medicine (craniofacial plastic surgery planning, and cosmetics).