* 0414175
* Molecules Based on Phenyl-Acetylene Scaffolding:  Experimental, Theoretical, and Materials Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Michael Haley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2007
* USD 390,000.00

The focus of this research involves the synthesis of phenyl-acetylene polymeric
structures based on dehydrobenzoannulenes (DBAs). The current targets are DBA
macromolecules calculated to have core sizes in the nanometer regime. The
synthetic plan utilizes a dendrimer- inspired modification of the cross-
coupling/macrocyclization methodology used in the group. Further, a large number
of annulenes will be prepared that contain topologies, symmetries and functional
groups previously difficult to obtain. The nonlinear optical properties of all
the DBAs will be determined as well. Finally, hetero-dienyne cyclizations will
be used in an effort to prepare molecules with interesting biological
properties.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
the research activities of Dr. Michael M. Haley in the Department of Chemistry
at the University of Oregon. Professor Haley will focus his work on developing
methods for the synthesis of dehydrobenzoannulenes (DBAs), macrocycles designed
for advanced materials applications. The project will have broader impacts in
the area of student training at the undergraduate and graduate levels and could
be of importance to the pharmaceutical industry and to materials science.