* 0414239
* Development of Unique Multitopic Ligands for the Syntheses of Highly Organized Multi-metallic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Daniel Reger, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 351,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports Professor Daniel Reger at the University of South Carolina to design
new types of multi-metallic coordination compounds that have highly organized
structures in the solid state and exhibit unusual electrical, photophysical, and
magnetic properties. These complexes will be prepared using a series of new
ligands that are specifically designed to bond to more than one metal and
contain functional groups designed to support supramolecular structures. New
host/guest chemistry based on assemblies formed by unique tripodal ligands such
as 1,3,5-(CH3)3C6[CH2OCH2C(pz)3]3 (pz=pyrazolyl ring), and metal complexes of
new bitopic ligands, such as Fe[C5H4CH(pz)2]2, that are based on the semi-
flexible nature of the ferrocene core, will be targeted. Particularly important
systems that will be investigated are spin-crossover Fe(II)N6 complexes, which
are complexes with switchable domains, that open new possibilities for the
development of novel memory devices. &lt;br/&gt;New types of multi-metallic
coordination compounds will be synthesized that have highly organized structures
in the solid state and exhibit unusual properties. This research will lead to
the syntheses of new ligands that are specifically designed to bond to more than
one metal and to develop the growing knowledge of the relationship between
supramolecular structures and optical and magnetic properties. Such materials
may have a significant potential impact by forming the basis for novel memory
devices. This research is attractive for cultivating broadly trained specialists
at various educational levels. Indeed, the PI has a tradition of diverse human
resource and education development.