* 0414981
* Collaborative Research:    Achieving Information Integration of Web Databases Through the Construction of Metasearch Engines
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2009
* Weiyi Meng, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2009
* USD 230,001.00

The goal of this collaborative research project (0414981, W. Meng, SUNY
Binghamton and 0414939, C. Yu, UIC) is to develop technologies for providing
integrated access to Web databases. The approach consists of developing highly
automated solutions to the following tasks: discovering Web databases from the
Web, clustering them according to their application domains, integrating the
search interfaces of the Web databases in the same domain into an integrated
search interface, mapping each query submitted to an integrated interface to its
underlying Web databases, extracting and annotating the search result records
from the result pages returned from the local Web databases, and merging the
results to form an integrated response for presentation to the user. Web
services based interfaces of Web databases, if available, will be utilized. The
evaluation of the developed algorithms is based on real Web databases from
different domains. This research is expected to produce new algorithms, useful
datasets, a software toolkit, and several operational Web database metasearch
engines (including some for the Air Force Research Lab at Rome). The developed
technology can be used in many applications including comparison shopping and
collecting data from the deep Web. Research results will be incorporated into
several courses the PIs teach and students will be recruited to participate in
the research activities. Research results will be disseminated through published
papers as well as a textbook on Web-based search technology. The project Web
site (http://www.cs.binghamton.edu/~meng/DMSE.html) provides access to research
results as well as datasets and demo systems. &lt;br/&gt;