* 0414229
* IMR:  Acquisition of a Gel Permeation Chromatography with Multiple Detection System for Polymer Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Surita Bhatia, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 76,601.00

This proposal requests support for acquiring a gel permeation chromatography
set-up with MALS, RI, and viscosity detectors for polymer materials research and
education. The need for the instrumentation is based on significantly increased
demand in using GPC for characterizing custom-designed polymers. This demand is
evidenced by the fact that seven of the investigators listed in this proposal
were hired by the University of Massachusetts within the past five years. The
applications of these custom-designed polymers range from material science to
biology. This instrument will also serve as a demonstration equipment for high
school outreach programs targeted on science popularization. %%% This proposal
requests a Gel Permeation Chromatography equipment to characterize polymeric
materials. Several research groups at the University of Massachusetts are
interested in the design and synthesis of polymers that are of interest in a
wide variety of applications. These applications range from material science
(e.g. light emitting diodes and photovoltaic materials) to biology (e.g.
targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs to cancer cells). On the educational
side, this equipment will be used for demonstrations in a 'science
popularization' outreach program that is being run by the PI and co-PIs of this
proposal. ***