* 0414251
* IMR - RUI: Acquisition of a Magnet Cryostat for Terahertz Spectroscopy and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Mary Parks, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 138,507.00

This grant will fund the acquisition of a split-coil magnet cryostat that will
be incorporated into an existing terahertz spectrometer. The initial experiments
that will be performed using this spectrometer will examine the causes and
effects of quantum tunneling of the magnetic moment in single molecule magnets.
Quantum tunneling of the magnetic moment of Mn12-acetate was first reported in
1996, but its mechanism is still uncertain. This project will use a time-domain
terahertz spectroscopy to probe a collection of these molecules during the
tunneling process in order to provide a link between the local environment of
the molecules and the tunneling probability. In a separate experiment, the
process of relaxation will be observed through the observation of the THz pulse
emitted when the molecules are suddenly heated above the blocking temperature,
and it is anticipated that superradiance will be observed. In the longer term,
this instrument will be used to study a wide variety of effects ranging from
spin density waves to superconductivity, and it will also be used in upper level
courses in solid state physics and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum tunneling is one of
the hallmarks of quantum mechanics; its occurrence in a material guarantees that
this material's properties cannot be explained by classical mechanics alone. In
the twentieth century, the properties of very small quantum mechanical systems
like atoms became fairly well understood. Now physicists are attempting to
understand what happens when quantum mechanics becomes important for larger
systems. The acquisition of this cryostat will enable experiments that will
increase our understanding of quantum mechanical tunneling in the material
Mn12-acetate, in which clusters of atoms behave as nanoscale magnets that can
tunnel from one orientation to another. Besides being of fundamental scientific
interest, this line of research may also lead to denser memory storage for
computers or even to quantum computers. These possible future applications make
these experiments particularly exciting for undergraduate physics students. This
research award supports undergraduate research by allowing students at a liberal
arts college to be involved in an exciting research project. It also will
benefit students enrolled in upper level solid state physics and materials
science courses by making it possible to perform laboratory experiments in a
strong magnetic field so they can see directly the phenomena they are
studying.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;