* 0414083
* CAREER: Designing Hypertext Materials for the Science Classroom: Understanding Students' Changing Cognitive Representations
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Sadhana Puntambekar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 06/30/2006
* USD 103,462.00

My research and teaching plans are geared towards designing and implementing
online science resources to help students learn science, and providing
professional development activities for teachers. My plans integrate an
interdisciplinary approach to designing and using hypertext resources in science
classrooms, evaluating the cognitive demands of student learning while using
such material, as well as associated professional development initiatives for
teachers.

The aims of my research plan are: (1) Design, implement and evaluate hypertext
material for the science classroom. These materials will focus on helping
students understand interrelationships between principles and concepts so that
they learn science as an integrated body of knowledge, not as a set of isolated
facts. There are numerous interrelationships that students need to understand in
order to effectively use and do science. For example, in understanding planets,
physics shades into chemistry, astronomy, and geology, and biology shades into
chemistry, in understanding osmosis. (2) Through empirical studies, understand
students' changing cognitive representations as they learn from these materials.
This will help not only in understanding student learning but will also help
understand how students learn from hypertext materials, thus providing
guidelines for better design.

My teaching plan has the following aims. (1) Continue developing the graduate
program in Instructional Media and Technology. (2) Integrate professional
development activities for teachers along with design and implementation of
research materials. (3) Build an interdisciplinary team of students to enable
the design and integration of technology in science classrooms.