* 0414944
* IMR: Development of a Variable Temperature/Variable Magnetic Field Scanning Force Microscope and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Charles Ahn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 168,000.00

We propose the development of a variable temperature, variable magnetic field
ultrahigh vacuum scanning force microscope that enables the local measurement of
frictional, magnetostatic, and electrostatic forces as a function of temperature
(10 K &lt; T &lt; 300 K) and magnetic field (B &lt; 0.1 T). The new instrument
will combine well-tested elements together with new design elements that have
not been applied to SFM before. The attributes of extremely high resolution and
stability, ultrahigh vacuum with in-situ tip and sample preparation, flexibility
in temperature from 10 K to room temperature, and magnetic fields up to more
than 0.1 T would be unique in the US. Friction has been explored at the
nanoscale in the past as a function of the applied load or the sliding velocity,
but very little has been done as a function of the temperature due to a lack of
suitable equipment. Such experiments will be useful to test current theoretical
models of friction, which describe friction as a thermally activated process. To
address these questions, we will investigate friction as a function of the
temperature, and also measure friction at phase transitions in order to separate
phononic and electronic contributions to friction. In this project, we will
carry out local imaging of the phase separation between ferromagnetic metallic
and charge-ordered insulating clusters that coexist in colossal magnetoresistive
(CMR) manganites using electrostatic force microscopy and magnetic force
microscopy at variable temperatures and magnetic fields. We will also examine
the low field manipulation of phase percolation of epitaxial ferroelectric/CMR
heterostructures using an electric field effect approach. In this experiment, we
will look to induce metallic conduction at low magnetic fields (hundreds of
gauss) by applying small voltages (a few volts). &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;We
propose the development of a variable temperature, variable magnetic field
ultrahigh vacuum scanning force microscope that enables the local measurement of
frictional, magnetostatic, and electrostatic forces as a function of temperature
and magnetic field. The new instrument will combine well-tested elements
together with new design elements that have not been applied before. The
attributes of extremely high resolution and stability, ultrahigh vacuum with in-
situ tip and sample preparation, flexibility in temperature, and magnetic fields
up to more than 0.1 T would be unique in the US. Friction has been explored at
the nanoscale in the past as a function of the applied load or the sliding
velocity, but very little has been done as a function of the temperature due to
a lack of suitable equipment. Such experiments will be useful to test current
theoretical models of friction, which describe friction as a thermally activated
process.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;