* 0414378
* Spatial Organization in Epitaxial Thin Films and Chemisorbed Layers:  Manipulation of Nano- and Meso-scale Structure on Metal Substrates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Patricia Thiel, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2009
* USD 540,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0414378&lt;br/&gt;Evans/Iowa
State&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project, carried out at Iowa State
University, is a collaboration between and experimental surface scientist, Pat
Thiel, and a mathematician/modeling expert, James Evans. The work, which is
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, addresses metallic
thin film growth and spatial organization of thin films. The effect of
surfactants on heteroepitaxial growth, thin film growth on bimetallic and
quasicrystalline substrates, and the ordering of chemisorbed layers on metal
substrates are all addressed in this research project. Experimental information
from scanning probe microscopy and high resolution electron diffraction is
combined with theoretical modeling of the growth process and calculations of
geometric structures and relaxation of thin film morphologies. Information from
this fundamental work helps to understand electronic materials processing and
nanomaterials synthesis and preparation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
understand the growth processes that form the basis of many important
technologies, including electronic device preparation, catalysis formation, and
nanomaterials synthesis, fundamental information about the growth and
morphological changes of model systems must be obtained. This research
collaboration between Evans and Thiel at Iowa State University provides detailed
experimental information about the growth process with state of the art modeling
of the growth and relaxation processes. With the support of the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry Program, this collaboration is examining the effects of
surfactants, bimetallic and quasicrystal systems, and ordered chemisorbed
overlayers using these approaches. &lt;br/&gt;