* 0414311
* Acquisition of an Automated Sequencer for Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching in an Undergraduate College Setting
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Andrea Sequeira, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 150,500.00

A grant has been awarded to Wellesley College under the direction of Dr. Andrea
S. Sequeira for support of the Acquisition of a Genetic Analyzer for
Interdisciplinary Research and Teaching in an Undergraduate College Setting. A
diverse array of important biological questions in a wide variety of organisms
are addressed in the ten research and teaching projects, undertaken by six
faculty members of the Department of Biological Sciences, that will benefit from
the arrival of the automated sequencer on campus. Projects that will utilize the
instrument include: A study of differentiation of populations and formation of
new species of endemic weevils, identification of differences in the genome of
bacterial strains that respond differently to pH stress, using DNA sequences to
identify genes that play a role in determining the localization within the cell
of a protein that is important for cell division in budding yeast. The automated
sequencer is considered a crucial piece of equipment that will play an important
role in the training and research experience of Wellesley undergraduates.
Wellesley has built an outstanding record in educating women scientists, a
record improved in recent years by the increasing amount of students of
underrepresented minorities being attracted to the sciences. The impact of the
automated sequencer on research will be two-fold, enhancing research-training
opportunities for students during courses and for those that take the
opportunity to work side-by-side with faculty and enhancing the research
environment for our faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The automated sequencer will
play a role in achieving the research goals described above but most importantly
the instrument will be integrated into undergraduate lab settings at both
intermediate and advanced levels, in at least five courses. In courses as
Evolution, Molecular Genetics, Advanced Topics in Cellular Regulation, Molecular
Biology and Population Genetics and Systematics, the acquisition of the
automated sequencer will enhance the development of discovery based laboratory
exercises, a realistic approach to science fundamentally different from
traditional laboratory demonstrations. The advantage of in-house data
generating, with the acquisition of an automated sequencer, will provide
students with hands-on expertise in generating the data themselves and the
possibility to customize the sequence analysis parameters while providing
students with the tools to master a widely used molecular biology technique.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The opportunity for undergraduate women students to
experience the excitement of research collaborations with faculty and access to
state-of-the-art instrumentation has long been a hallmark of science programs at
Wellesley. Many alumnae from the sciences cite undergraduate research with a
faculty member as the single most influential factor in their choice of career.
Ultimately, the broader impact of this award will derive from these well-trained
and talented young women choosing to pursue science careers, strengthening the
scientific society of the United States and expanding the benefits to all the
society. &lt;br/&gt;