* 0414073
* Molecular Mechanisms of pheromone Perception: Role of Pheromone Binding Protein
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Smita Mohanty, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 08/31/2006
* USD 252,057.00

The ability to detect and respond to chemical stimuli is a fundamental behavior
of all organisms. Lepidoptera male moths have an exquisitely sensitive olfactory
system that is capable of perceiving airborne pheromone molecules released by
females and responding to them over great distances. They are capable of
distinguishing between closely related pheromones of different species.
Pheromone binding proteins play an important role in olfaction. They are carrier
proteins that transport the volatile hydrophobic pheromone molecules across the
aqueous lymph to the membrane-bound olfactory receptors. Interaction of
pheromone and pheromone binding protein is the first step in the sequential
events that leads to the activation of the receptor. Despite over 50 % sequence
identity pheromone binding proteins from different moth species have different
substrate specificity. The overall goal of this project is to understand the
role of pheromone binding protein in the process of recognition. This project
utilizes biochemistry, molecular biology, and structural biology to test the
hypothesis that pheromone specificity is encoded in the pheromone binding
proteins. Knowledge gained from these studies may have significance to insect
control, through pheromone based integrated pest management programs to control
agricultural pests and also those who are carrier of vector borne diseases. This
project will contribute to Stony Brook University through "Women in Science and
Engineering program provide training opportunities for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, particularly for women and under-
represented groups.