* 0414754
* Interacting with Human Physiology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* James Levine, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2008
* USD 640,169.00

People in this country spend increasing amounts of their work and leisure time
in front of computers. The term "human computer interaction" suggests a two-way
exchange, with each participant aware of the other and responding appropriately.
In reality, computers may appear frequently rude, frustrating, indifferent, and
generally unpleasant. Much of this can be attributed to the fact that current
computers are almost completely unaware of the actual state of the human user.
The research community has proposed methods for computers to understand and
respond to the user's feelings with mixed results. Emphasis has been placed on
stress and frustration, feelings often generated by the use of the computer
itself. There is no previous work, however, with regard to monitoring the actual
health of the user during computer use. In this project, the PIs will
incorporate physiologic monitoring in the human-computer interface, with the
help of a thermal imaging camera employed as a computer peripheral. Through bio-
heat modeling of facial imagery, they will monitor a range of vital signs
including blood flow and cardiac pulse. This physiological information will then
be used to draw inferences about a variety of health symptoms, possibly
including stress, headaches, and heartbeat irregularities. Outcomes of the
project will include novel/improved facial tracking and bio-heat modeling
algorithms that: will allow contact-free and accurate measurement of vital signs
without restricting the user; will enable the study of ubiquitous ailments like
stress, heartbeat irregularities, and headaches on an unprecedented continuous
basis; and will serve as a catalyst for the creation of new HCI paradigms that
incorporate the computer as an aware and responsive partner with the user (e.g.,
in which the computer can react in real time to physiologic data for the benefit
of the user). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In the short term, the
results of this project will provide less cumbersome tools for those attempting
to conduct research in the areas of usability and of emotional and affective
interfaces. In the longer term, they will support a fundamental change in the
way that we interact with machines. Today, software designers create systems
that they hope will not frustrate the users. In the future, software designers
will create truly collaborative interactions in which human and machines are
both observing and responding. This has the potential to greatly improve the
usability of systems for the elderly, minorities, the economically
disadvantaged, and other populations impacted by the "digital divide." On the
clinical front, developing systems that can monitor the health status of an
individual will revolutionize remote monitoring and the care of chronic
conditions such as anxiety, heartbeat irregularities, and headaches.