* 0414063
* New Architectures of Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Kung Wang, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2008
* USD 342,000.00

The focus of this research involves the development of synthetic methods for the
production of helicenes. A variety of 4,5-disubstituted phenanthrene
derivatives, helicenes and related nonplanar polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
possessing a helical twist will be prepared via the radical cyclization
reactions of enyne-allenes. Thermolysis of enyne-allenes will also be used to
synthesize bridged bis(benzofluorene), which, in turn, will serve as precursors
for the production of ansa-metallocene complexes of group 4 metals. The latter
have potential use for olefin polymerization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research of Dr. Kung K. Wang in the Department of Chemistry at West Virginia
University. Dr. Wang will focus his work on developing methodology for the
synthesis of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons possessing a helical twist
(helicenes). The helicenes are inherently chiral and form a class of materials
having interesting optical and electronic properties. The broader impact of the
work is in the area of materials science as well as in the field of asymmetric
catalysis. Further, the project presents an excellent vehicle for the training
of both undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented
populations, and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;