* 0414521
* Natural Variation in Expression of Self-Incompatibility in A. Thaliana: Evolution of Inbreeding
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Mikhail Nasrallah, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 07/31/2008
* USD 390,000.00

The switch from out-crossing to self-fertilizing (inbreeding) mating system is
one of the most prevalent evolutionary trends in plant reproduction. A major
goal of the proposed study is to identify and characterize the genes underlying
evolutionary switches to self-fertility, and thus understand a major process in
the reproductive isolation of plant species. In crucifers, two genes, which
encode the S-locus receptor kinase SRK and its ligand the S-locus cysteine-rich
peptide SCR, function together to prevent self-pollination and are thus
responsible for the self-incompatible (out-crossing) mode of mating. The model
plant Arabidopsis thaliana is a highly self-fertile species, but it can be
rendered self-incompatible by transfer of these two genes from its self-
incompatible relative A. lyrata. Natural populations of A. thaliana were found
to exhibit polymorphisms in their SRK/SCR sequences, and to harbor hidden
variation for expression of self-incompatibility, which can only be uncovered by
transfer of A. lyrata SRK and SCR genes. Genetic and molecular analysis of this
variability will allow, for the first time, a study of the genetics of
inbreeding in natural populations of a genetically tractable species. The study
is expected to provide insight into the changes in mating system that occur
during or subsequent to speciation, further our understanding of the molecular
mechanism of self-incompatibility, and possibly reveal the evolutionary origins
of self-incompatibility and its genes. In the long term, the project should also
enhance the ability of breeders to manipulate plant reproduction for crop
improvement.