* 0414919
* Learning Tone
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Gina-Anne Levow, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2009
* USD 319,500.00

Human languages make crucial use of pitch to convey information. This
information ranges from word meaning in languages with lexical tone to syntactic
and pragmatic information across a wide range of languages. Furthermore, child
language research has suggested that hyper-articulated pitch, loudness, and
duration in child-directed speech play a role in bootstrapping intonational as
well as lexical and syntactic acquisition. However, despite the fundamental
importance of this tone information, computational approaches to speech
recognition and processing have largely viewed such pitch variation as a source
of noise to be normalized away. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on
recent phonetic research that identifies the key role of context in tone
realization and pitch variation, explained through mechanisms of maximum rate of
pitch change and tonal coarticulation. This research develops a broader-context,
articulatorily-motivated model of tone, utilizing a common framework across a
range of language and tone typologies including Bantu languages, Chinese
dialects, and English. The hyper-articulation of child-directed speech is
exploited to identify linguistically relevant variation and to understand its
role in tone acquisition. Through unsupervised learning, this work automatically
identifies tone and pitch accent in natural speech, while highly leveraging
sparse, manually annotated resources for gold-standard evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improved techniques for modeling and recognition of
tone developed in this project will allow computational spoken language
understanding systems to more fully exploit the information carried by pitch.
These components will also enhance support for language learning through
integration of feedback on tone and pitch accent use in a computer-assisted
learning system.