* 0414903
* IMR:      Acquisition of a SGI Origin350 for Nano/Bio-Technology Computational Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 119,649.00

Support is requested for acquiring a SGI Origin350 with 16 R16,000 processors
running at 800MHz, 16GB memory, and 4 x 73GB of disk space. This equipment will
enhance the existing computational facilities and complement the ongoing
experimental efforts in the Institute for Micromanufacturing (IfM) and the
College of Engineering &amp; Science at Louisiana Tech University by providing
high quality computational research in nano- and biotechnology on three
fundamental fronts: small molecules, polymers (biopolymers are implicit), and
cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument will support both faculty
and students working at several applied branches of science and technology,
while building upon the existing computational resources of Louisiana Tech. The
acquisition of the supercomputer will ultimately benefit two educational
institutions in an EPSCoR state. Louisiana Tech University, which has a
significantly high percentage of African-American students for a non-HBCU
institution (~15% of enrollment), and Grambling State University (GSU), a HBCU
institution dedicated to undergraduate education with a strong commitment to
undergraduate research in north Louisiana. At present, one faculty member holds
a joint faculty appointment position (JFAP) between these two Universities and
two more JFAPs are expected to be filled in 2004. These faculty members are
expected to be the "bridge-for-conducting-research" between these two
institutions. The requested equipment will be also made available for research
activities of GSU undergraduates. Consequently, this project will have a
significant impact on underrepresented groups in engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support is requested for acquiring a
supercomputer (SGI Origin350) that will enhance the existing computational
facilities at Louisiana Tech University and complement the ongoing experimental
efforts in the College of Engineering &amp; Science by providing high quality
computational research in several fundamental and currently applied branches of
science, such as chemistry, physics, and nano/bio-
technology.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate students involved in research
projects are expected to gain knowledge and experience with this state-of-the-
art computational facility and the readily available modeling software. The
acquisition of the supercomputer will ultimately benefit two educational
institutions in an EPSCoR state. Louisiana Tech University, which has a
significantly high percentage of African-American students for a non-HBCU
institution (~15% of enrollment), and Grambling State University (GSU), a HBCU
institution dedicated to undergraduate education with a strong commitment to
undergraduate research in north Louisiana. At present, one faculty member holds
a joint faculty appointment position (JFAP) between these two Universities and
two more JFAPs are expected to be filled in 2004. These faculty members are
expected to be the "bridge-for-conducting-research" between these two
institutions. The requested equipment will be also made available for research
activities of GSU undergraduates. Consequently, this project will have a
significant impact on underrepresented groups in engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;