* 0414735
* Development of a 10 m SANS Instrument for Materials Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* John Barker, NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
* Interagency Agreement
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

At National Institute of Standards and Technology's Center for Neutron Research
(NCNR) scientists and engineers from around the U.S. use neutrons to probe the
sub-microscopic structures and molecular motions that determine the properties
of materials ranging from concrete to cell membranes. One of the principal
techniques used is small-angle neutron scattering (SANS), which specifically
probes materials microstructure in the range from 1 nm to 500 nm. In response to
increasing demand from university researchers for SANS measurements, the NCNR,
through its NSF sponsored Center for High Resolution Neutron Scattering (CHRNS),
has undertaken to renovate a 20-year-old, medium resolution 8-m long SANS
instrument, and to make 50 % of the beam time on the refurbished instrument
available through its user program. In addition, another 20 % of the beam time
on the 10-m SANS would be set aside specifically for graduate student training
and early stage thesis research. This allocation of beam time represents a novel
approach to enhancing the educational benefit of a national user facility and to
developing the next generation of researchers knowledgeable and skilled in
neutron scattering techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Institute of Standards and Technology's Center for Neutron Research (NCNR)
currently operates two 30-m long small-angle neutron scattering (SANS)
instruments that, in terms of neutron flux, measurement range, versatility and
ease of use, are the best in North America and competitive with the best such
instruments in the world. In response to the sustained demand for SANS
measurements, the NCNR, through its NSF sponsored Center for High Resolution
Neutron Scattering (CHRNS), has undertaken to renovate a 20-year-old, medium
resolution 8-m long SANS instrument, and to make 50 % of the beam time on the
refurbished instrument available through its user program. The modernized
instrument would have a working length of 10 meters and a measurement range that
would satisfy the requirements of roughly one-half to two-thirds of SANS user
experiments. In addition, another 20 % of the beam time on the 10-m SANS would
be set aside specifically for graduate student training and early stage thesis
research. This allocation of beam time represents a novel approach to enhancing
the educational benefit of a national user facility and to developing the next
generation of researchers knowledgeable and skilled in neutron scattering
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;