* 0414680
* Collaborative Research: Sensitivity of Ecosystem Processes to Precipitation Across a Grassland to Shrubland Vegetation Transition in the Soutwestern U.S.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* David Williams, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Martyn M. Caldwell
* 07/31/2007
* USD 223,933.00

This project asks the general question of how ecosystems composed of different
types of plants use water and process carbon dioxide. Specifically, this project
will evaluate the differences in water-use and carbon processing in grassland
versus shrubland ecosystems of the semi-arid, southwestern U.S. In this region,
water-use by vegetation can influence stream behavior and the subsequent
availability of water for human endeavor. Additionally, how vegetation in this
region processes carbon from the atmosphere may influence the carbon sink-
versus-source characteristics of North America. This project will evaluate
water-use and carbon processing at five sites in both riparian and upland
settings each with a gradient of vegetation types (between grass-dominated and
shrub-dominated) will be evaluated. The project will measure the photosynthetic
behavior of whole ecosystems, along with patterns of vegetation water-use as
assessed via large-scale meteorological techniques. Rainfall simulations will be
employed in grasslands and shrublands to understand how a change in rainfall
events affects the way these ecosystems function. This work is motivated by the
expected shift in vegetation composition within North America's biomes in the
next century. This vegetation change is arguably the most ubiquitous and
significant manifestation of global change. The current increase in the density
of woody plants in North America's grassland and savanna ecosystems may be an
important contributor to the North American carbon sink. How such a change in
vegetation composition affects landscape water budgets is unknown, yet may
directly influence society in water-limited regions of the globe. On top of
these issues are the expected shifts in the timing and magnitude of rainfall in
North America. Together these issues suggest the need for a greater
understanding of how vegetation type, water-use, carbon processing and variation
in climate (primarily rainfall) are interlinked. This project will contribute
substantially to the goals of the National Science Foundation in the production
of interdisciplinary knowledge and education of students. This program
represents a collaboration among several researchers with distinct backgrounds
and areas of expertise and hence will foster novel interdisciplinary approaches
cutting across plant physiological ecology, ecosystem ecology and hydrology.
Graduate students, including females and underrepresented groups, will be
involved in all aspects of the science proposed. Graduate students working on
this project will disseminate the information and enthusiasm derived from this
project to others through K-12 Teaching / Research Fellowships. The research
goals and individual members of this project are critical components of the long
term focus of the NSF Science and Technology Center "Sustainability of semi-Arid
Hydrology and Riparian Areas" (SAHRA-http://www.sahra.arizona.edu). This project
will further the goals of the Upper San Pedro Partnership, a consortium of 20
agencies and organizations working to meet the water needs of area residents
while protecting the San Pedro River (http://www.usppartnership.com).
Undergraduate students employed in this project will be recruited from a program
at the University of Arizona (Undergraduate Biology Research Program) that
actively encourages research opportunities for under-represented groups.