* 0414768
* The Role of Bik1p in Positioning the Mitotic Spindle in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Rita Miller, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 08/31/2008
* USD 430,180.00

Correct positioning of the mitotic spindle is critically important for the
development of all eukaryotes. This process utilizes both the actin and
microtubule cytoskeletal systems. In the yeast, S. cerevisiae, spindle
positioning requires two genetic systems, the Kar9p pathway and the dynein
pathway. The Kar9p pathway functions prior to anaphase, whereas the dynein
pathway functions later with the onset of anaphase. The molecular mechanisms
that co-ordinate the two pathways are not known. Bik1p, a member of the CLIP 170
family of microtubule binding proteins, associates with proteins of both
pathways and could therefore function to coordinate the activities of the two
pathways. The goal of this research is to determine the function of interactions
between Bik1p and proteins in the Kar9p pathway. These studies will use
mutations that separate the interactions of BIK1 with proteins of the Kar9p
pathway from the interactions of BIK1 with proteins in the dynein pathway.
Several models will be tested for the role of the Bik1p-Kar9p pathway
interactions. Because Bik1p is a plus-end microtubule-binding protein and
interacts with Kar9p, the bik1 alleles will be tested for a role in
Kar9p-dependent microtubule orientation. Bik1p will also be tested for a role in
coordinating the temporal pattern of the Kar9p and dynein pathways using a
series of biochemical and live-cell microscopy assays. A fuller understanding of
how the two major pathways for spindle positioning are coordinated can provide
important insights into how microtubules maintain semi-stable attachments while
simultaneously undergoing shortening. This project will also promote the
integration of education and research. The PI will provide summer training for
undergraduates in the McNair program, which encourages low-income and minority
students to pursue graduate education. The PI will further integrate teaching
and research by forming an educational collaboration with SUNY-Genesco, a
liberal arts college in the State University of New York
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;