* 0414117
* Prosodic, Intonational, and Voice Quality Correlates of Disfluency
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Jennifer Cole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2008
* USD 526,973.00

Spontaneous speech is typically interrupted by one disfluency every 10-20 words.
While humans easily comprehend disfluent speech, computer speech recognizers
often fail to separate disfluent regions from surrounding context, resulting in
failed transcription and loss of meaning. This project develops disfluency
recognition for automatic speech recognition by investigating perceptually
salient acoustic correlates of disfluency. Effects of disfluency on the pitch,
energy and voice source features are examined in the Switchboard corpus of
spontaneous speech. The approximate repetition of pitch and energy contours is
investigated as a cue marking the dependency between a disfluency and its
subsequent repair. Analysis-by-synthesis techniques are adapted from the Stem-ML
model of speech generation to recognize prosodic repetition that is often
obscured by differences in scaling. Voice quality correlates of disfluency, such
as glottalization, are tracked through several acoustic measures of the spectral
envelope, with ROC testing performed to determine the best predictors.
Correlations between disfluency and intonational features marking accent and
phrasing are examined through the creation of a ToBI-standard intonation
labeling of the speech corpus. Acoustic and prosodic correlates of disfluency
are combined with a repetition language model in the design of a speech
recognizer that automatically transcribes both words and disfluencies. The
recognizer integrates cues at multiple linguistic levels which together serve to
identify regions of disfluency in spontaneous speech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will advance speech technology by enabling recognition of disfluency in
natural speech. It will contribute new statistical and acoustic models of
disfluency and a publicly accessible corpus of spontaneous speech with prosody
and disfluency annotation.&lt;br/&gt;