* 0414684
* Sigma Factor Exchange during Bacillus Subtilis Sporulation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* William Haldenwang, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2008
* USD 360,000.00

Bacillus endospore formation represents a simple differentiation in which a
series of physiological and morphological changes leads to a dormant cell form.
At an early stage in sporulation, Bacillus subtilis partitions itself into two
unequal compartments that are destined for unique fates. The smaller forespore
compartment develops into the spore. The larger mother cell compartment engulfs
and nurtures the forespore, then lyses to release the mature spore into the
environment. Each compartment's program of gene expression is controlled by the
sequential appearance of unique transcription factors. Sigma E is the first of
the mother cell transcription factors. It is synthesized in the predivisional
cell as an inactive proprotein (pro- E ), which later becomes active during a 2
hour period in the mother cell compartment. Maturation of pro- E occurs when a
sporulation specific protease (SpoIIGA), activated by a forespore generated
signal, cleaves 27 amino acids from the proprotein's amino terminus. The
activity of sigma E is restricted by both the time of its processing and its
turnover. Mature sigma E is unstable in the mother cell and even the normally
stable precursor is subject to compartment-specific degradation in the
forespore. The activation of sigma E and its turnover will be examined, using
mutational analyses to identify features of sigma E that make it uniquely
sensitive to degradation in the mother cell, the factors that lead to its
proteolysis in the forespore, and the consequences of preventing sigma E decay
on spore gene expression. In other experiments, the nature of the sigma E pro-
sequence's block on sigma E -activity will be examined in vitro. Additional
assays will test the ability of mature sigma E to compete for RNA polymerase
with the sigma factor A that it displaces during sporulation to ask whether this
holoenzyme changeover may be due to an inherent property of the sigma factors
themselves. Finally, mutational analyses and fluorescent protein fusions will be
employed to examine the activation of the SpoIIGA protease and the basis for its
localization in the mother cell. Regulation of cell fate by the selective
activation and degradation of transcription factors is likely to be widespread
in developmental processes. Bacillus sporulation provides a tractable model
system in which such mechanisms can be explored in detail. This project will
serve to train graduate and undergraduate students; many of the students are
from underrepresented backgrounds.