* 0414762
* Next-Generation Issues in Data Stream Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2010
* Jennifer Widom, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2010
* USD 949,697.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;NSF 0414762&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many modern
applications must contend with continuous, unbounded, possibly rapid and time-
varying streams of data, in addition to or instead of the more traditional bulk-
loaded, periodically updated, data sets. In the presence of data streams,
evaluating queries or other analyses over the data becomes a long-running,
continuous process, rather than the typical one-time queries and analyses
supported by traditional database systems. More generally, event-based, reactive
processing as a computing paradigm is becoming more and more prevalent, spanning
a wide variety of application areas. Continuous queries over data streams are an
intuitive and effective approach to data management within this paradigm. Data-
intensive applications of this type include network traffic monitoring and
engineering, analysis of sensor network data, monitoring call-detail records or
charge-card transactions for fraud detection, online analysis of financial data,
manufacturing monitoring and control, and others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
original work focused on basic functionality of a streaming data prototype, but
additional issues have become evident as applications have been deployed. These
include query processing issues, such as approximate techniques to handle system
overload, performance issues based on scalability problems and issues dealing
with the distributed nature of the data processing. In addition, new work on
algorithms for transparent querying of multiple web services and processing of
streams of approximate or uncertain data will be explored. Because stream
applications frequently maintain layers of derived data products, it is
particularly important to capture the connections between derived and raw data
to insure effective data maintenance and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
history and scope of the STREAM project, coupled with the current popularity of
the research area in general, positions the proposed work to have wide impact on
both research and education. The project provides Ph.D.-level research and
education for numerous graduate students, as well as research experience for a
number of undergraduates. The graduate students give presentations and
demonstrations of their work at large forums- up to hundreds of people. Research
papers from the first phase of the project are being studied in graduate classes
at several institutions, and the PIs have been organizing biannual meetings that
bring together several data streams research groups. The STREAM project
initiated and curates a repository of data stream application specifications,
and will continue to expand this repository as an important part of the proposed
work. Finally, the software developed is made available for download, and a
convenient web-accessible server is provided so that anyone can try out the
system without the inconvenience of downloading and installing the
software.&lt;br/&gt;