* 0414271
* Nuclear Chemistry:    NUCLEAR REACTIONS, Flavors Across Energies; June 13-18, 2004; New London, NH
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Pawel Danielewicz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 03/31/2005
* USD 6,000.00

The grant supports junior scientists' participation in the 2004
Gordon&lt;br/&gt;Conference on Nuclear Chemistry. The objective of the Gordon
Research&lt;br/&gt;Conference on Nuclear Chemistry is to provide the
international community of&lt;br/&gt;nuclear scientists with a unique forum
where the most recent developments in&lt;br/&gt;this field can be presented,
discussed and criticized. The emphasis in this&lt;br/&gt;year's Conference is
placed on central nuclear reactions, with a particular&lt;br/&gt;attention
devoted to the role of flavors in nuclear dynamics. Flavor is&lt;br/&gt;what
distinguishes neutrons from protons in an atomic nucleus and
the&lt;br/&gt;nucleons from some more exotic particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
agenda of this Conference provokes new ideas for future research,
in&lt;br/&gt;ensuring that discussions facilitate vigorous and open interactions
between&lt;br/&gt;scientists. This requires the participation of a significant
number of the&lt;br/&gt;leaders, including both internationally recognized
senior scientists and the&lt;br/&gt;young and rising stars. Bright and promising
postdoctoral researchers and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students are selected for
participation in this Conference and&lt;br/&gt;encouraged to present their
ideas. Their participation provides them with&lt;br/&gt;unique and extensive
access to the leaders in their field, exposes them to&lt;br/&gt;new research
opportunities and techniques and helps prepare them for the&lt;br/&gt;leadership
roles they will assume in the future. Some of the young&lt;br/&gt;scientists
have been invited to present talks. For others, poster sessions&lt;br/&gt;are
organized to provide a forum for their ideas, with best
displays&lt;br/&gt;additionally selected for oral
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;