* 0414243
* Mini-protein scaffolds for protein design
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Barbara Imperiali, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2009
* USD 648,000.00

This research program is focused on implementing complementary design and
screening tools for the development of mini-protein motifs of defined structure
and stoichiometry. New solvatochromic amino acids will be designed and
synthesized, then integrated into test peptides and evaluated to assess their
utility as probes for investigating protein-protein interactions in synthetic
and natural systems. Mini-protein motifs comprised entirely of the encoded amino
acids will be developed, increasing the likelihood that biological rather than
chemical systems could be exploited for the generation and selection of useful
motifs from expressed libraries. The latter studies will specifically target the
development of a porphyrin-binding mini-protein motif.

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
Professor Barbara Imperiali, of the Department of Chemistry at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Proteins (polypeptides), comprised of long chains of
interconnected amino acids, play myriad biochemical roles. Their specific
function is critically dependent on the three dimensional structure adopted by
the polypeptide chain, yet the factors responsible for protein folding are still
at best incompletely understood. Through the design, synthesis, and study of
small polypeptides, Professor Imperiali is shedding light on the factors
responsible for the formation of particular protein folding motifs. Her studies
also explore the possibility that these "mini-motifs" could serve as scaffolds
to permit the recognition and sensing of small organic molecules.