* 0414023
* Mathematical analysis of dynamic activity patterns in neuronal network models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jonathan Rubin, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 136,316.00

Rubin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator develops and applies mathematical
techniques for&lt;br/&gt;the study of activity patterns in conductance-based
neuronal network&lt;br/&gt;models, which include biophysically relevant time
scales and&lt;br/&gt;parameters, and in activity-based models, in which the
temporal&lt;br/&gt;variation in the cumulative activity of a neuronal population
is&lt;br/&gt;tracked with a single equation. The models analyzed include
features,&lt;br/&gt;such as spatially continuous coupling, temporally varying
input&lt;br/&gt;patterns, and heterogeneity in parameter values, that have
largely&lt;br/&gt;been neglected in previous mathematical work yet which are
relevant in&lt;br/&gt;a wide range of neuronal systems. The mathematical methods
developed&lt;br/&gt;relate to the derivation and subsequent analysis of
subsystems of&lt;br/&gt;equations capturing dynamics on disparate time scales.
Further, the&lt;br/&gt;study of biophysically-based models is complemented by
the development&lt;br/&gt;of a new and broadly applicable inverse approach, in
which&lt;br/&gt;observations of network dynamics is used to constrain
possible&lt;br/&gt;patterns of connections between cells in the network in cases
where&lt;br/&gt;this connectivity has not been experimentally
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The mathematical study of neuronal network
models in this project&lt;br/&gt;is motivated by experimental data on changes in
neuronal rhythms&lt;br/&gt;between normal and parkinsonian conditions; by
activity of neuronal&lt;br/&gt;populations involved in navigation; and by the
behavior of neurons&lt;br/&gt;that help to drive respiration. In each of these
settings, networks&lt;br/&gt;of neurons perform particular tasks by engaging in,
and switching&lt;br/&gt;between, organized firing patterns. Correspondingly,
this project&lt;br/&gt;elucidates the mechanisms that allow the relevant
networks to support,&lt;br/&gt;and to modulate between, particular modes of
activity. These&lt;br/&gt;analytical results lead to general conclusions about
how various&lt;br/&gt;components combine to shape neuronal network dynamics,
with their&lt;br/&gt;particular contributions teased apart in a way that would
be difficult&lt;br/&gt;to achieve with a purely experimental approach. The
understanding&lt;br/&gt;gained is well suited to guide future biological and
computational&lt;br/&gt;experiments. In particular, this project promotes
an&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary partnership with J. Smith's lab at NIH, which
allows&lt;br/&gt;for direct access to experimental data and testing of
model&lt;br/&gt;predictions. Students engaged in the work receive
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;training in an important area of interest to both
mathematics and&lt;br/&gt;biology. &lt;br/&gt;