* 0414803
* IMR: RUI-Thermogravimetric Analyzer Acquisition for Characterization of Advanced Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Donald Snyder, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 132,784.00

This award supports the purchase of a research grade thermogravimetric analysis
system to facilitate undergraduate and MS level research and education. The
research program for which this equipment is needed is based upon reverse
microemulsion polymerization technology for formulating advanced nanocomposite
polymers exhibiting fire resistance, effects of non-halogenated flame retardants
on polymer flame stability, synthesis and thermal stability of novel
benzotriazole-based step-growth polymers, thermal stability and curing of
advanced coatings, and thermal analysis of reverse microemulsions for controlled
combustion effects. This thermogravimetric analysis system is built around a
research grade thermogravimetric analyzer and includes a quadrupole mass
spectrometer and an evolved gas analyzer. This system will facilitate
mechanistic studies of several projects ongoing in two of our Colleges, and will
provide a thermal analysis center in our Coatings Research Institute that will
be available to and shared with other investigators campus wide and used in our
advanced undergraduate and M.S. polymers and coatings laboratory educational
program. This initial work will contribute to the education and training of
students in an institution heavily committed to the education and training of
women and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
purchase of a research grade thermogravimetric analysis system to facilitate
undergraduate and MS level research and education. This system will allow us to
study how various materials decompose as the materials are heated in air or in
other gases. The results of these studies will provide advanced materials that
have improved fire resistance properties and fuels that burn more cleanly. This
new instrumentation system will help faculty and students in several projects
ongoing in two of our Colleges and also in our Coatings Research Institute where
we interface our research results with industry here in the southeastern
Michigan area and nationwide. Our initial work using this instrumentation will
contribute to the education and training of students in an institution heavily
committed to the education and training of women and
minorities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;