* 0414890
* IMR:  Acquisition of a Measurement System for Research and Education in Thin Film Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 106,281.00

A Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) will be used to investigate the
properties of highly correlated and disordered materials. Problems under
investigation include the superconductor-insulator transition (SIT) in two
dimensions, metal-insulator transitions in oxide film systems, and the nature of
superconducting fluctuations in underdoped cuprates. The thin film materials
that would be investigated exhibit important paradigms in contemporary condensed
matter physics such as quantum criticality and glassiness. The PPMS would
complement a series of dedicated facilities in our laboratory used for ultra-low
temperature (below 1 Kelvin) and scanning tunneling microscope studies. It would
be used to establish the quality of the samples that would be studied using our
dedicated facilities. An example of this would be in work on electrostatic
tuning of the SIT in which films are incorporated in a field effect transistor
configuration using a mechanically thinned single-crystal strontium titanate
(STO) substrate as a gate insulator. The dielectric constant of STO at low
temperatures depends upon the electric field, thus the charge transfer is a
nonlinear function of gate voltage. The PPMS would be used to calibrate specific
substrates before committing them to dilution refrigerator experiments. The
instrument will contribute to the training of graduate students in a traditional
physics Ph.D. program as well as provide opportunities for undergraduates and
high school students to experience research. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;A Physical
Properties Measurement System (PPMS) will be used to investigate the quantum
properties of highly correlated and disordered materials. Problems under
investigation include the superconductor-insulator transition in two dimensions,
metal-insulator transitions in oxide film systems, and the nature of
superconducting fluctuations in underdoped cuprates. These are important
problems in contemporary condensed matter physics. The PPMS would complement a
series of dedicated facilities in our laboratory used for ultra-low temperature
(below 1 Kelvin) and scanning tunneling microscope studies. It would provide a
means of carrying out extensive, electrical transport studies of thin films in
magnetic fields of up to 9T, over a temperature range from 1.9K to 400K. These
are necessary to establish the quality of the samples that would be studied
using our dedicated facilities. The instrument will contribute to the training
of graduate students in a traditional physics Ph.D. program as well as provide
opportunities for undergraduates and high school students to experience
experimental research.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;