* 0414702
* SGER:  Exploratory Research on a New Advancing Front Approach for Numerical Grid Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Beddhu Murali, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 12/31/2005
* USD 70,399.00

Cutting down the cost and the time necessary for generating numerical grids is
an emerging requirement since parallel processing has enormously cut down the
cost and time of physical analysis after a grid is generated. Besides, emerging
applications in the biomedical, bioengineering and nanosciences arena demand new
approaches to grid generation. These applications demand higher accuracy of
surface representation and typically involve highly flexible/deformable surfaces
and require a higher degree of automation. A new advancing front approach is
proposed here that will address these emerging requirements on numerical grid
generation. Moreover, the proposed approach can be used in other related areas
such as in image processing for identifying surfaces of interest, in
computational geometry for "surface repair", and, in computing fluid flows
involving moving/deforming boundaries. The formulation presented addresses both
structured and unstructured/hybrid grids. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will
result in a software product that will be developed and used for proof of
concept using simple geometries with the help and involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students, who will be thoroughly exposed to the practical use of
modern software design principles as well as mathematical and numerical
analyses. Scientific knowledge and experience accrued during the course of this
investigation will be disseminated to the community through conference
presentations, with the involvement of student presenters, and journal
publications, as well as be made available over the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;