* 0414087
* RUI:      An Analysis of Infectious Disease Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Lora Billings, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2008
* USD 129,969.00

Billings&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overall objective of this work is to develop
a thorough&lt;br/&gt;understanding of emergent dynamics in epidemiological
models as a practical&lt;br/&gt;way to prevent disease outbreaks. Theproject has
four parts: 1) developing&lt;br/&gt;new, detailed models, with the advantage of
analysis by dynamical systems;&lt;br/&gt;2) incorporating time-dependent
parameters that more accurately capture&lt;br/&gt;climate variability and other
nonstationary behavior; 3) adding stochastic&lt;br/&gt;perturbations to analyze
emergent dynamics; and 4) controlling the system.&lt;br/&gt;These problems are
studied using theory from dynamical systems, topology,&lt;br/&gt;numerical
analysis, asymptotics, and stochastic perturbations. In this&lt;br/&gt;study,
the investigator includes noise, time-dependent parameters,
and&lt;br/&gt;spatial networks, which are known to combine to produce
unexpected&lt;br/&gt;complexity in systems, or emergent dynamics. In particular,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator builds on recent work developing the Galerkin
Transport&lt;br/&gt;Matrix, which allows a rigorous study of stochastic dynamics
in the context&lt;br/&gt;of the topology of the system. This tool can identify
precursor behavior&lt;br/&gt;to outbreaks, allowing the control of the dynamics
by a parameter, such as&lt;br/&gt;vaccination, to avoid these patterns and avert
epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Disease dynamics have been modeled and studied
for hundreds of years. &lt;br/&gt;Yet, epidemiologists cannot accurately predict
large-scale outbreaks or&lt;br/&gt;epidemics in the most common diseases.
Currently, there are fears of new&lt;br/&gt;strains of deadly diseases and calls
for a defensive plan. Questions are&lt;br/&gt;being asked about which
vaccination or quarantine strategies are necessary&lt;br/&gt;to avert outbreaks.
Due to ethical issues of testing vaccination&lt;br/&gt;strategies on people,
epidemiologists must rely on data from past epidemics&lt;br/&gt;and
corresponding mathematical models to guide these decisions. Models
are&lt;br/&gt;powerful tools if their results are interpreted correctly. They
can&lt;br/&gt;capture qualitative dynamics that point to patterns and mechanisms
that&lt;br/&gt;enable disease persistence in a population. They can also predict
the&lt;br/&gt;success of an action taken to avert an outbreak. In collaboration
with&lt;br/&gt;epidemiologists, a better mathematical understanding of the
possible&lt;br/&gt;dynamics in these models can lead to improved methods of
disease control. &lt;br/&gt;This work can also be extended to new models to
describe the propagation of&lt;br/&gt;multiple disease strains and certain types
of computer viruses.&lt;br/&gt;