* 0414319
* Multi-Phase Flow Dynamics in Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2007
* Kendra Sharp, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 02/28/2007
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT - 0414319&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the potential for high
power density and efficiency, fuel cells hold tremendous&lt;br/&gt;promise for
future portable, automotive and stationary applications. Among fuel cell types,
the&lt;br/&gt;strongest candidate for portable applications is the direct
methanol fuel cell (DMFC), while the&lt;br/&gt;hydrogen polymer electrolyte fuel
cell (H2 PEFC) is the strongest candidate for stationary
and&lt;br/&gt;transportation applications. The minute length scales and complex
materials in these fuel cells&lt;br/&gt;present many unique and challenging
physicochemical issues. In particular, two-phase flow&lt;br/&gt;effects through
the thin-film porous carbon fiber gas diffusion layers (GDLs) present a
major&lt;br/&gt;microfluidic management bottleneck for achieving high power
density and stability. The GDL is&lt;br/&gt;a critical component and functions
to deliver reactant to, and product away from, the electrodes&lt;br/&gt;where
electrochemical reaction occurs. If product transport through the GDL or flow
channels is&lt;br/&gt;insufficient, reactant mass transport will be restricted,
limiting performance. For example, CO2&lt;br/&gt;gas production at the anode of
the DMFC can block transport of liquid methanol solution to
the&lt;br/&gt;reaction site. At the cathode of the DMFC and H2 PEFC, liquid
water from electrochemical&lt;br/&gt;reaction, electro-osmotic drag and
diffusion can severely limit performance by flooding the&lt;br/&gt;cathode,
starving it of oxygen. In both the DMFC and H2 PEFC, there is a complex two-
phase&lt;br/&gt;flow challenge to manage the transport of reactants and products
through the thin-film porous&lt;br/&gt;GDL and in the flow channels. As a
result, the naturally hydrophilic GDLs are typically tailored&lt;br/&gt;by
addition of hydrophobic material during processing. To date, the fraction of
hydrophobic&lt;br/&gt;additive is determined through inefficient trial-and-error
testing. The existing literature has also&lt;br/&gt;followed a phenomenological
approach and has yet to yield any clear rationale or
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the basic transport processes of bubbles and
liquid droplets through the GDL, at the&lt;br/&gt;interfacial boundaries between
the GDL and the flow channel, or in the flow channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
propose to initiate an experimental and analytical study of the two-phase flow
of gasphase&lt;br/&gt;bubbles and liquid-phase droplets in reactant flow
channels and thin-film porous media&lt;br/&gt;with tailored wetting properties.
We will use high-speed microfluidic flow visualization&lt;br/&gt;techniques and
a model fuel cell to experimentally quantify parameters such as
bubble/droplet&lt;br/&gt;shape, detachment size, transport rate, distribution,
and liquid saturation in the porous material as&lt;br/&gt;a function of
operating conditions. Analytical models will then be developed to describe
the&lt;br/&gt;bubble/liquid droplet dynamics and validated using the novel data
obtained from a highly&lt;br/&gt;instrumented fuel cell. The ultimate goal of
this research is to provide, for the first time, design&lt;br/&gt;theory based
on fundamental understanding that can be used to engineer fuel cell materials
and&lt;br/&gt;empower microfluidic management for next-generation fuel cell
systems. This would represent a&lt;br/&gt;significant leap in understanding of
one of the most critical areas currently limiting fuel
cell&lt;br/&gt;development and would impact portable, stationary, and automotive
fuel cell design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of our integrated approach
to research and education are to: 1) create a&lt;br/&gt;physical and
intellectual infrastructure for addressing a multidisciplinary technical
junction in the&lt;br/&gt;design of next-generation hydrogen or methanol polymer
electrolyte fuel cells; 2) train graduate&lt;br/&gt;and undergraduate students
in physical/chemical science fields highly relevant to current
national&lt;br/&gt;needs; 3) integrate cutting-edge research results directly
into three established courses at Penn&lt;br/&gt;State and enable supported
graduate students to present material in the undergraduate courses;
4)&lt;br/&gt;expand the role for fuel cell and microfluidic research programs at
PSU in undergraduate and&lt;br/&gt;graduate recruiting process; and 5) provide
significant opportunities for undergraduate/graduate&lt;br/&gt;students to
interact with industry through existing and future Electrochemical Engine
Center&lt;br/&gt;industry collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;