* 0414328
* RUI: Investigating DNA Deformation Induced by Cation Binding Using Computational Analysis of X-ray Crystal Structures
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Lori Isom, University of Central Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2008
* USD 149,825.00

It is well known that DNA contains the instructions for building live organisms.
Less well known is that many of these instructions are not used directly. Which
instructions are actually used is partially determined by how the DNA is bent
and folded. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms by which DNA is deformed is
important to understanding the function of DNA in the storage and expression of
genetic information. This project investigates the tendency of cation binding to
distort DNA. The experimental focus of the project involves using computational
analysis to test the ability of cations to induce two types of DNA deformation:
(1) phosphate crowding that occurs in bending and groove narrowing; and (2) base
unstacking by ions interacting with base faces via cation-pi interactions. The
ability of monovalent cationic protein side chains to induce DNA phosphate
crowding in crystal structures of DNA/protein complexes will be analyzed. The
project will also characterize cation-pi interactions in DNA by computational
analysis of DNA crystal structures as well as determines the crystal structures
of DNA complexes with various divalent cations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Students engaged in this interdisciplinary research will learn skills
important in experimentally determining crystal structures as well as
computational skills to analyze structural information available in databases.
The projects described herein will develop scientific thinking skills and
programming skills that when combined with practical structure determination
skills, will give the student well-rounded experience of these symbiotic aspects
of structural biology. The students' education will be further expanded by close
collaboration with and travel to two major research institutions to collect and
analyze crystallographic data.