* 0414466
* Auctions for Time-Dependent Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Maria Gini, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2009
* USD 318,979.00

The PI will investigate methods for modeling and evaluating the decisions an
agent must make when requesting quotes and when bidding for tasks that have
complex time constraints and interdependencies. Time plays a major role in most
human contracting and planning activities, yet current auction-based systems do
not support decisions involving time constraints and inter-item dependencies.
The way task schedules are specified in a Request for Quotes affects the number
and types of bids received, and therefore the quality of the solutions that can
be produced by such a system. Similarly, the way tasks are scheduled affects the
ability of an agent to fit a new task into its own pre-existing commitments. The
research will focus on two major goals: quantifying the relationships between
schedules of tasks, bids, costs, and commitments of agents (to this end, the PI
will develop theory, algorithms, and heuristics to maximize the expected utility
for an agent scheduling tasks in a Request for Quotes and for an agent
submitting bids); and experimentally validating the algorithms and heuristics in
two application domains, supply-chain management and collaborative planning
among robots and people. The project will provide a fundamental understanding of
the tradeoffs between schedules and feasibility of tasks, in particular the
dependencies between the way tasks are scheduled in a Request for Quotes, the
bids they solicit, and their cost. The ability of agents to bid for tasks
depends on their previous commitments, so different settings of time windows
will end up soliciting different bids with different costs. The model proposed
is based on Expected Utility Theory. Expected utility provides a natural way of
accounting for the risk posture of the person or organization on whose behalf
the agent is acting, and for modeling the tradeoffs between risks and profit
expectations. The outcomes of the project will include a theoretical study of
the dependencies between task schedules, bids, and costs, which will provide the
foundations for efficient maximization algorithms and heuristics for determining
optimal schedules, a collection of methods for generating practical schedules
suitable for use in a Request for Quotes, algorithms and heuristics for an agent
to generate bids for tasks with time and precedence constraints, and an
experimental validation in two application domains, supply-chain management and
collaborative planning among robots and people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This research will produce a new theoretical understanding of the
interdependencies between time and costs, which will lay the foundations for
designing more capable agents, and thus will increase the effectiveness of
systems of agents. The application scenarios address real world problems, and
have significant societal impact. Improving the efficiency of supply-chain
management has the potential to decrease costs and open new markets. The results
of this work will be especially useful in situations involving a large number of
intersecting constraints and/or dynamic environments with evolving constraints.
Enabling teams of robots and people to plan and interact will make robots more
useful for tasks such as monitoring large areas or helping people in their daily
life. The software tools developed will be made available to the community at
large.&lt;br/&gt;