* 0414465
* QEIB: Island Biogeography and Metacommunity Dynamics of Food Webs--Theory and Experiments in a Model System
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Marcel Holyoak, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2009
* USD 401,042.00

Ecological communities are comprised of organisms that assemble over time by the
colonization of a local site from the surrounding region and by subsequent
species interactions that determine the fate of species. The sequence of such
colonizations and subsequent changes in community composition are termed
"community assembly". Because ecological communities are not static,
understanding assembly is central to successfully conserving biodiversity.
Unlike previous work, this project studies assembly in patchy landscapes where
both within-patch assembly and between-patch movement are expected to be
important. It uses a recently-developed mathematical approach and a highly-
tractable laboratory system consisting of protozoa in microcosms to understand
transitions in species composition. These approaches represent powerful tools
for developing and testing ecological ideas that can then be tested in the field
systems we wish to conserve. The approach consists of experimentally identifying
all persistent species combinations and determining the frequency of invasion by
previously absent species. Experiments will test the effect on the frequency
distribution of species compositions of between patch movement, whether species
are native or nonnative, and the distance over which species are moving in
landscapes. Modeling such transitions will produce a precise, testable, general
theoretical framework that can be applied to studying community assembly in many
systems. The problems addressed are key to conservation of biodiversity,
management of invasive species, and habitat restoration.