* 0414410
* Microbial Genome Sequencing:  Genome Sequencing and Analysis of Bacillus Pumilis
* BIO,EF
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Sarah Highlander, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 292,740.00

The goal of this project is to produce a complete, closed and finished genome
sequence of the sometimes-pathogenic Bacillus pumilus strain FO-036b. This
strain produces spores and vegetative cells with dramatically elevated
resistance to a variety of sterilizing agents, including vapor phase hydrogen
peroxide, UV radiation, gamma radiation and desiccation. Such spore forming
bacteria challenge proper maintenance of environments in medical,
pharmaceutical, semiconductor manufacturing, spacecraft assembly, and food
processing environments. The project will be performed at the Baylor College of
Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center. The strategy will be to perform whole
genome shotgun sequencing of clones with different sized inserts. Assembly,
finishing, and annotation will use the existing procedures at the BCM-HGSC.
Final assembly will be verified by fingerprinting of clones that form a
contiguous tiling path on the genome. Sequence and assembly information will be
made public via a website at the BCM-HGSC without delay. This project will
facilitate basic research on the genetic basis for resistance to UV radiation
and vapor phase hydrogen peroxide as well as understanding how organisms adapt
to highly oxidizing environments. The project will be of interest to research
communities including those interested in sporulation and DNA repair, NASA
communities concerned with planetary protection and adaptation of life to high
UV flux or oxidizing environments, industrial communities that require
maintenance of clean environments and the biodefense community concerns about
highly resistant pathogenic agents.

