* 0414610
* Regulation of Caste Formation in a Polyembryonic Wasp
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Michael Strand, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 413,745.00

Title: Regulation of caste formation in a polyembryonic wasp&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Michael Strand, Institution: University of Georgia Research Foundation
Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social animals are characterized by the development of
castes in which some colony members reproduce while others function as
altruistic helpers. Most social species are insects like ants, bees, and
termites. Caste systems have also evolved in selected groups of aphids, thrips,
and polyembryonic wasps. The conditional switch controlling caste formation
usually involves environmental stimuli that act upon processes that regulate
development of individuals. Unlike other social species, embryos of
polyembryonic wasps develop clonally to produce large numbers of genetically
identical offspring and two morphologically distinct castes. All embryos in a
clone exist in an identical environment, the host, yet develop into either
reproductive larvae that mature into adult wasps or soldier larvae whose
function is defense. Previously conducted background studies indicate that caste
determination in the polyembryonic wasp Copidosoma floridanum involves the
inheritance of germ cells. Embryos that inherit germ cells form reproductive
larvae, whereas embryos that do not form soldiers. The objective of this
research is to understand how the presence or absence of germ cells causes
individuals with the same genes to develop so differently. Molecular methods
will be combined with experimental studies to determine how germ cells are
asymmetrically distributed among embryos and how the presence of germ cells
affects expression of other genes. The results of this study will improve
understanding of how caste formation is regulated, the function of germ cells in
development, and the evolution of altruism in multicellular organisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;