* 0414385
* SGER:    Toward More Helpful Help
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Melody Ivory-Ndiaye, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2005
* USD 99,043.00

Software applications, large-scale web sites, and computing devices like mobile
phones continue to increase in complexity as new features are added almost
daily. Thus, help systems are needed and extremely important to enable users,
novice users in particular, to cope with current interfaces. Despite their
importance, studies continue to show that existing help systems are not very
helpful at assisting users in accomplishing their tasks. One issue that is not
reflected in these studies is the fact that help systems are also difficult to
develop. Innovations are clearly needed in both the design and development of
help systems. In this project, the PI will explore the solution space for
improving the usability and maintainability of help systems, in order to lay an
empirical foundation for future research that will result in innovative, usable,
and maintainable help systems. In particular, the PI will characterize the
state-of-the-art in help systems, examine the use and development of help
systems, and test the technological feasibility of two help system innovations:
(1) a help-by-demonstration system which enables users to demonstrate their help
needs and receive the appropriate help; and (2) a help search engine that
harvests help content from various sources (such as online help, web sites, and
discussion groups), organizes intelligently the content, and enables users to
search for help on specific problems. Help use by users with visual and other
impairments, in addition to novice and experienced users, will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce invaluable data on
current help system use and development in the desktop, Web, and mobile device
domains. These findings are needed to inform the design of more usable and
maintainable help system solutions. The activities will also provide evidence of
users' and developers' perceptions, and the technological feasibility, of the
two proposed help system solutions. There is a major risk involved with changing
the way that people use (and possibly create) help, and this preliminary work
will minimize this risk. By the completion of this research, the innovations
that are most feasible from all perspectives (user, developer, and technology)
will be documented. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The existence of
unusable and unmanageable help systems is a pervasive problem that affects users
and developers universally. Thus, this project will benefit a broad population
of help system users and developers. The research will include a user population
that is typically excluded from studies on help use-namely, users with
disabilities. Hence, findings will address the needs of users with diverse
abilities and computer experience. Study results will be disseminated via
journal articles, conference papers, and online, so that other help system
researchers and developers can benefit from the findings.