* 0414482
* How can document-genre metadata improve information-access for large digital collections?
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Barbara Kwasnik, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 302,685.00

This project seeks to improve information-access systems for large digital
collections by incorporating metadata about the documents' genres. Genre
metadata facilitates information retrieval and use. For example, people rarely
have to read every word to understand documents' meaning. Instead, they start by
identifying the kinds of documents they are faced with, and then use different
types of documents in appropriate ways. For example, a grant proposal is used
differently from a syllabus, a product brochure or a bank statement.
Information-access systems would be more useful for many tasks if they could
similarly distinguish the form and purpose of documents (that is, their
genres).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study includes a series of human-centered
studies of information use by K-12 teachers to develop an understanding of genre
and its role in information use. Based on these studies, the researchers develop
a taxonomy of relevant genres and the features that identify each. The study
includes the development and preliminary testing of genre-enhanced interface
prototypes for information access tools. The study provides an understanding of
the role of document genre in information-based tasks, evidence of the level of
utility of genre metadata in improving user performance on those tasks and
development of methods for studying genre.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of the study include a reusable classification of genres, enhancing the
infrastructure for research and advancement of the domain of education, both in
the population targeted by the studies (K-12 teachers) and by including students
in the research. The project Web site (http://crowston.syr.edu/genre/) provides
access to more information.&lt;br/&gt;