* 0414301
* RUI:  Characterization of Reactive Intermediates in the Cytochrome P450 Pathway
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Gregory Raner, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 07/31/2007
* USD 165,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports Professor Gregory Raner at the University of North Carolina at
Greensboro to directly observe and characterize intermediates in two distinct
catalytic pathways of cytochrome P450 by taking advantage of rapid mixing and
data acquisition techniques. The first objective is to generate and spectrally
characterize two related intermediates in the reaction of P450BM3-F87G with
oxygen atom donors. The second objective is to identify transient intermediates
in the peroxo-pathway for P450BM3-F87G. The stopped-flow and freeze-quench EPR
methods for rapid mixing and monitoring of the spectroscopic properties of the
enzyme will be used to achieve both specific objectives. The oxygen atom donors,
m-chloroperoxybenzoic acid and iodosobenzene will be combined with the F87G
mutant of P450BM3 and over the time course of several milliseconds to several
minutes, spectra will be acquired. In addition, samples will be rapidly frozen
at various time points after mixing, and analyzed using electron paramagnetic
resonance spectroscopy in order to provide supporting experimental details
relating to the identity of intermediates formed in the reactions. Reaction
mixtures will be prepared in which an aldehyde substrate will react with
P450BM3-F87G in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, resulting in deformylation of
the aldehyde, with chemical modification of the heme cofactor in the enzyme.
Analogous freeze-quench EPR experiments will also be carried out.

Successful attainment of the research objectives will provide critical details
concerning the catalytic mechanism of cytochrome P450 concerning relationships
between electronic structure and activity, which may lead to the more efficient
use of cytochrome P450 enzymes in biotechnology. The proposed study will equip
undergraduate and Masters students with the valuable research skills at the
interface of chemistry and biology.