* 0414463
* Symbiotic Modulation: A Mechanism for Adaptation to Environmental Stress and Habitat Expansion
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Russell Rodriguez, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2008
* USD 649,595.00

Although all plants in natural ecosystems have symbiotic associations with
endophytic fungi, the role these fungal symbionts play in ecosystem dynamics is
poorly understood. The time frame required for plant adaptation to environmental
stresses is unknown, but, the adaptive process is considered to be regulated by
the plant genome. However, most plant studies do not consider the potential
contribution of fungal symbionts to plant adaptation. Previous studies indicated
that fitness benefits conferred by symbiotic fungi contribute to and are
responsible for plant adaptation to high stress environments. In addition,
recent findings indicate that plants change endophytes, and endophytes change
plant hosts, in adjacent microhabitats that impose different selective
pressures, a phenomenon described here as symbiotic modulation. Symbiotic
modulation is proposed as a novel mechanism that allows plants and fungi to make
quantum evolutionary jumps resulting in rapid adaptation to environmental
stresses and habitat expansion. Symbiotic modulation will be studied in two
locations (geothermal soils of Yellowstone National Park and costal beaches of
San Juan Island) where in adjacent microhabitats imposing different selective
pressures: 1) a plant host has changed endophytes; and 2) an endophyte has
changed plant hosts. In both of these environments, plants are exposed to annual
dry periods and either temperature or salinity stress, while adjacent
microhabitats do not impose temperature or salinity stress. The proposed studies
would address fundamental questions regarding the role of fungal endophytes in
the adaptation of plants to: 1) elevated soil temperatures of geothermal soils
and 2) high salinity of costal beaches. The objective is to determine the
significance of symbiotic modulation in the expansion of plants and endophytes
into new habitats, and the following hypotheses will be tested during these
studies :H1 - Symbiotic modulation allows plants to adapt to high stress
environments; H2 - Symbiotic modulation provides plants and fungi a mechanism to
expand habitat range. To accomplish this, experiments will be performed to: 1)
assess intra-species genetic diversity of fungal endophytes and plant hosts
representing symbioses in two high stress habitats, 2) use the tomato model to
determine if multiple mutualistic benefits can be conferred to a single host via
co-colonization with endophytes that confer different stress tolerances, 3)
determine if there is competition between endophytes in planta, 4) compare the
physiological response to stress in symbiotic and non-symbiotic native species
and tomato. The methods employed will include field, greenhouse, and growth
chamber studies to characterize the ecological significance of symbiotic
modulation. Native plants from two high-stress habitats and the model plant
tomato will be used to characterize physiological responses to different fungal
endophytes. The broader impacts are improved understanding of plant - stress
tolerance, with results relevant to those interested in ecology and agriculture.
Outreach with Yellowstone National Park staff is planned.