* 0414536
* An Examination of the Autocatalytic Cell Death Machinery in Marine, Planktonic Photoautotrophs
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Paul Falkowski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stephen J Tonsor
* 08/31/2009
* USD 477,529.00

Phytoplankton mortality largely determines how other organisms live and is
essential to linking major biogeochemical cycles in the ocean. Unfortunately,
the mechanisms controlling the dramatic and abrupt bloom termination in natural
systems are not well understood. Like all marine organisms, microscopic
phytoplankton encounter adverse environmental conditions in the ocean (i.e.,
nutrient stress), which result in physiological stress and, sometimes, death.
Indeed, substantial cell death (via lysis) has been documented in field studies
with some estimates exceeding 50% of phytoplankton growth. This proposal
examines autocatalyzed cell death in marine phytoplankton, a self-destruction
analogous to programmed cell death (PCD) or apoptosis in multicellular
organisms. It focuses (1) on the ecological relevance of PCD as a critical
mortality mechanism of phytoplankton in response to environmental stress and (2)
on the origins of PCD in marine phytoplankton by examining its cellular
machinery and their relationship to those employed by multicellular organisms,
for which this type of death in best understood. Proposed research examines PCD
pathways in diverse lineages of phytoplankton, including a cyanobacterium
(Trichodesmium sp. IMS101), a chlorophyte (Dunaliella tertiolecta) and a
coccolithophorid (Emiliania huxleyi). Based on preliminary findings, similar PCD
pathways appear to be activated in these organisms in response to physiological
and environmental stress (culture age, oxidative stress, iron and phosphorus
limitation), each resulting in massive cell death. It specifically addresses
whether a specific class of proteases, termed Caspases, activate and execute PCD
in phytoplankton. Caspases play a ubiquitous role in the execution of PCD in
metazoans, functioning both in cell disassembly (effectors) and in initiating
this disassembly (initiators). In addition, this proposal investigates whether
the PCD cellular machinery is activated upon viral infection of phytoplankton,
using E. huxleyi and its virus (EhV1) as a model system. In metazoans (e.g.,
humans), PCD is often employed as a defense mechanism by host cells to prevent
spread of viral infection. The PCD machinery may have evolved in phytoplankton
to prevent massive viral infection and demise of natural
populations.&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a variety of broader impacts.
Research findings will provide critical mechanistic insight into phytoplankton
mortality as well as novel ecological and evolutionary context for PCD. Research
activities will provide hands-on training for development of an undergraduate
student and help to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups such as
women and minorities. It will also establish collaboration between Rutgers, a
leading research institute, and Cal State University San Marcos, a new minority
serving institution with a strong educational mission. In collaboration with the
education staff at the Institute of Marine and Coastal Science (Rutgers
University), research findings will be translated for K-12 and public audiences
in New Jersey, as part of the newly established, NSF-funded Mid-Atlantic Center
for Ocean Science Education Excellence (MA-COSEE).&lt;br/&gt;