* 0414253
* Collaborative Research: RUI:  Terrestrial Carbon Subsidies of Aquatic Food Webs (RUI)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* James Hodgson, St. Norbert College
* Continuing grant
* Ann Russell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 128,930.00

Much of the organic carbon in lakes originates from surrounding terrestrial
ecosystems. Degradation of this terrestrial carbon in lakes implies that lake
food webs are potentially supported by external sources, rather than solely by
internal primary production. Prior experiments in small lakes using inorganic
carbon-13 additions revealed significant terrestrial support of aquatic food
webs. This project will directly address the relative importance of terrestrial
support of food webs in lakes 4-10 times the size of lakes studied previously.
Carbon-13 will be added to two large lakes and analyzed with several models
developed by the investigators. Results will determine the importance
terrestrial subsidies in these larger lakes that are in the top quartile for
size in the Northern Highlands of Wisconsin and Michigan and representative of a
large class of temperate lakes globally.

This research will contribute to understanding lakes in a landscape context by
assessing whether differences in lake size influence food webs and carbon
cycling. Broader impacts of this project include promoting public understanding
of lake ecosystems as well as research training for graduate and undergraduate
students. Results will be incorporated into an ongoing outreach effort on the
future of the Northern Highland Lake District.