* 0414574
* Collaborative Research: Aquatic Plant Beds as Biogeochemical Hot Spots in a Large River Ecosystem.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Jonathan Cole, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2009
* USD 409,000.00

The objectives of this work are to document and understand the impacts of
aquatic plant beds on biogeochemical reactions that regulate oxygen, plant
nutrients and greenhouse gasses. The work will take place in a large river (the
Hudson River) where an alien invasive aquatic plant and a native aquatic plant
are present in high abundance and the focus will be on species impacts as well
as hydrologic impacts on the functioning of aquatic plant beds. Continuously
recording instruments, modeling, and a system experiment will be used to meet
the research goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will add to a
growing body of knowledge on how species removal or addition (by species
introductions) can impact ecosystem functioning. The introduced plant in the
Hudson (the Eurasion water chestnut) is now being actively removed at
considerable expense in lakes and river systems and in other systems, including
the Hudson, decisions on water chestnut removal are still being made and the
proposed work will aid in this management decision. The Hudson Valley includes a
large number of educational and management groups with a substantial interest in
educating diverse audiences on the ecology of the Hudson River. Through an
ongoing NSF - REU grant with a focus on minority inclusion at IES, and funding
from the proposed grant, undergraduates will have the opportunity to complete
projects within the context of a larger ecosystem experiment. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project will afford undergraduate and graduate
students the opportunity to be trained in both biogeochemical and physical
approaches to ecosystem science. &lt;br/&gt;