* 0414143
* Protein Transport in Charged Gels for Chromatography and Membrane Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Giorgio Carta, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2008
* USD 277,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Protein Transport in
Charged Gels for Chromatography and Membrane Applications&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: CTS-0414143&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Georgio
Carta&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop a fundamental understanding of protein partitioning and transport in
charged hydrogels. Understanding the transport properties of charged
macromolecules in such materials is a key to their development and optimum
design. New insights have recently been obtained through microscopic studies,
which can provide the basis to develop a mechanistic understanding of transport.
This project will expand current efforts in this area with the ultimate goal of
developing new adsorbents and membranes for protein separations as well as
models to predict their process performance. Protein partitioning and transport
in charged dextran gels and agarose-dextran composites will be studied on a
microscopic scale focusing on the effects of gel properties and protein
molecular weight and charge on equilibrium uptake and mass transfer kinetics.
Kinetics of protein ion-exchange in charged poly(acrylamide) gels and charged
agarose-dextran composites will be studied using radiotracer techniques to
elucidate protein transport under both gradient and tracer diffusion conditions.
Modeling single and multicomponent protein transport in ionic gels and
application of these models to predict the behavior of column chromatography
under processing conditions will be performed. This research will provide a
higher level of understanding of transport phenomena in these complex media as
well as models to aid the design and optimization of chromatographic processes.
The research will have multiple broader impacts. It will guide the development
of optimized stationary phases by media manufacturers. It will also provide a
basis for the formulation of rate models to predict and optimize chromatographic
separations permitting pharmaceutical companies to improve the design and
efficiency of bioprocesses. Since separation and purification are often the
costliest steps in bioprocessing, there is a critical need for separation
scientists and engineers who are trained to develop and implement novel
separation media integrating a broad spectrum of experimental and modeling
approaches to improve the effectiveness of industrial bioseparations.
&lt;br/&gt;