* 0414657
* A dynamical framework for phonological learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Betty Tuller, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent R. Brown
* 08/31/2009
* USD 349,997.00

Every year people immigrate to the United States who do not understand or speak
English. While learning a new language is not too difficult for children and
adolescents, it is a much harder feat for adults. This is in part because adult
speakers cannot usually hear meaningful sound distinctions in English that are
not part of their native language. For example, in English "bit" and "bead" have
different meanings but in Spanish the two English words may sound identical. It
is often extremely difficult for native Spanish speakers to learn to hear the
difference between these two words. Another common example is Japanese speakers'
difficulty in perceiving the difference between "r" and "l." It works both ways,
so to speak, typical American English speakers cannot tell the difference
between, for example, the Hindi "d" (as in dal, which is the word for lentils)
and the American English "d", which is produced with the tongue slightly further
back in the mouth. Typical courses in English for Speakers of Other Languages
(ESOL) concentrate on vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation, but much is as yet
unknown about how adults can learn to perceive new speech sounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from The National Science Foundation, Dr.
Betty Tuller (a cognitive scientist) and Dr. Viktor Jirsa (a theoretical
physicist) will advance our understanding of 1) how learning of a meaningful
speech sound occurs over time, 2) exactly what is learned, 3) the impact of a
newly learned distinction on a similar, but not identical, native speech sound,
4) transfer of learning to a novel speech contrast, and 5) variables that may
facilitate learning. The collaboration between a cognitive scientist and a
theoretical physicist has the potential to be exceptionally fruitful, as
behavioral research and theoretical modeling, grounded in the dynamics of the
problem, can inform and guide each other. This multidisciplinary approach has
proven to lead to new insights in many realms of human behavior. The proposed
experiments have broad implications for understanding the nature of learning
itself (what is learned and what processes are involved in learning) as well as
for the specific area of second language learning. There is a critical need for
language-learning research that can improve second language teaching. Perhaps
less obvious are the implications for computer-assisted language learning and
speech remediation. Understanding how adult's perceptions are altered by
linguistic experience will likely shed light on how meaningful speech perception
can be regained after brain damage (e.g. in aphasia) or learned in developmental
language disorders. In particular, the work may steer strategies of remediation
to become more individually based. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;