* 0414254
* Trending Economic Time Series and Panels
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Peter Phillips, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 236,469.00

A dominant characteristic of economic data is their tendency to trend over time.
This behavior includes the wandering nature of interest rates, exchange rates,
and inflation with their long and erratic cycles, as well as the secular drift
of series like GDP. Important socioeconomic issues such as national economic
growth, the determinants of growth, and disparities in growth across nations all
relate to matters of trend. Much of modern time series econometrics, as well as
recent work on panel data, is concerned with the statistical analysis of such
trend behavior, including the possible interconnectedness of the trends across
different series. Economic theory provides insights about potential sources of
trend and linkages but it gives little practical guidance concerning suitable
formulations for empirical research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will
model trends in economic data in such situations and develop a theory of
statistical inference that allows for incorrect specification of the trends in
applied work. The project will develop a formal apparatus for studying commonly
fitted trend functions and develop methods for validly interpreting these fitted
trends within the context of a coordinate system that is designed to capture
trends and long cyclical behavior in the data under a much more general
maintained hypothesis. Using coordinate functions, it is possible to analyze
trends in a single series and co-movement in several series while placing only
weak restrictions on the class of generating mechanisms. The research will
develop new econometric methods for this approach and explore their relationship
to conventional methods developed for cases where the true generating process is
known. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve an asymptotic theory for
inference and for trend forecasting, simulation experiments to evaluate
performance characteristics of the methods, and empirical applications with both
macro-economic and financial data sets. The methods will contribute to our
understanding of wider socioeconomic issues related to economic growth and they
will be used to assess empirical evidence on the hypothesis that the world
economy diverges during a period of transition before it starts to converge.
Thus, the results of this research will allow social scientists and statistician
to model and correctly analyze data whose trends had hitherto been poorly
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;