* 0414110
* Development of Computational Methods with Applications to Quantum Dynamics Problems and NMR Experiments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Vladimir Mandelshtam, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 02/29/2008
* USD 360,000.00

Vladimir Mandelshtam of the University of California Irvine is supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program for research to develop and
apply novel theoretical/computational methods, in applications ranging from
quantum chemical dynamics calculations to data processing in nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) experiments. Numerical algorithms for quantum chemical dynamics
and thermostatics are being explored, by developing improved methodology based
on new applications of variational Gaussian wave packet methods. Spectral
analysis techniques, previously designed by the PI, is being used to extract
efficiently the spectral information from computed correlation and cross-
correlation functions. Outcomes are expected to make possible quantum
simulations of large molecular species. The research includes a second project
on algorithm and code development in NMR spectral analysis techniques such as
the filter diagonalization method (FDM). In particular, three-dimensional FDM is
being developed and adapted for various triple-resonance experiments; then FDM
will be extended to higher dimensional (4D and 5D) problems. The spectral
analysis code resulting from this project will be distributed freely to NMR
researchers worldwide, and is expected to reduce NMR experimental times and
possibly even make certain multidimensional NMR experiments newly feasible.
&lt;br/&gt;