* 0414493
* Regulation of Neurohormone Synthesis in Aplysia
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Nancy Wayne, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 08/31/2008
* USD 296,829.00

Neurohormones are responsible for controlling different aspects of physiology
and behavior including body growth, eating, drinking, and sex and reproduction.
The broad goal of this project is to understand cellular mechanisms controlling
synthesis of a neuropeptide hormone using neurons that control reproduction in
the mollusk Aplysia. Earlier studies from the PI's laboratory showed that
electrical excitation of the reproductive neuroendocrine bag-cell neurons (BCNs)
led to large amounts of secretion of the neuropeptide egg-laying hormone (ELH).
It was revealed that electrical excitation upregulates ELH synthesis to
replenish releasable stores of hormone by both sodium- and calcium-dependent
pathways that are independent from both ELH secretion and action potential
firing. Furthermore, a novel protein-synthetic pathway involving a special code
on ELH mRNA called an internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) plays an important
role in mediating the effects of electrical excitation on upregulating
specifically ELH synthesis, at the expense of non-essential proteins in the
cell. This is similar to how viruses control protein synthesis in cells
following infection, and was not thought to play a physiological role in
cellular systems. The aim of this project is to understand the mechanistic links
between membrane electrical excitation, sodium/calcium ion fluxes into the bag
cell neurons, IRES activation on ELH mRNA, and ELH synthesis. Experiments will
utilize electrophysiological monitoring of membrane electrical excitability and
optical imaging of intracellular calcium concentrations in response to
treatments that alter sodium/calcium flux, biochemical measurement of ELH
synthesis, and a combination of molecular biological tools and optical imaging
to monitor IRES activation in living bag cell neurons in the intact Aplysia
nervous tissue. The outcome from the proposed experiments will lead to entirely
novel conclusions regarding the control of specific protein synthesis in cells.
This project provides excellent training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students embarking on cutting-edge studies using an integrative
experimental approach