* 0414815
* Automatic Indexing of Audio with Timbre Information for Musical Instruments of Definite Pitch
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Zbigniew Ras, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 315,000.00

The goal of the project is to construct a system for automatic extraction of
audio files containing a tune performed with desired timbre, given microphone
vocal input. The system will be able to identify which audio files within the
searched database match the tune and timbre of specified instrument or
instrument family with selected articulation. The approach consists of sound
processing, segmentation, and indexing of audio files for content-based
searching. The first step is the elaboration of the appropriate sound
description for timbre classification, based on low-level sound parameters. The
main process involves segmentation of audio files from the database into musical
events, and indexing them using a dedicated tree-based structure. When this step
is accomplished, the database of audio files, indexed using the above procedure,
can be searched.

This research project has a strong educational component. It involves graduate
students gaining expertise in sound processing under the guidance of PIs and
adding this new research domain into a set of topics currently offered by the
graduate program in Computer Science at UNC-Charlotte. Involvement of faculty
and graduate students from the Polish-Japanese Institute of Information
Technology in this project will add not only a strong international component to
it, but also will expose graduate students at UNC-Charlotte to international
collaboration.

As the result of this project, new tools applicable for automatic search of
audio files matching desired contents, including melody and timbre information,
will be available to users and research community.