* 0414060
* Collaborative Research: Land Use and Carbon Sequestration in Eastern Deciduous Forests: Interactions Between Human Activities and Ecosystem Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* William Peterjohn, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2008
* USD 259,118.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observed warming at the Earth's surface has raised
concerns about the effects of increased carbon dioxide in the global
environment, and understanding the role of forests as potential carbon sinks is
becoming a national and global priority. The objective of this project is to
investigate the role of recent past, current, and future land use change on
carbon dynamics in eastern deciduous forests of North America. Eastern deciduous
forests may have played a major role in past carbon dioxide uptake due to
regrowth following major cutting at the turn of the century. Current rates of
timber harvest in eastern deciduous forests are high, so future land use and
cover changes may again affect carbon cycling. These forests are managed under a
diverse set of public and private management regimes, with each group possessing
different motivations for land management and potentially responding differently
to economic incentives. The project's research questions address the
interactions between human activities (forest management) and an ecosystem
process (carbon sequestration) in temperate deciduous forests of West Virginia:
1) How do carbon stocks differ between forests with different land use
practices? 2) How have changes in land management (1989-2000) affected carbon
stocks, and what were the human drivers of this land use change? 3) How might
the ability of central hardwood forests to store carbon change under future
conditions? To address these research questions, an ecosystem model (Pnet-CN)
will be calibrated and validated at two spatial scales (watershed and state). At
the watershed level, PnET-CN will be calibrated for four management treatments:
mature forest, young forest, and two types of diameter limit cuts. At the state
level, PnET-CN will be run for 1989 and 2000 at USDA Forest Service, Forest
Inventory and Analysis (FIA) plot locations classified by management strategy to
match those of the experimental watersheds. This model of productivity will be
linked to an econometric model that investigates correlations between land-
use/land-management categories and their potential drivers, using FIA plot data
combined with information on plot accessibility, management regime, and local
hardwood timber prices. The econometric model will be coupled with the ecosystem
model to conduct scenario analysis linking changes in drivers of land use and
cover change to changes in carbon storage. Scenarios holding drivers of land use
and cover change fixed, but varying climate parameters, will also be developed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the human causes of land use and cover
change and their consequences for the carbon cycle is critical given elevated
levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. This research addresses the
important interaction between drivers of land use change, terrestrial
ecosystems, and carbon balance by directly linking economic causes of timber
harvest to details of forest biomass and productivity. Results from this project
will help state and national agencies manage temperate deciduous forests in the
context of future economic and climatic changes. This research will also enhance
scientific understanding of the role of deciduous forests in the carbon cycle
through broad dissemination of results in scientific journals and conferences,
through the support of graduate research assistants, undergraduate field
assistants, and through the development of graduate and undergraduate teaching
modules.&lt;br/&gt;