* 0414665
* REVSYS: Taxonomic Revisions in the Boletaceae, Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Roy Halling, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 214,753.00

0414665&lt;br/&gt;Halling&lt;br/&gt;Members of the porcini mushroom family
(commonly called boletes) are easily recognized in natural forests throughout
the world. The family contains approximately 25 genera, none of which has
received critical taxonomic documentation on a global scale. Dr. Roy Halling, at
The New York Botanical Garden, and two Ph.D. students under his guidance, will
provide systematic revisions of four genera (Boletellus, Heimiella, Phylloporus,
Tylopilus). These four genera appear to have their largest diversity in SE Asia
and Australia, areas yet little explored for fungal diversity. Thus, Halling and
his students will collaborate onsite with local students and professors to
document that diversity, symbiotic associations, and distribution patterns.
These collections will be analyzed morphologically and genetically to make it
easier to identify these mushrooms, to document the species diversity, and to
produce a reliable measure of their relationships to each other. In addition to
technical publications, web-based information will be assembled, to provide
descriptions of ongoing research, as well as a synthesis of the phylogeny,
biodiversity, and ecology of the group. Images, literature guides, and other
resources for researchers and educators will also be provided. Furthermore, a
searchable database will be available providing up-to-date information on the
diversity of genera and species, characters useful in identification, and the
relationships among the species. &lt;br/&gt;The boletes form symbiotic
associations with roots of tropical and temperate forest trees (associations
called mycorrhizas), and in this association, the boletes facilitate nutrient
uptake for the trees, provide some protection from invasion of soil pathogens,
and accomplish nutrient breakdown and recycling of organic matter in the
ecosystem. Thus, they are a critical link in maintenance and health of these
ecosystems and are crucial for developing forest management plans, reforestation
programs, and conservation strategies. Some are also highly prized as wild
edibles (they have not successfully been brought into cultivation). In addition,
two students (one American and one Brazilian) will be trained as Ph.D.
mycologists with expertise for future work in mushroom
systematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;