* 0414145
* Comparative Germanic Syntax Workshop
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Marcel den Dikken, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 10,272.00

The National Science Foundation will support the 19th annual Comparative
Germanic Syntax Workshop (CGSW), to be hosted by The Graduate Center of The City
University of New York on June 3-5, 2004. CGSW is a major international
conference, widely recognized as the world's premier venue for generative
linguists studying the syntax (sentence structure) of the Germanic languages,
organized on an annual basis since 1984. This year's edition will feature a
special focus on variation across Dutch and English dialects, with keynote
addresses by Professors Hans Bennis and Alison Henry. Professor Bennis, the
director of the P.J. Meertens Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of
Sciences, will report specifically on the recent completion of the first volume
of the syntactic atlas of the dialects of Dutch, a major milestone in
comparative Germanic syntax. Professor Henry, an internationally renowned
specialist on syntactic variation in English, will report on ongoing research on
the differences between standard English and its dialects, focusing particularly
on Belfast English. Alongside the two keynote addresses, the program includes
sixteen papers selected by a peer-review process, presented by linguists from
six European countries and the United States. The complete program as well as
other important information about the event is accessible on-line at: http://web
.gc.cuny.edu/dept/lingu/events/CGSW19/index.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
current theoretical research, studies that compare the linguistic phenomena of
different languages play a pivotal role in establishing and refining the
theoretical machinery. Comparative linguistic research conducted within the
confines of a particular language family has proved particularly conducive to
answering detailed questions about the universal principles and language-
particular parameters (i.e., points where languages differ from each other). The
Comparative Germanic Syntax Workshop is the primary forum for the dissemination
of research results in the domain of syntactic variation within the Germanic
language family, as well as variation between the Germanic languages and other
languages. The program of CGSW19 features comparative studies on the
Scandinavian languages, Dutch and German and their dialects, syntactic variation
in English (including diachronic variation), differences between Germanic and
other languages (such as Bangla, French and Greek), as well as the acquisition
of the Germanic languages by (first or second language) learners - a state-of-
the-art palette of ongoing research on syntactic variation within and beyond the
Germanic language family, furthering the development of generative syntactic
theory.&lt;br/&gt;