* 0414576
* Collaborative Research:    Supporting Efficient Similarity Searches for Multidimensional Non-ordered Discrete Data Spaces
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2005,12/31/2009
* Sakti Pramanik, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 12/31/2009
* USD 161,000.00

This collaborative research project conducted jointly by the Michigan State
University and the University of Michigan at Dearborn investigates the issues
and techniques for supporting efficient similarity searches in multidimensional
Non-ordered Discrete Data Spaces (NDDS). Similarity searches in NDDSs are
becoming increasingly important for applications based on multidimensional
discrete vectors, such as genome sequence databases, biometrics and E-commerce.
Efficient similarity searches require robust indexing techniques in order to
provide fast access to data. The currently existing indexing methods are either
not suitable for an NDDS (e.g., the R*-tree) or too generic to provide good
performance for an NDDS (e.g., metric trees). The main goal of this project is
to study the fundamental properties of NDDSs and develop indexing methods
exploiting these properties to support efficient similarity searches in NDDSs. A
set of essential geometric concepts for an NDDS is introduced based on extended
methods for traditional (ordered) continuous data spaces. A number of promising
data-partitioning-based and space-partitioning-based indexing techniques
(including index tree structures, building strategies, search algorithms and
performance models) using these concepts for NDDSs are explored and compared.
Other related issues including supporting various types of queries, adopting
different distance measures, indexing hybrid data spaces with mixed ordered and
non-ordered dimensions, developing efficient bulk loading techniques and
utilizing effective compression schemes are studied. This research will provide
new database indexing techniques to solve relevant issues in scientific, medical
and commerce fields that require fast access to large volumes of NDDS data.
Research results, including software tools or programs and experimental data
will be disseminated via the projects' Web sites
(http://www.cse.msu/~pramanik/nsf05/nsf05msu.html and
&lt;br/&gt;http://www.engin.umd.umich.edu/~qzhu/nsf05/nsf05umd.html).&lt;br/&gt;