* 0414057
* Neuronal Dynamics and the Basal Ganglia
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* David Terman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 70,859.00

Terman

The basal ganglia are a group of nuclei that play an important role in the
generation of movement. Dysfunction of the basal ganglia is associated with
movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease and Huntington's chorea.
Structures within the basal ganglia have in fact been the target of recent
therapeutic surgical procedures including pallidotomy and deep brain
stimulation. Numerous experiments have demonstrated that neurons within the
basal ganglia display a variety of dynamic behaviors; moreover, patterns of
neuronal activity differ between normal and pathological states. Neither the
origins of these neural firing patterns nor the mechanisms that underlie the
patterns are understood. The primary goals of the project are to develop
detailed computational models, based on experimental data, for basal ganglia
activity and to develop mathematical tools for analyzing these models. The
investigator systematically studies mechanisms underlying complex activity
patterns found in a broad class of excitatory-inhibitory neuronal networks.
These include a recently constructed model for neurons within the so-called
indirect pathway of the basal ganglia. He also uses geometric, dynamical systems
methods to explore how these networks transform incoming firing patterns.

The investigator develops a computational model for neuronal activity in the
basal ganglia. The model is used to formulate and test hypotheses concerning the
functional role of the basal ganglia in both healthy and diseased states. As it
evolves, the model serves as a tool that can be used to test hypotheses about
the function basal ganglia, the pathologies that develop in motor disorders, and
the mechanisms through which therapeutic interventions such as deep brain
stimulation (DBS) may prove effective. In particular, a central aspect of this
research is to test hypotheses about how DBS reduces parkinsonian motor
symptoms. This may lead to new strategies by which DBS can be applied. Topics in
this project present tremendous opportunities for cross-disciplinary seminars,
workshops and collaborations. The principal investigator has been very active in
the training of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students. He has
organized numerous workshops at international conferences and has lectured at
several summer educational programs. A primary goal of these activities is to
help nurture a community of scholars from different disciplines involved in the
mathematical biosciences.

