* 0414294
* IMR:  Acquisition of a FESEM for Characterization of Advanced Materials and Development of Improved EBSD Tools.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* David Bahr, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 252,007.00

A thermal-source field-emission SEM (FESEM) will be acquired to perform
structural characterization on nano-scale and nano-crystalline materials.
Specifically, projects in the development and optimization of functional thin
films will be enabled by this instrument. The WSU MEMS based engine which
operates on layers of piezo-electric films (lead zirconate titanate, PZT)
currently produces power sufficient to operate small electrical devices (such as
a wrist-watch). Optimization of the structures through strategic processing will
boost the power output to tens of watts. This will be accomplished through
complete structural characterization of the grain structure and local
crystallographic texture. Such analysis is only possible through electron
backscatter diffraction (EBSD) on an FESEM. Cu interconnects for integrated
circuits have enabled continued miniaturization of the interconnect structure
that now requires maximum spatial resolution for adequate crystallographic
analysis of the structures. Local crystallogaprhic texture and grain boundary
structure (including twin boundary content and morphology) are important for
improved manufacturability and resistance to electromigration that now has
driving forces on the order of 106 A/cm2. Finally, mechanical properties of
nanocrystalline materials are controlled by mechanisms that are not considered
to be important in conventional polycrystals. Investigation of the mechanisms
controlling the performance of nanocrystalline metals requires complete
structural characterization on the scale of the crystallites that can be
accomplished using the FESEM. The instrument will add significant new strength
to existing funded research areas such as MEMS, structures and properties of
metal films for microelectronics applications, the study of radiation induced
structures in wide bandgap materials, and nano-materials for biological
applications.

In addition to the several graduate students that will be primary users of the
FESEM, there will be access to the instrumentation for various undergraduate
students working on specific topic areas under one of the principal or ancillary
users, or as part of the requirements to complete undergraduate research
projects. The instrument will be used by undergraduate students in a Materials
Characterization Laboratory course, and will be highly utilized in our NSF
sponsored REU program in Characterization of Advanced Materials (in which about
50% of the participants are women or minority students). The proposed FESEM can
easily be adapted for remote operation and will be remotely operated for
training purposes. This will benefit existing courses on our main campus. In the
future, this remote access will be offered to the various high school and
community colleges in Washington State that may have an interest.



A field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) will be purchased for use
in characterization of nano-scale materials. Advances in SEM technology have
enabled superior imaging resolution, via the field emission electron source.
Electron back-scatter diffraction (EBSD) analysis enables crystallographic
information (phase and orientation) to be obtained in the SEM. These
enhancements have empowered researchers to embark on an entirely new class of
research that previously could not be reasonably approached with any other
analytical instrumentation. Fine structures in crystalline materials ultimately
control the macroscopic properties of materials. The FESEM will be used to
develop microstructure-property relationships and processing/synthesis-
microstructure relationships in several key application areas. It will be used
to further develop and optimize the world's smallest engine currently in
development at WSU. This micro-electromechanical system (MEMS) device is only
millimeters in total dimension, and can generate power on the order of tens of
watts. The power-generating films in this device are sub-micron in thickness,
with structural features on the order of 50 nm. Local structure analysis can
only be performed using an FESEM in concert with EBSD technology. Additional
major research projects require the characterization power of the FESEM.
Mechanical properties of nanocrystalline materials are generally superior to
conventional materials. Optimizing the structures of such materials will allow
for stronger, more efficient materials that will result in lighter, stronger
materials for use in automotive, aerospace, and structural applications.
Finally, modern integrated circuits require highly optimized interconnect
structure with minimum feature sizes on the order of 100 nm and shrinking with
each new generation. This research will continue to further the understanding of
optimal structures, particularly in the copper interconnect wires, that will
lead to increased speed and reliability of computer chips.

In addition to the several graduate students that will be primary users of the
FESEM, there will be access to the instrumentation for various undergraduate
students working on specific topic areas under one of the principal or ancillary
users, or as part of the requirements to complete undergraduate research
projects. The instrument will be used by undergraduate students in a Materials
Characterization Laboratory course, and will be highly utilized in our NSF
sponsored REU program in Characterization of Advanced Materials (in which about
50% of the participants are women or minority students). The proposed FESEM can
easily be adapted for remote operation and will be remotely operated for
training purposes. This will benefit existing courses on our main campus. In the
future, this remote access will be offered to the various high school and
community colleges in Washington State that may have an interest.



