* 0414560
* Doctoral Consortium for Research In Universally Accessible IT
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Julie Jacko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2006
* USD 26,273.00

This is funding to support a research symposium (workshop) of approximately 15
promising doctoral students from the United States and abroad, along with
distinguished research faculty. The event will take place in conjunction with
the 6th International ACM SIGCAPH Conference on Assistive Technologies
(ASSETS'04), to be held October 18-20 in Atlanta, and sponsored by the
Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Computers and
the Physically Handicapped. The ASSETS conference is the premier forum for
presenting research results and innovations in software and technology designed
to address the special needs of people with disabilities of all kinds.
Researchers and developers from both academia and industry around the world will
meet to exchange ideas and present reports on the latest work relating to
speech, motor, hearing, and vision impairments, cognitive limitations, emotional
and learning disabilities, and aging. The ASSETS'04 doctoral research symposium
will provide an opportunity for graduate students to explore their research
interests in an interdisciplinary workshop, under the guidance of a panel of
distinguished experts in the field. Student participants will make formal
presentations of their work during the symposium, and will receive constructive
feedback from a faculty panel. The feedback is designed to help students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to related
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Thus, the symposium will
help shape ongoing and future research projects aimed at assistive technologies
and universal access, will promote scholarship and networking among new
researchers in this emerging interdisciplinary area, and will expose these
promising young researchers to a larger community. Evaluation of the symposium
will be conducted, and the results made available to the organizers of future
such events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The doctoral symposium will
help expand the participation of young researchers pursuing graduate studies in
this field, by providing them an opportunity to gain wider exposure in the
community for their innovative work and to obtain feedback and guidance from
senior members of the research community. It will further help foster a sense of
community among these young researchers, by allowing them to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in
their professional development. Because the students and faculty constitute a
diverse group across a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and
scientific discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future
benefit of the field.