* 0414813
* HBP:  Algorithms and Informatics for Analysis of Neural Coding
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Daniel Gardner, National Institutes of Health
* Interagency Agreement
* Diane M. Witt
* 01/31/2008
* USD 216,346.00

The proposed project will establish a multifaceted resource and collaboration to
support a broad range of users, including experimental and computational
neuroscientists, neuroinformatics developers, and others with an interest in the
central problem of neural coding. The project supports as well the Human Brain
Project initiative by incorporating linked neuroscience, informatics, and merged
neuroinformatics goals. The neuroscience goal is an understanding of neural
coding, synthesized via application of a wide range of algorithms to a database
of neural data from multiple cortical areas, protocols, and preparations.
Subgoals quantify the information present in patterns of visual neural activity,
determine which features of activity carry information and transmit it between
neurons and cortical areas, test contrasting coding hypotheses, and relate
information and activity to behavior. Informatics goals include implementation
and application of new analytic algorithms and the development, interfacing, and
availability of a parallel computational resource, enhancing the value of a
linked neurodatabase by adding value to archived data and encouraging submission
and data sharing. The neuroinformatics goal tests different analytic algorithms
against particular neurobiological processes, sites, and paradigms, including
parallel channels formed by paired neurons. Neural coding is imperfectly
understood. A main limitation is that at present, analyses and models are often
derived from or tested on restricted numbers of datasets. To remove these
limits, the project will link four disciplines: experimental neuroscience,
analytical computational neuroscience, computer science, and informatics, via
three aims. The first aim will develop, implement, and refine an array of
algorithms for neural data analysis that probe how information is represented
and processed. By applying several approaches to a given dataset, or one
approach to many datasets, investigators can reach conclusions that are robust
and not method-dependent. Lack of available computing power often limits the use
of such algorithms. The second aim applies an existing 26-processor parallel
computational array and designs neuroinformatics tools to ease data exchange
with neurodatabases. Parallelized algorithms will thus be applied to a broad
range of neural data. Utilizing insights into neural coding and parallel
processing, the third aim will refine and advance algorithmic development,
parallelization schemes, and neuroinformatic classification and exchange. New
experimental/analytic collaborations will advance the design of protocols for
the study of visual and somatic sensation that produces neural data--especially
multiunit data--readily analyzed using evolving algorithms. Generated as well
will be new ideas for hypothesis-testing analytics, all advancing collaborative
computational neuroinformatics

