* 0414727
* Dynamic Coordination for Distributed Planning with Limited Communication
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Alfredo Garcia, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2008
* USD 414,714.00

As is clear from the emergence of the Internet, the national electric power
grid, and other large-scale network infrastructures, engineering systems today
are increasingly reliant on distributed control authority and coordination
between subsystems. Typically, coordination is achieved in engineering systems
through the specification of ad hoc protocols for relatively well-defined
(constrained) interactions between distributed systems. As information systems
become more integrated into society, however, we find that existing protocols
are not adequately tuned for new applications and/or unexpected situations.
Though issues of decentralized control and planning are becoming more prevalent
in the engineering systems we build today, there unfortunately appears to be
little in the way of underlying guiding principles and theory for designing and
operating such systems. Notions of game theory and decentralized control go only
part way toward revealing the basic problems associated with distributed
engineering systems, especially in situations where distributed
agents/players/actors all recognize the same performance objective and would
work together except for the problem of having little or no opportunities to
coordinate their actions because of limited communication. In this project, the
PI's goal is to derive an enhanced understanding of coordination without
explicit communication by posing a new class of sequential decision processes,
known as coordination processes, whose analysis will provide new theoretical
insights and new algorithmic approaches in decentralized systems and distributed
planning applications. The mathematical framework the PI team will investigate
is rooted in the theory of controlled Markov processes and dynamic games, thus
providing a firm foundation for new results, including new solution concepts and
new algorithmic approaches for identifying optimal coordination strategies. The
PI team will focus their efforts broadly on two subclasses of coordination
problems: transient coordination processes where all actors seek to drive an
underlying system to a terminal state with minimum cost; repeated play
coordination processes where the objective is to learn optimal coordination
strategies that tend to minimize the average cost perceived in repeated
instances of a coordination problem. The PI team will evaluate their solution
concepts and algorithmic procedures in the context of two illustrative
applications, a robotic planning problem and an Internet traffic engineering
problem, both of which require autonomous agents (actors) to coordinate without
opportunities for explicit communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
This work will impact diverse research communities, including those for control
theory, game theory, and decision sciences. The results should find application
in diverse sectors&lt;br/&gt;of engineering and computer science, including the
design of new MAC-layer protocols, the design of better conflict resolution
algorithms in distributed collaboration tools and peer-to-peer applications, the
design and control of transportation resource management systems, and in future
sensor management systems.&lt;br/&gt;