* 0414644
* Collaborative Research: TANGO: Table Analysis for Semiautomatic Generation of Ontologies
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2009
* David Embley, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2009
* USD 272,000.00

This collaborative project "TANGO" is leveraging strengths of research teams at
Brigham Young University (IIS-0414644, PI: David Embley) and Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute (IIS 0414854, PI: George Nagy). TANGO is a framework for
organizing domain-specific factual data appearing in independently generated web
pages. Algorithms and software are developed for extracting and interpreting
individual lists and tables and integrating them with the contents of other
tables that present partially overlapping information. The input pages may be
HTML, PDF, PostScript, or scanned document image files. The output of the system
is an ontology that provides the conceptual framework for the domain. The
ontology evolves as web pages with additional relevant data are harvested and
processed. Constructing ontologies is currently a labor and skill intensive
process. The TANGO framework automates much of the ontology construction task
for a domain when information exists in lists and tables that describe the
domain. The results of this project build stepping stones to the Semantic Web,
for which ontologies are a central component. Therefore, this project will have
an impact on users of the Semantic Web, who assisted by the automated software
agents developed in this project, can accomplish information-based tasks for
research, scholarship, planning, design, education, and entertainment. This
cross-disciplinary and cross-university endeavor introduces graduate and
undergraduate students to cutting-edge research. Developed tools (including
source programs), a corpus of tables both in raw and normalized forms, collected
test data, and technical reports can be found at the project website
(http://www.tango.byu.edu). &lt;br/&gt;