* 0414181
* Tritrophic Interactions in Datura
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2009
* J. Daniel Hare, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2009
* USD 480,000.00

Both biological control and host plant resistance are effective and safe means
to protect crops against pests. Historically, these two mechanisms were thought
to be independent, with one having no effect on the other. We now know that
biological control agents may be harmed by the same plant traits that confer
resistance to pests. Such effects present a difficulty in predicting the
evolution of plant defenses: should evolution favor strong defenses that act
directly on pests, or reduced defenses to favor the pests' natural enemies? This
question will be answered by comparing the benefits for plant reproduction of a
resistance trait that acts directly on pests with its indirect effects on the
pests' natural enemies. Datura wrightii, an abundant, native species of
jimsonweed, is ideal for such a comparison. The trait that helps plants resist
pests, glandular hairs, is controlled by a single dominant gene. Glandular
plants are less suitable for pests but glandular hairs also inhibit the natural
enemies of these pests. I will quantify the direct and indirect effects of
glandular hairs on seed production of D. wrightii in field experiments,
determine the seasonal variation in densities of herbivores and natural enemies
on glandular and non-glandular D. wrightii plants in natural populations, and
determine the influence of glandular hairs on the foraging behavior of natural
enemies in the laboratory. This research is among the first to disentangle the
direct benefits of pest resistance from its indirect effects on natural enemies
and has broad applicability to better integrate host plant resistance with
biological control in the management of pests of potato, tomato, and other
crops. A postdoctoral research associate, a graduate student, and several
undergraduate students from NSF's underrepresented ethnic groups will be
mentored and trained under this research project.