* 0414307
* 2004 Industrial Ecology Gordon Research Conference;  August 1-6, 2004;  Queens College, Oxford, England
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Valerie Thomas, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 12/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Industrial ecology focuses on reducing the environmental impacts of goods and
services, on systems-based analysis of environmental problems, and on
innovations that can significantly improve environmental performance. The Gordon
Research Conference on Industrial Ecology is the leading a forum for the
discussion and presentation of the latest scientific developments in this field.
This grant provides shared funding for the 2004 Gordon Research Conference on
Industrial Ecology. Specifically, the funds will be used to support the
participation of students, and the participation of scientists from developing
countries who would not otherwise be able to attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference provides an opportunity for leading scientists to discuss new
research on role of technology in addressing global environmental problems. The
conference will help to ensure that research approaches are vetted among a wide
group of international scientists, and provides a way for new research results
to be discussed among scientists before they are published in the peer-reviewed
literature. If successful, this conference will support the development of new
research, improved research methods, new collaborations, and a better
understanding of the role of technology in simultaneously supporting human well-
being and protecting the environment. &lt;br/&gt;