* 0414317
* The Fluvial Response to Late Quaternary Climatic Change of Large Rivers in France
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Michael Blum, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2005
* USD 34,784.00

The mechanisms that produced past climate changes may have been global in
extent, but the manifestation of such changes in the climate system and on
terrestrial environments varied regionally. The need for increased understanding
of this spatial and temporal variability has become even more significant in
light of the recent results from ice core and marine records, which provide
exciting new glimpses of the complexity the transition from the last full-
glacial to Holocene transition. Unraveling the spatial and temporal variability
of terrestrial systems and their responses to climate changes requires clearly
dated stratigraphic records from representative parts of Earth's surface. Toward
that end, this research project involving geographers and Earth scientists from
the U.S., France, and the United Kingdom will develop a region record of late
Pleistocene and Holocene landscape evolution for the Loire, Rhone, and Garonne
rivers of southern France. Long-term project goals are to develop and refine
geomorphic, stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and paleohydrologic models for the
three systems in order to analyze how they operated over the course of a
complete glacial-interglacial cycle. More specifically, the project will develop
a general stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and chronologic framework for these
river systems during the "Wurm glacial cycle." It also will develop a detailed
stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and chronologic framework at millennial-scale
resolution for the three river systems during the very dynamic period of
deglaciation and transition to the Holocene. The chronology of glacio-fluvial
sediments will be developed through the use of optically stimulated luminescence
(OSL) and accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) 14C dating procedures,. These data
will be used to evaluate the frequency, magnitude, differential sensitivities,
and thresholds for change in these fluvial systems over that critical time
period. This research project will generate a valuable new database and
contribute new insights into a range of important issues, including (1) linkages
between regional climate and hydrological systems and global atmosphere-
cryosphere-ocean processes and (2) regional sensitivities to climate change. The
database will complement information gathered from individual river systems
elsewhere and from relatively small regions, and it will provide a reference
standard for future studies conducted on a regional scale. The project is
jointly supported by the Geography and Regional Science, Geology and
Paleontology, and Western European programs at the National Science Foundation
in collaboration with the French National Center for Scientific Research
(CNRS).&lt;br/&gt;