* 0414516
* 2004 Laser Interactions with Materials Gordon Conference, Andover, NH, August 1 - 6, 2004
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* J. Thomas Dickinson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 12/31/2004
* USD 5,000.00

This application requests partial funding to support the Laser Interactions with
Materials conference to be held August 1 to 6, 2004 at Proctor Academy in
Andover New Hampshire. The primary goal of this conference is to bring together
investigators from diverse disciplines studying a wide variety of materials
systems to share their approaches and progress in unraveling basic mechanisms
and applications that arise from laser/material interactions. Such a
multidisciplinary conference is ideal for the isolated, informal atmosphere
typical of Gordon Conferences, known for facilitating crosstalk and synthesizing
novel viewpoints across wide ranging interests. The conference will consist of
nine formal sessions, each consisting of 3 oral presentations with an
introduction by a leading scientist in the area, and two evening poster
sessions. Invited speakers have been selected on the basis of their relevant
expertise while emphasizing a program with gender balance, minority
representation, and participation of young investigators that show promise as
future scientific leaders. Topics of high current interest which will be covered
include applications to laser processing, applications to nanotechnology,
optoelectronics, and future electronics systems; life sciences and medicine; and
applications of ultrafast lasers to further our understanding surface phenomena.
This unique mix of topics illustrates the rich diversity of interest in the
laser-materials community. In addition, informal workshops will be held on new
developments in education of scientists and engineers and on the latest trends
in research and development funding.