* 0414434
* Rational Design of Nanostructures Derived from Self-Assembly of Helical Peptide Motifs
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Vincent Conticello, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 330,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professor Vincent
Conticello of the Department of Chemistry at Emory University for research that
utilizes the structural guidelines employed in biological systems for the design
and construction of non-native, nano-scale materials that display the structural
specificity and the chemically and spatially unique functional group
presentation of native biomolecular assemblies. This proposal describes the
design and synthesis of peptide sub-units based upon a-helical structural motifs
that can self-assemble into functionalized fibers and fiber networks. These can
be employed as functional elements in biological systems in roles including
protein-protein recognition, locomotion, signal transduction, and
sensing/actuation. Professor Conticello hypothesizes that synthetic helical
peptides can be created to self-assemble into functional protein fibrils that
emulate and expand upon the functional roles of native protein fibrils.
Chemosynthetic control of peptide sequence should facilitate introduction of the
desired functionality, including non-native functionality, at specifically
defined positions in the nano-structures resulting from self-assembly. These
synthetic peptide modules will be employed to define the scope of the fibril
self-assembly and create nano-scale scaffolds for the presentation of functional
groups arranged at periodic intervals along the fibril axis, which can be
ultimately articulated into functional biomimetic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program, Professor Vincent Conticello of the Department of Chemistry
at Emory University is developing a research program where well-controlled
assembly of helical peptides offers many opportunities for the design of unique
assembled materials for nanotechnology applications. The work includes a
detailed set of experimental design parameters that can be used to govern the
assembly of fibrillar structures, as well as a plan for the modification of
these structures with inorganic (or other) materials. The assembly of inorganic
particles on these length scales is of significant research interest and marks
one of the primary advantages of the marriage of biological and inorganic
materials. Interesting and useful knowledge in the field will undoubtedly emerge
from this research. Professor Conticello's graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows will be involved in undergraduate education through a newly established
Freshman Seminar series entitled "The Origins of Order." Research fellows will
present their research projects to undergraduate students to provide an
indication of the process through which scientific discovery occurs. Themes to
be discussed in these seminars include prebiotic origins of template-directed
synthesis, protein folding, hierarchical self-organization in macromolecular
systems, which are broadly encompassed within the scope of his research.
Graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and undergraduate students
involved in this project will also contribute as active participants within the
Center for Fundamental and Applied Molecular Evolution (FAME). This is a jointly
sponsored initiative between Emory University and Georgia Institute of
Technology dedicated to the investigation of evolution in a molecular context
with an emphasis on applications toward the synthesis of novel molecules and
materials in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;