* 0414901
* IMR:  Aquisition of Cryogenic Prober for Nanoscale Materials and Device Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Theresa Mayer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 91,691.00

The Instrumentation for Materials Research (IMR) funding provided to this
program will be used to purchase a Micromanipulated Cryogenic Probe Station.
This instrument will facilitate temperature-dependent characterization of a
variety of materials and devices being fabricated in the Penn State Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center for Nanoscale Science including
ferroelectric thin films and nanotubes, semiconductor and superconductor
nanowires, and metal-molecule-metal junctions. These measurements will provide
insight into fundamental materials properties such as domain wall motion in
scaled ferroelectric thin films and electrical transport in one-dimensional
nanostructures. This system offers advantages over conventional cryostats for
these samples because it eliminates potentially damaging device packaging (i.e.,
dicing, mounting, and wire bonding) steps by incorporating six independently
controlled micro-manipulated low-noise probes that are used to contact devices
across a large sample diameter. In addition, the ability to probe multiple
devices in a single cool down will make it easier to collect data on device-to-
device variations, which have proven to be significant in many new nanoscale
materials such as those described here. The cryogenic probe system will also
have broader educational impact in undergraduate research and laboratory-based
coursework. Several new laboratory modules will be incorporated into existing
undergraduate and graduate physics and electrical engineering courses to provide
instruction on temperature-dependent measurement of physical effects in
nanoscale materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Instrumentation for Materials Research (IMR) funding provided to this program
will be used to purchase a Micromanipulated Cryogenic Probe Station. This
instrument incorporates six independently controlled probes that are used to
contact individual on-chip devices, which are maintained at temperatures between
4 and 300 K by a continuous flow liquid helium cryostat. The probe station will
facilitate temperature-dependent characterization of a variety of new devices
being fabricated in the Penn State Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center for Nanoscale Science including ferroelectric thin films and nanotubes,
semiconductor and superconductor nanowires, and metal-molecule-metal junctions.
These measurements will provide insight into fundamental materials properties
such as domain wall motion in scaled ferroelectric thin films and electrical
transport in one-dimensional nanostructures. The cryogenic probe system will
also have broader educational impact in undergraduate research and laboratory-
based coursework. Several new laboratory modules will be incorporated into
existing undergraduate and graduate physics and electrical engineering courses
to provide instruction on temperature-dependent measurement of physical effects
in nanoscale materials and devices.