* 0414809
* IMR:  Development of a Transient Spectrometer for Education and Research into Quantum Coherence in Molecular Nanomagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Stephen Hill, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 198,000.00

This project will advance existing spectroscopic capabilities at the University
of Florida (UF) and the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) through
the development of a unique broadband transient spectrometer which will be used
for interdisciplinary collaborative research and student training. Experiments
will focus on single-molecule magnets (SMMs), which represent a molecular
approach to nanoscale and sub-nanoscale science, with potential applications in
quantum computational devices. Very little is known about the coupling of such a
nanomagnet to its environment, and how this coupling affects the coherence of
quantum superposition states. Thus, we will develop a spectrometer capable of
addressing questions relating to the quantum dynamics of molecule-based
nanomagnets. A unique instrument will be developed, enabling: broadband
continuous-wave frequency coverage (8 to 500 GHz); pump/probe and time domain
capabilities (up to 300 GHz) with sub-microsecond resolution; and precise
control over the DC magnetic field orientation. Experiments will include: rapid
passage and transient EPR studies of magnetic quantum tunneling in SMMs; hole-
burning and double resonance (ELDOR) investigations of quantum dephasing
mechanisms in nanomagnets; and, ultimately, coherent control of the quantum spin
states of SMMs. The new instrumentation will have important uses beyond the
scope of the investigations described in this proposal, e.g. for high-resolution
high-frequency EPR with applications in chemistry and even biology. The PI will
collaborate with researchers at the NHMFL with the aim of developing a similar
instrument for users of this facility. The PI is also involved in a range of
outreach/education activities (related to an NSF CAREER award) which will
benefit immensely from this project. %%% This project will build upon existing
experimental capabilities available to researchers at the University of Florida
(UF) and the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) through the
development of a new instrument which will be used for interdisciplinary
collaborative research and student training. Experiments will focus on single-
molecule magnets (SMMs), which represent a molecular approach to nanoscale
science, with potential applications in quantum computing. The major hurdle in
the development of a quantum computer is the so-called "decoherence" problem,
whereby "quantum information" is irreversibly lost to the environment due to the
simple fact that it is both impractical and impossible to completely isolate a
quantum device from its surroundings. This decoherence can be studied using
time-resolved magnetic or optical measurement techniques. Studies of SMMs will
require capabilities covering a wide portion of the microwave frequency range,
and with time resolution on the order of a fraction of a microsecond.
Furthermore, an ability to control the quantum states of SMMs with a strong
magnetic field is also needed. This project will address these pressing needs,
resulting in a unique experimental instrument. The PI will collaborate with
researchers at the NHMFL with the aim of developing similar capabilities for
users of this national facility. In particular, the new instrumentation will
have important uses beyond the research into the quantum properties of SMMs,
e.g. for high-frequency electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) studies of
problems in chemistry and even biology. Finally, the PI is involved in a range
of outreach/education activities (related to an NSF CAREER award) which will
benefit immensely from the development of the new instrument.