* 0414519
* 2004 Tribology Gordon Research Conferences; June 27 - July 2, 2004;  Bristol, RI
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jimmy K. Hsia
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

0414519&lt;br/&gt;PI - Dickinson, Washington State University&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
SUMMARY - THE 2004 GORDON CONFERENCE ON TRIBOLOGY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tribology
- the study of friction, wear &amp; lubrication - affects us all. Controlling
friction and wear can either inhibit or enable technological advances from large
engines to body prostheses, MEMS and nanotechnological devices. Thus, in the
21st Century, tribology will continue to critically impact all aspects of our
quality of life, health, wealth and livelihood and there are significant
challenges to be addressed, many requiring paradigm shifts in both our
approaches and thinking. The biennial Gordon Research Conference in tribology is
the premiere basic research meeting for tribologists and supporting scientists.
Coming from all parts of the world, leading scientists from universities,
national labs and industries gather with young scientists and newcomers to
tribology for one week of formal and informal discussions on state-of-the art
issues in this multidisciplinary and multi-scale subject. Today's Problems &amp;
Tomorrow's Solutions - Challenging Our Needs in Tribology Research theme is our
attempt to explore how underlying science, including recent advances in our
understanding of surface mechanics, physics, chemistry and phase transformations
can help solve the problems posed by tomorrow's applications. Simultaneously we
wish to examine the converse problem: how the perceived demands of tomorrow's
innovative devices and applications can reveal 'the blanks' in our current
understandings and research capabilities. The speakers and discussion leaders
chosen for the 2004 GRC Conference on Tribology are amongst the most eminent
scholars and researchers in the world. Besides bringing many of the established
intellectual leaders of the subject together to brainstorm the future, there is
also a very strong commitment to fully involve practicing engineers and young
scientists from a range of related disciplines so that they may not only learn
of the latest research tools but also contribute to the paradigm changes in
approach which are necessary for underpinning and enabling the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This meeting is a key mechanism
for linking basic science with a technological field of significant importance
to the U.S. and World economies. It also provides ties between new, young
investigators and those with experience and depth in their understanding of the
problems. Advances in tribology also require a constant flux of new ideas and
healthy connections to other disciplines. This meeting provides an extremely
efficient way to make all of these connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This proposal focuses on providing support for conference fees and/or
travel expenses for participants including discussion leaders, speakers,
graduate students, postdocs and young investigators. This will allow many young
investigators the opportunity to benefit from the new working experience which
the Gordon Conferences provide but who could not otherwise be able to attend
because of fund restrictions. We strive for gender balance and also favor any
under-represented ethnic minority or disabled individuals that apply. Beyond
these criteria, we will attempt to diversify the meeting by selecting attendees
from academic research, industry, and educational professions with a further eye
toward a mix of senior and junior independent investigators, postdoctoral
trainees and graduate students. We are also seeking funds to support a few
undergraduates (seniors) who have expressed interest in attending and wish to
present posters.&lt;br/&gt;