* 0414144
* Mechanisms Controlling Metal and Phosphorus Dynamics in an Experimentally Acidified Watershed in Maine
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Stephen Norton, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 07/31/2009
* USD 535,423.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Bear Brook Watershed in Maine (BBWM) is a long-term (14+ years),
whole-watershed experiment designed to study ecosystem responses to acid
deposition. One watershed has been treated bimonthly by helicopter with nitrogen
and sulfur since 1989. Results have documented progressive acidification of
soils and streams, substantial losses of soil nutrients (e.g., calcium),
increased nitrogen cycling, and changes in tree foliar chemistry. Little
research has been done on phosphorus, a critical nutrient in ecosystems. This
project will evaluate the effects of long-term watershed acidification on metal
mobilization (focusing on aluminum and iron) and linked effects on phosphorus at
BBWM by studying soils, soil solutions, stream water, and biota (e.g., foliage,
roots, and soil microorganisms).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policy makers have focused
on emissions regulations to control nitrogen and sulfur due to known ecological
effects on forests and streams such as acidification, nitrogen saturation, and
base cation depletion. Little is known about how these ecological changes will,
in turn, affect phosphorus cycling. Understanding changes in this key nutrient
may be pivotal to understanding underlying mechanisms of forest decline and
surface water quality, and will therefore be fundamental to policy and
management planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;