* 0414974
* IMR:  Acquisition of Optical Instrumentation for Determination of the Band Structure of Photonic and Phononic Crystals and Education of Students
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Edwin Thomas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 76,182.00

This project is aimed at constructing two optical instruments in order to
measure novel optical and acoustic properties of periodic polymeric materials.
Specifically scientists at the MIT are interested in measuring both photonic and
phononic dispersion relationships in self assembled block copolymers and
photopolymers created by 3d interference lithography using high resolution
magnetooptical rotation measurements and Brillouin light scattering. These two
complementary types of measurement jointly rely on common physics (wave
propagation in periodic media). Specifically the researchers will construct a
high resolution Faraday polarization rotation apparatus comprised of an
electromagnet system and a photoelastic modulator for the magnetooptical
measurements and purchase a Brillouin light scattering apparatus, consisting of
a Fabry-Perot interferometer and avalanche photodetector to enable the phononic
dispersion curves to be measured. The realization of such experimental setups
will enable scientists to test very exciting predictions of recent modeling
studies conducted concerning 1D chiral photonic crystals containing
magnetooptical nanoparticles being performed under NSF grant DMR#0308133 and to
further recent work on phonon dispersion in 1D lamellar block copolymer crystals
and 3d bicontinuous cubic network crystals made via interference lithography.
The scientists have found a nondispersive optic-like mode related to the
periodic variations in the mechanical properties, a clear indication of the
behavior of a phononic crystal.

Photonic crystals (materials that can guide the propagation of light, and in
particular reflect certain colors) and phononic crystals (materials that can
guide the propagation of sound, and in particular, reflect certain frequencies)
both present basic scientific and potentially very technologically interesting
materials. In this project scientsists at MIT will develop two related
instruments to make new measurements of these interesting phenomena.
Interactions between electromagnetic waves (light) or elastic waves (sound) in
periodic materials can be surprising and useful. The researchers will make
appropriate patterned polymeric crystals, model/simulate their properties using
well developed theories and use the newly acquired instruments to access never
before measured data for critical comparison to theory and for fundamental
insight into to potentially revolutionary new devices: super thin prisms to
spread out the colors of white light and open structures that one can see
through but not hear through.