* 0414033
* Research Starter Grant:  Comparative Phylogeography of Amphibians Across the Southern Appalachians and Gulf Coastal Plain
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Leslie Rissler, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

Understanding the forces responsible for generating genetic and ecological
diversity across a biogeographic region is critical to understanding the origin
and distribution of species. One approach is to use comparisons of evolutionary
history to determine patterns of biodiversity and infer the processes governing
these distributions. An understanding of the spatial pattern of genetic
diversity is critical for evaluating the affect of geography, ecology, and
history in determining spatial distributions of
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on multiple, co-
distributed amphibian species in the southern Appalachians and Gulf Coastal
Plain. The investigator takes a molecular phylogenetic and population genetic
approach in combination with spatially explicit ecological analyses in a
geographic information systems (GIS) framework to address questions in
biogeography. This approach is both novel and rigorous, and uses techniques
developed during the investigator's postdoctoral fellowship at the University of
California at Berkeley. This approach will improve knowledge of geographic
distributions and phylogenetic relationships among populations of amphibians in
the southeastern United States and lead to a better understanding of regional
biogeography and biodiversity. In addition, the research is important for
conservation because phylogeographic analyses often reveal the existence of
hidden lineages; this is especially true for amphibians. The proposed research
is unique in focusing on multiple species of amphibians that span the southern
Appalachians and Gulf Coastal Plain bioregions. The work has broad significance
in terms of understanding the relative impact of glacial refugia, dispersal
ability, and climate on the distribution of genetic variation within and among
amphibian species of the southeastern United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research provides numerous opportunities for the career development of
undergraduate students and graduate students. Students can assist the
investigator during field collections, museum preparations, DNA sequencing, and
GIS analyses. The research will strengthen relations between the departments of
biological sciences and geography at the University of Alabama. Collaborations
will likely result with state and federal employees in national forests and
parks. &lt;br/&gt;