* 0414270
* Dynamical Systems in Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Hal Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 260,304.00

Broadly, the investigator studies specific mathematical&lt;br/&gt;models
arising from the life sciences and develops new&lt;br/&gt;mathematical tools
with which to analyze such models. Models of&lt;br/&gt;biofilms, previously
developed by this investigator and&lt;br/&gt;collaborators, are used to study
important phenomena such as gene&lt;br/&gt;transfer among micro-organisms and
quorum sensing. These models&lt;br/&gt;are based on the classical chemical
engineering bio-reactors,&lt;br/&gt;namely, the continuously stirred tank
reactor and the tubular&lt;br/&gt;plug flow reactor with dispersion, and take
the form of ordinary&lt;br/&gt;differential equations for the former and coupled
parabolic&lt;br/&gt;equations with nonlinear boundary conditions for the latter.
The&lt;br/&gt;aim is to understand the factors that facilitate
biofilm&lt;br/&gt;formation, the factors involved in the successful introduction
of&lt;br/&gt;new genes via plasmid transfer in biofilm communities, and
the&lt;br/&gt;role of bacterial quorum sensing in these processes. The
study&lt;br/&gt;also addresses a fundamental issue in population biology --
the&lt;br/&gt;so-called "paradox of the plankton": why can so many
plankton&lt;br/&gt;species be supported by so few limiting resources in lakes
and&lt;br/&gt;seas? The same paradox arises with the microbial denizens
of&lt;br/&gt;arid soils that receive infrequent rains and deposition
of&lt;br/&gt;nutrients -- another focus of the project. The
investigator's&lt;br/&gt;aim is to introduce mathematical models based on the
classical&lt;br/&gt;model of a multi-species community in which members
compete&lt;br/&gt;exploitatively for several essential (nonoverlapping)
resources&lt;br/&gt;(light, nitrogen, carbon, etc.) in a well-mixed environment
and&lt;br/&gt;to provide mathematically rigorous results of an
explanatory&lt;br/&gt;nature rather than numerical simulations. On the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;side, the theory of monotone dynamical systems and
persistence&lt;br/&gt;theory have greatly contributed to the understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;biological models and the study aims to enhance and build
on&lt;br/&gt;these theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A substantial effort is
devoted to study mathematical models&lt;br/&gt;of microbial processes in
environmental settings where biofilms&lt;br/&gt;may form on surfaces. Biofilms
are of great importance in the&lt;br/&gt;health sciences and industry, where
their formation typically&lt;br/&gt;results in negative outcomes. They are
responsible for food and&lt;br/&gt;water contamination, dental caries and
periodontal disease, and&lt;br/&gt;the contamination of medical implants. The
focus is on&lt;br/&gt;understanding conditions favorable for biofilm formation,
factors&lt;br/&gt;involved in gene transfer (e.g., antibiotic resistance)
among&lt;br/&gt;microorganisms in biofilms, and the ability of organisms
to&lt;br/&gt;chemically communicate their existence and current state
to&lt;br/&gt;others organisms on these processes. Broadly, the study
is&lt;br/&gt;characterized by a desire to obtain mathematically
rigorous&lt;br/&gt;results along with computer simulations. Modelling and
computer&lt;br/&gt;simulations are widely acknowledged to be important tools in
the&lt;br/&gt;study of biological systems. The modelling process forces
a&lt;br/&gt;careful description of what are the known and important
features&lt;br/&gt;of a system. Computer simulations are important in order
to&lt;br/&gt;explore the implications of assumptions and sensitivity of
model&lt;br/&gt;behavior to parameter changes. However, computer
simulations&lt;br/&gt;alone seldom lead to a comprehensive understanding of a
model,&lt;br/&gt;let alone the underlying biological process, due to the
inherent&lt;br/&gt;limitations of the computer itself -- one can only test
a&lt;br/&gt;relatively small sample of the full range of model
parameters,&lt;br/&gt;follow the time course of the model over a relatively
small time&lt;br/&gt;window, for a relatively small number of possible initial
data. &lt;br/&gt;Rigorous mathematical analysis can lead to real understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;a model and the underlying biological processes by
identifying&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms responsible for model behavior. Unfortunately,
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical tools necessary to provide a careful
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;analysis are often not currently available. The study
seeks to&lt;br/&gt;develop such tools and to apply them to problems in the
life&lt;br/&gt;sciences.&lt;br/&gt;