* 0414231
* Tuning the Thermodynamic and Kinetic Properties of the Binding of Hairpin Polyamides to Their Cognate DNA Sequences, through Incorporation of Intercalating and Threading Agents
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,09/30/2005
* W. Wilson, Furman University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2005
* USD 180,000.00

With this new award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports
the work of Professor Moses Lee of the Department of Chemistry at Furman
University and Professor W. David Wilson of the Department of Chemistry at
Georgia State University. The research will involve the synthesis and
characterization of hairpin polyamides that bind to DNA in a sequence specific
manner. In order to enhance binding to DNA, the sequence specific hairpin
polyamide JH-37, previously developed in the PI's lab, will be modified by the
incorporation of pendant intercalating and threading groups. These added groups
will be chosen for their preference for binding to the minor groove of DNA. Once
these compounds are synthesized, the thermodynamics and kinetics of their
binding to DNA will be investigated by surface plasmon resonance. Those
compounds that exhibit favorable binding constants and kinetics will be examined
further by isothermal titration calorimetry and nuclear magnetic resonance. In
this way, rational ligand design and synthesis will be linked to the biophysical
properties that determine DNA-ligand interactions. These collaborative studies,
which will be carried out by undergraduates, graduate students and
postdoctorals, will yield information of importance in development of novel
biologically active compounds, specific gene knockouts, and gene based
biosensors.