* 0414630
* GRASP:     Parsing of Grammatical Relations for Databases of Spoken Language Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2008
* Brian MacWhinney, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2008
* USD 405,999.00

This award supports the development of a system for computation of syntactic
structure in spoken language conversations with a specific emphasis on parent-
child conversations. The new system, called GRASP (Grammatical Relations
Analysis for Spontaneous Protocols), replaces the traditional computation of
full parse trees with the computation of grammatical relations linked through a
dependency structure. GRASP is being applied to all the English language corpora
in the CHILDES (Child Language Data Exchange System) database. It replaces
tedious hand calculation of commonly used child language profiles such as IPSyn,
DSS, and LARSP with a more reliable automatic method. GRASP is able to achieve
significantly greater parsing accuracy, since it can concentrate on the
computation of syntactic structures that are most relevant to these profiles. To
validate accuracy, results from GRASP are compared with hand-coded results
contributed by 8 laboratories. Deviations between GRASP and hand-coded results
are analyzed in detail to diagnose ways to increase system accuracy. The current
parser relies primarily on a simple statistical parser for grammatical relations
trained on maternal utterances in the Eve and Sachs corpora in CHILDES. Analyses
have shown that training on the grammatical relations in the maternal input is
superior to training on inputs that include children's utterances, even when the
target utterances are child utterances. Additional modules in construction
emphasize rule-based grammatical relation construction and robustness
rules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automation of these scoring profiles benefits
academics and clinical professionals working with bilingual and minority
populations, delayed talkers, and children with hearing problems. In addition,
the grammatical relation dependency structures being computed are at the core of
the language acquisition theory, such as thematic role structure, binding,
relativization, complementation, and movement. The specific identity of the
grammatical relations being encoded was determined by paying close attention to
structures of traditional importance in the literature and by an open
solicitation of additional suggested relations posted to the child language
bulletin board. After consolidating these new parsing methods and automating the
relevant child language measurement instruments, the project will extend the
results to language development in other languages, as well as to adult spoken
language corpora. The final system will be disseminated by facilitating web-
based analyses of online corpora and by packaging into a simple desktop
application.&lt;br/&gt;