* 0414012
* RUI: Paleohydrology of the Great Lakes region since the most recent glaciation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,04/30/2006
* James Clark, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2006
* USD 105,290.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The Great Lakes region has experienced significant and
dramatic changes in hydrologic character since late glacial times, 17,000 years
ago. Large proglacial lakes drained suddenly and the slow viscous deformation of
the earth caused outlets to move vertically affecting the associated lake
levels. The proposed research will use a numerical model of viscous flow within
the mantle to simulate deformation of the earth's solid surface relative to its
geoid that was caused by the changing ice loads during the last ice age.
Shorelines of the ancient glacial and postglacial lakes are now tilted relative
to the present geoid and provide data of time-dependent earth deformation. An
inverse model will also be used to predict the thickness of the ice sheets
consistent with the deformation data.&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the research is
to simulate the changing hydrologic nature of the entire Great Lakes region
during the past 17,000 years. Because digital elevation models (DEM's) exist
over the entire region, predictions of deformation everywhere in the region
allow calculation of paleo-topography. It is common to use geographic
information systems (GIS) to determine modern stream networks given present
topography (DEM's). In the proposed work, a GIS will use the predicted paleo-
topography to determine the integrated river systems and lake levels that were
continually modified as retreating ice exposed progressively lower outlets and
as outlet elevation change resulted from isostatic uplift. Calculations are
readily performed in the GIS of exact volumes of freshwater released by lakes as
glacial burst events. Such estimates are important because cold freshwater
pulses, affecting ocean circulation patterns, may have contributed to extremely
rapid climate change. The GIS can also determine paleo- drainage basins and
stream networks with quantification of the total area contributing surface water
to any point on any stream and at any time.&lt;br/&gt;Predictions of shorelines
will be superimposed upon USGS digital raster graphics topographic maps for use
in field checking the predictions, and these predictions will be available to
all on a website or CDs. The predictions can also be downloaded onto a handheld
computer connected to a global positioning system (GPS) device and used to
pinpoint in the field exact locations of shoreline features, whether predicted
or observed. The inverse model will tune the ice sheet history and earth
rheology to the data. Successful inversion will yield a predicted ice sheet
thickness history helpful to glaciologists and glacial geologists attempting to
understand the dynamic nature of the southern limit of the Laurentide ice sheet.
It will also serve to address the issue of crustal stability in the southern
Great Lakes and improve the understanding of earth viscosity structure and
neotectonics of the region.&lt;br/&gt;The research will expose undergraduate
geology majors to numerical models, statistical methods, advanced GIS practices
and fieldwork. Their continued active participation in&lt;br/&gt;Geological
Society of America sectional meetings and as co-authors on publications will
stimulate the research environment of a small undergraduate geology department
and encourage undergraduates to continue their education as researchers in
graduate school and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;