* 0414167
* Households and Polities in Classic Maya Society: Survey and Excavation in the Aguateca Area, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Daniela Triadan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 228,656.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Takeshi Inomata, Daniela Triadan,
and an international team of colleagues, will conduct the second phase of the
Aguateca Archaeological Project, examining households in Classic Maya society
(A.D. 250-900). Its first phase focused on the epicenter of Aguateca, which was
abandoned rapidly because of an attack by enemies around A.D. 810. Extensive
excavations of residences with numerous in situ assemblages provided
extraordinary data on elite households. Investigations showed that Aguateca was
originally part of the Tamarindito polity during the Tepeu I phase (A.D.
600-700) of the Late Classic period. After an intrusive dynasty, coming from
Tikal, established its seats of power at Dos Pilas and Aguateca, the population
of Aguateca grew explosively during the Tepeu II phase (A.D. 700-810).
Households associated with the Tamarindito polity and those affiliated with the
Dos Pilas/Aguateca dynasty appear to have built their houses in different
architectural styles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the success of the first
phase, the proposed second phase will examine the relationship between
households and polities. The primary research questions are: How do governmental
institutions of polities affect the daily lives of households and how does the
organization and activities of households condition the governing strategies and
political options? An effective archaeological approach for this purpose is to
examine differences and similarities among households across neighboring
polities with particular attention to the nature of political boundaries. The
research will be guided by three theoretical concerns. The first is a debate
among Maya scholars on whether Classic Maya polities had clearly demarcated
boundaries or fluid, indeterminate ones. The second is that the effects of
political control by the central authorities may have varied among households of
different social positions. The third is that the study of this issue requires
attention to multiple dimensions of society, including political administration,
economic transactions, social interactions, and community identities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A consideration of the specific historical context and the
nature of available data leads to the following more specific questions: (1) Do
the two different architectural styles exhibit clearly demarcated spatial
distributions between Aguateca and the neighboring centers?; (2) Did elite and
non-elite households in the Aguateca polity and the Tamarindito polity use their
domestic spaces differently and conduct different types of activities?; and (3)
Did elite and non-elite households in the Aguateca and Tamarindito polities have
differential access to economic goods? These questions will be addressed through
an integrated program of survey along transects between these centers,
excavation, soil residue analyses, and continuous laboratory
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed, contextualized data obtained from the
project will contribute to the growing field of household archaeology in the
Maya area. They will also present theoretical implications beyond Maya
archaeology, by providing a rich account of how households experienced
centralized power and how the reactions of households shaped the political
strategies of polities. In addition, the project will promote intellectual
exchanges among scholars and students from various countries and offer
opportunities for master, Ph.D., and licenciatura research. Moreover, the
project will aid the preservation of cultural and natural patrimony through a
sustainable development of the region and the involvement of local communities.
The project will continue a long-term collaboration with the local Q'eqchi' Maya
by promoting and assisting their initiatives for archaeo-eco tourism,
reforestation, and lake-rejuvenation.&lt;br/&gt;