* 0414935
* IMR:  Acquisition of a Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering Camera for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Eric Kaler, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 117,600.00

A new Small-Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) System will fulfill immediate needs in
the &lt;br/&gt;characterization of polymeric, catalytic, biological,
electroactive, nanocomposite and other classes of materials and complex fluids.
The instrument will be used as a multi-user facility available to all faculty
and students in the COE and other units at UD. We have selected the high-flux
SAXS system from Anton Paar (SAXSess) as the most suitable instrument for the
COE on the basis of its capabilities, resolution, ease of use and the quality of
the software for data analysis. It uses the line-shaped beam from a conventional
X-ray tube that is focused using multilayer optics and a block collimator to
produce an intense primary beam. The signal is detected by a 2D imaging plate
and the q range is very suitable for the samples that we propose to investigate.
It has a built-in pinhole option that can be used to investigate oriented
anisotropic samples and we plan to include the wide-angle extension that allows
for the simultaneous measurement of the angular range from 0 degrees to 45
degrees of scattering angle. Small angle scattering is essential for the
characterization of nanostructured materials and complex fluids. With the large
emphasis on nanotechnology in the current research paradigm, and certainly here
at UD, this new SAXS will fill a large materials characterization gap in the
COE.s research capabilities and provide research benefit to 8 immediate users.
Up to 8 additional investigators both in the COE and in Physics and Astronomy
have expressed the need for SAXS capabilities. The major users of the instrument
will utilize it for the characterization of (1) self-assembled nanocomposite
materials using biopolymer matrices and clay platelet or peptide fibrillar
nanoscopic reinforcement; (2) to study the self-assembly of organic-silica
nanoparticles in aqueous solutions; and (3) to investigate the structure and
stability of colloidal surfactant aggregates. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;A new
Small-Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) System will fulfill immediate needs in the
&lt;br/&gt;characterization of polymeric, catalytic, biological, electroactive,
nanocomposite and other classes of materials and complex fluids. The instrument
will be used as a multi-user facility available to all faculty and students in
the COE and other units at UD. Small angle scattering is essential for the
characterization of nano-structured materials and complex fluids. With the large
emphasis on nanotechnology in the current research paradigm, and certainly here
at UD, this new SAXS will fill a large materials characterization gap in the
COE.s research capabilities and provide research benefit to 8 immediate users.
Up to 8 additional investigators both in the COE and in Physics and Astronomy
have expressed the need for SAXS capabilities. The major users of the instrument
will utilize it for the characterization of (1) self-assembled nano-composite
materials using biopolymer matrices and clay platelet or peptide fibrillar
nanoscopic reinforcement; (2) to study the self-assembly of organic-silica nano-
particles in aqueous solutions; and (3) to investigate the structure and
stability of colloidal surfactant aggregates.&lt;br/&gt;***