* 0414409
* Metagrammatical Knowledge for Grammars and Corpora
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Aravind Joshi, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2008
* USD 506,000.00

There is today a broad consensus among theoretical linguists (of all frameworks)
and researchers in Natural Language Processing (NLP) about what the syntactic
phenomena are that we encounter in natural languages. However, there are many
different frameworks in which analyses of these phenomena have been implemented,
and there is even disagreement about specific analyses within one single
framework. As a result, linguistic resources such as annotated corpora or
grammars cannot be easily reused across frameworks. This project will
investigate the common categorization of syntax that underlies work in
linguistics and NLP. This underlying categorization is called a ``metagrammar''.
Given a metagrammar, a tool can be produced to automatically generate grammars
in different frameworks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contains three main
activities. The first involves comparative work in several languages (including
English) that will lead to coordinated metagrammars for these languages. These
framework-independent specifications will catalog syntactic properties and
detail their possible interaction; categories shared between languages will lead
to shared portions of the metagrammar. The second concerns the development of
specific grammar statements that relate metagrammatical categories to constructs
in particular frameworks and for particular languages. It is these statements
that, in their interaction, determine word order. The third involves annotating
the Penn Treebank (PTB) corpus with the syntactic properties from the
metagrammar, thus making the information implicitly encoded in the phrase
structure of the PTB explicit and usable by other
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the NLP and
linguistics communities to better share insights on syntactic phenomena.
Additionally, the work will enable the development of new NLP tools that are
less dependent on a particular representation. It will enable linguists to
rapidly develop grammars and test-suites for different frameworks and languages,
thus allowing for both cross- and inter-framework evaluation of linguistic
grammars. Upon completion of the project, the PTB re-annotated with the high-
level categories of the metagrammar will be made available to the research
community .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;