* 0414472
* Pribilof Islands Collaborative:   Promoting a Strong Economy and a Healthy Ecosystem; January 2004; Anchorage, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2004,02/29/2004
* Margaret King, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/29/2004
* USD 4,140.00

This award will fund Alaska Native and Bering Sea community members to
participate in the workshop, Pribilof Islands Collaborative: Promoting a Strong
Economy and a Healthy Ecosystem, to discuss the social, scientific, and
ecosystem issues affecting their communities. This meeting will give the three
major stakeholders in the Bering Sea Region, communities, NGOs, and commercial
fishing companies the opportunity to communicate with scientific researchers, as
well as each other, concerning the major social, scientific, and ecosystem
issues in their regions.

This meeting has great value to the Arctic Social Sciences Program (ASSP) as the
program develops its draft research plan as a component of the larger Bering Sea
Ecosystem Study (BEST). As stated in the "Principals for the Conduct of Research
in the Arctic," prepared by the Interagency Social Science Task Force in
response to a recommendation by the Polar Research Board of the National Academy
of Sciences and at the direction of the Interagency Arctic Research Policy
Committee, "researchers should consult with and, where applicable, include
communities in project planning and implementation. Reasonable opportunities
should be provided for the communities to express interests and to participate
in the research." The ASSP program director will be attending the workshop
accompanied by Dr. Ben Fitzhugh, University of Washington, to consult with
community members prior to the drafting of the research plan concerning their
interests in social science research in the Bering Sea.

