* 0414849
* IMR:  Acquisition of a High-Bandwidth, High-Performance Computational Cluster for Research and Education in Computational Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Gerbrand Ceder, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

One of the next great advances in materials research will be the computational,
first-principles design of materials with desired target properties. The
abundance of relatively inexpensive computer power, and the tremendous progress
in developing robust and efficient numerical algorithms, coupled to the
unparalleled interest in nanomaterials, has set the stage for materials'
development through computational modeling. Microscopic, nanoscale properties
can be unexpected, but are directly related to atomic arrangements, making
computational modeling a natural tool to understand, predict, and design the
properties of novel materials. To achieve this goal, scientists need a
combination of accurate electronic-structure approaches, high-throughput data
mining, and multiple-scales modeling in a computing intensive environment. With
this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program, Scientists
at MIT will acquire a 64-node (128 CPU, 192GB DDRAM, 5.8 TB disk, 783 GFlops
peak performance) computational cluster which will provide a dedicated resource
to perform on-demand materials' simulations for technologically-relevant problem
sizes and complexities, and to be used as a computational laboratory for just-
in-time realistic modeling in undergraduate and graduate computational
classes.&lt;br/&gt;The cluster will revolutionize current capabilities at MIT,
and would allow the study and characterization of nanostructures, biological
molecules, and complex materials with sizes and accuracies that are not
currently available. A 40-people strong computational research team will benefit
from this award. The Department has redesigned the educational experience of
undergraduate and graduate students in 2003. A fully revised undergraduate
curriculum in Materials Science that teaches the fundamentals of quantum
mechanics and of simulation and modeling has been added as core classes in the
sophomore year. The new computer cluster would allow students a seamless
transition between theoretical lectures and hands-on computational experiments,
allowing a real-time exploration of materials using supercomputing electronic
structure approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the next great
advances in materials research will be the computational, first-principles
design of materials with desired target properties. The abundance of relatively
inexpensive computer power, and the tremendous progress in developing robust and
efficient numerical algorithms, coupled to the unparalleled interest in
nanomaterials, has set the stage for materials' development through
computational modeling. Microscopic, nanoscale properties can be unexpected, but
are directly related to atomic arrangements, making computational modeling a
natural tool to understand, predict, and design the properties of novel
materials. To achieve this goal, scientists need a combination of accurate
electronic-structure approaches, high-throughput data mining, and multiple-
scales modeling in a computing intensive environment. With this award from the
Instrumentation for Materials Research program, Scientists at MIT will acquire a
64-node computational cluster which will provide a dedicated resource to perform
on-demand materials' simulations for technologically-relevant problem sizes and
complexities, and to be used as a computational laboratory for just-in-time
realistic modeling in undergraduate and graduate computational
classes.&lt;br/&gt;The cluster will revolutionize current capabilities at MIT,
and would allow the study and characterization of nanostructures, biological
molecules, and complex materials with sizes and accuracies that are not
currently available. A 40-people strong computational research team will benefit
from this award. The Department has redesigned the educational experience of
undergraduate and graduate students in 2003. A fully revised undergraduate
curriculum in Materials Science that teaches the fundamentals of quantum
mechanics and of simulation and modeling has been added as core classes in the
sophomore year. The new computer cluster would allow students a seamless
transition between theoretical lectures and hands-on computational experiments,
allowing a real-time exploration of materials using supercomputing electronic
structure approaches.&lt;br/&gt;