* 0414446
* Segregation in Multicomponent Macromolecular Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Monica Olvera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports theoretical research that will analyze the statistics
and&lt;br/&gt;thermodynamics of self-associating neutral and charged
macromolecules in various environments. In particular, we will determine the
structure and phase diagram of solutions of macromolecules with site-specific
interactions such as heterogeneous polymers with associating end groups and
peptide amphiphile molecules. Heterogeneous molecules with associating end
groups form micelles and/or clusters. When their concentration increases the
clusters expand over the whole system leading to gel-like structures. The
physical properties of these gels will be analyzed as a function of the
functionality of the associating groups and the excluded volume of the
molecules. We will also analyze the effect of charge on the polymer backbone and
of the salt in the environment on the thermodynamics of charged chain solutions
with strong site-specific attractions. The association of peptide amphiphile
molecules into cylindrical micelles will be analyzed as a function of the
concentration and charge of the peptide. We will include hydrogen bonding in the
self-associating model and compare its effect on the micelle structure to
peptides with dipoles perpendicular to the backbones. Mixtures of peptides
amphiphiles of opposite charge will also be analyzed as candidates for
cylindrical micelles with specific surface structures driven by the segregation
of the This award supports theoretical research that will analyze the statistics
and peptides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research goals are to generate new models to
guide the synthesis and fabrication of new materials involving heterogeneous
macromolecules and multicomponent solutions. These systems are capable of self-
organizing in a large number of remarkable structures. Our results will aid the
design of various experimental systems including non-aqueous thermoreversible
gels with controllable adhesive properties, and aqueous thermoreversible gels
for drug delivery. Our studies on charge effects on strongly interacting
heterogeneous macromolecules, on the other hand, are highly relevant to the
understanding of the self-organization of many biological systems. Biological
molecules fulfill a wide variety of amazing functions, and the understanding of
the relation between their complex structure and their efficiency in performing
specific tasks opens the possibility of creating new molecules for innovative
applications. Moreover, our studies on peptide amphiphile are motivated by the
need of creating new materials for significant medical applications, including
nerve repair. We are particularly interested in understanding how different
specific interactions, controlled by the synthesis and the environment,
influence the properties of the final self-organized
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational goals will generate scientists
capable of solving challenging and relevant problems for society. A well-
balanced gender and ethnicity is kept in the group to prepare for a new
generation of scientists. The group participates in local educational programs
at the high school level. The group also interacts with scientists in Mexico and
France.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt; This award supports theoretical research that
will analyze the statistics and thermodynamics of self-associating neutral and
charged macromolecules in various environments. In particular, we will determine
the structure and phase diagram of solutions of macromolecules with site-
specific interactions such as heterogeneous polymers with associating end groups
and peptide amphiphile molecules. The study of these macromolecular solutions
will lead to the design of new materials. It will also lead to a better
understanding of biological materials, with potential applications in drug
delivery, bio-adhesion and nerve repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational goals
will generate scientists capable of solving challenging and relevant problems
for society. A well-balanced gender and ethnicity is kept in the group to
prepare for a new generation of scientists. The group participates in local
educational programs at the high school level. The group also interacts with
scientists in Mexico and France.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;