* 0414325
* Cleavage and Formation of C-S and C-N Bonds in Heterocyclic Compounds by Homogeneous Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* William Jones, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 06/30/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
supports research by Professor William D. Jones at the University of Rochester
to develop new hydrodesulfurization techniques and synthetic applications for
the cleavage and formation of C-S and C-N bonds in thiophenes and heterocyclic
nitrogen containing compounds with transition metal fragments. The objectives
are to: (1) provide basic information about the requirements for the cleavage of
these strong and/or hindered C-X bonds (X = S, N), (2) provide information about
the mechanism(s) for C-X bond cleavage, (3) examine structural motifs for the
binding of sulfur- and nitrogen-containing organic compounds to metals, (4)
understand the chemistry of metal sulfhydryl and sulfido compounds, their
interconversion, and their lability, and (5) develop catalytic systems for
manipulation of C-S and C-N bonds. New concepts to be explored include the
determination of electronic effects on bond cleavage and the use of supported
systems for catalysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both undergraduate and graduate
students will be trained at an advanced level to use the concepts of inorganic,
organic, analytical, and physical. The University of Rochester has a joint
program with Hampton University to attract students from underrepresented groups
from the Hampton M.S. program directly into the Rochester Ph.D. program. The
scientific work is aimed at a better understanding of how to desulfurize the
most resistant polyalkylated dibenzothiophenes still found in hydrocarbon fuels.
This knowledge will help in meeting the new EPA standards for low sulfur
emissions from fuels. Another impact of the work is in developing new synthetic
routes to nitrogen-containing heterocycles, a fundamental building block in many
biologically important compounds. &lt;br/&gt;