* 0414298
* Dynamic Friction Models for Micro and Nanosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2004,09/30/2005
* Karl Astrom, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* mario rotea
* 09/30/2005
* USD 90,339.00

Dynamic friction models for micro and nano-
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: The purpose of this project is to combine
unique experiments with a long tradition of friction modeling to develop dynamic
models of friction that can be used for friction compensation in NEMS and MEMS
systems. The availability of unique experimental equipment, the Hysitron
nanoindenter in the Microsystems Characterization Lab at UCSB offers interesting
possibilities to improve the state of the art of friction models through precise
experiments. The PI and Co-PI bring together expertise in modeling and
experimental microscale mechanics to attempt to model the observed experimental
phenomena. An interesting property of the microindenter is that is may be
possible to make similar experiments in different scales by changing the tip
design. This may make it possible to compare friction atomic and macro-scale in
similar experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
proposal lie in the ability to not only create physically based friction models,
but in performing precise experiments which will verify such models, and yield
improved ones. In this feasibility study (exploratory basic research) the team
intends to explore what can be done with the nanoindenter and to make a
preliminary investigation of improved friction models. A particular focus will
be on the nature of friction forces for small displacements at slow velocities.
The hypothesis is that such experiments will give considerable insight. If this
is true there is significant scope for a more elaborate research program
including both the nano and the macro scale. Both the PI and the Co-PI are very
active in education of undergraduates. Should this project be successful,
undergraduate researchers will be involved though REU supplements. In addition,
the models developed will be incorporated into the MEMS curriculum in the
undergraduate Mechanical Engineering courses at UCSB. As this is a one-year
SGER, preliminary work will be primarily research-based, and many broader impact
outcomes will occur after the duration of the funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;