* 0414599
* IMR: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Scott Collins, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 416,822.00

With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program, the
Department of Polymer Science at the University of Akron will acquire a 500 MHz
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer. This equipment will enable
researchers to carry out studies on:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Dendrimer research
and applications in development of electronic devices, nanoscopic devices, and
photosynthetic mimics; &lt;br/&gt;2) Synthesis and applications of polymer
brushes and nano-composites; &lt;br/&gt;3) Studies of liquid crystalline
polymers and homo-poly-rotaxanes; &lt;br/&gt;4) Synthesis and characterization
of linear and star-branched polymers and co-polymers with controlled composition
and length distributions; &lt;br/&gt;5) Development of novel poly(olefin)-based
elastomers and thermoplastic elastomers with controlled properties through
catalyst design and process optimization; &lt;br/&gt;6) Physicochemical study of
blends of linear and branched polymers and thermodynamics in entangled polymeric
materials; &lt;br/&gt;7) Development and applications of bio-compatible polymers
and biomedical devices; &lt;br/&gt;8) Rheological study of liquid crystalline
polymers and co-polymers; &lt;br/&gt;9) Optimization of high technology coatings
and coatings chemistry and; &lt;br/&gt;10) NMR methods development for
applications in the above research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NMR spectroscopy
is one of the most powerful tools available to polymer scientists for the
elucidation of the microstructure of macromolecules. It is used to identify
unknown materials, to characterize specific arrangements of magnetically active
nuclei within macromolecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
macromolecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to polymer scientists who are carrying out frontier research. The
results from these NMR studies will have an impact in materials science
(including nanotechnology) and macromolecular
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the National
Science Foundation's Instrumentation for Materials Research Program, the
Department of Polymer Science at the University of Akron will acquire a Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer. This instrument possesses the capability
to analyze new materials and their constituent building blocks in solution with
respect to chemical composition. Data gained from the analyses includes (1)
information relating to the number and type of atoms that make up the material
under examination and (2) the environment in the vicinity of each type of atom
that ultimately allows determination of molecular structure in solution. This
technique thus complements other methods of structure determination limited to
analyses in the solid state. Additional features of the instrument include the
ability to gain information relating to molecular size based on the rate of
random movement of molecules through solution and to study the way in which
different parts of the same (or different) molecules interact with each other in
solution. This instrument will aid in the analysis and optimization of new
materials useful in many evolving research and industrial sectors, including the
polymer, coatings, health care, consumer goods and electronic
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;