* 0414595
* IMR:  Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Investigating Fundamental Interactions between Surfaces and Student Training
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Ho Bun Chan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 157,883.00

This IMR award supports the acquisition of a scanning probe microscope (SPM)
operating in vacuum of 10-7 torr. Acquisition of the SPM will create the
infrastructure to perform a series of experiments to investigate the fundamental
interactions between surfaces with separations at the nanometer scale, including
Casimir forces and non-contact friction. The vacuum environment, in combination
with custom alterations to the sample chamber, will enable the operation of
microelectromechanical devices simultaneously with the scanning head in the
environmental chamber. The approach and distance feedback mechanism of the SPM
head will be utilized in the measurement of the Casimir force using a
microelectromechanical oscillator. The SPM will also be used to characterize
surface imperfections, including the spatial mapping of surface potential and
roughness. Such a complete characterization of the surface is essential in the
fundamental test of the theory of Casimir forces. In addition to Casimir force
measurements, the SPM will also be used to investigate novel non-conservative
effects when closely spaced objects are in relative motion. Students
participating in the experiments will acquire invaluable experience in scanning
probe microscopy and in the design, fabrication and operation of
microelectromechanical devices.

This IMR award supports the acquisition of a scanning probe microscope (SPM)
operating in vacuum of 10-7 torr. Acquisition of the SPM will create the
infrastructure to perform a series of experiments to investigate the fundamental
interactions between surfaces with separations at the nanometer scale, including
Casimir forces and non-contact friction. The vacuum environment, in combination
with custom alterations to the sample chamber, minimizes viscous damping and
enables the operation of microelectromechanical devices simultaneously with the
scanning head. One of the areas to be pursued with the SPM is the study of
Casimir forces. The Casimir effect is the attraction between two neutral
metallic surfaces arising from the quantum fluctuations of the electromagnetic
field. The approach and distance feedback mechanism of the SPM head will be
utilized in the measurement of the Casimir force using a microelectromechanical
oscillator. Even though the Casimir force has been experimentally verified by a
number of experimental teams, surface imperfections introduce non-negligible
corrections to the Casimir force. The SPM will be used to characterize and
optimize various surface imperfections. In addition to Casimir force
measurements, the SPM will also be used to investigate novel non-conservative
effects when closely spaced objects are in relative motion. Students
participating in the experiments will acquire invaluable experience in scanning
probe microscopy and in the design, fabrication and operation of
microelectromechanical devices.