* 0414468
* Effective work practices for Open Source Software development
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Kevin Crowston, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2006
* USD 327,026.00

In this project, the PI will address the general research question: what
practices make some Free/Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS) development teams
more effective than others? To this end, the PI will conduct a three-phase
social science study identifying and comparing the work practices of more and
less effective FLOSS development teams. The conceptual basis for the study
derives from Hackman's model of work team effectiveness, and builds on the PI's
prior work involving coordination theory and collective mind to extend Hackman's
model by further elaborating team practices relevant to software development. In
light of the published literature on shared mental models (collective mind
theory in particular), the PI will focus his attention on actions that develop
and exhibit shared understandings. Coordination theory suggests identifying
tasks, interdependences among tasks and resources and the coordination
mechanisms that are adopted. During Phase I, the PI will conduct a census of
FLOSS projects in order to identify development teams of interest and concepts
and relationships that seem promising for further in-depth study. During Phase
II, he will conduct an in-depth multiple case study of approximately 8
distributed FLOSS development teams, to test and extend the model developed in
the proposal. During Phase III, he will collect and analyze data on hundreds of
teams using the metrics and tools developed in Phase II, in order to generalize
those findings. Phase III will also include a developer survey. Data considered
will include project and developer demographics, interaction logs, code,
interviews, observation and participant observation. Data will be analyzed to
describe software development practices and processes, team social networks, and
shared mental models of developers. Throughout all phases of the project, the
research will be guided by an advisory board of FLOSS developers to ensure
relevance and to help promote diffusion of findings into
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project will contribute to
advancing knowledge and understanding of FLOSS development, by identifying the
effective practices for FLOSS development, an increasingly important approach to
software development. The study will also shed light on effective practices for
distributed work teams in general, which will be valuable for managers who
intend to implement such an organizational form. Findings from the study may
also be used to enhance the way information and communication technologies (ICT)
are used to support distance education or for scientific collaboration. The PI
will make the tools and raw data collected available to other researchers.