* 0414956
* IMR: Acquisition of a High-Resolution X-Ray Microtomography Instrument for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Benjamin Grosser, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 219,788.00

The Imaging Technology Group (ITG) at the Beckman Institute, University of
Illinois, is purchasing a Skyscan 1172 microtomography instrument (micro-CT).
This instrument will provide 5-micron -resolution 3D datasets of the internal
structure of samples between 1 and 20 mm (35 x 60 mm at a reduced resolution).
To store the datasets, which can be as large as 270 gigabytes (GB) each, a
24-terabyte (TB) tape storage system will be purchased for data archiving, along
with a 3.7-TB RAID system for online access. The micro-CT will be integrated
into a successful K-12 outreach project called Bugscope.1 ITG has been running
the Bugscope project since 1999, allowing children from more than 150 classrooms
across the country to remotely control an Environmental Scanning Electron
Microscope (ESEM) to image their insect specimens. With the micro-CT, students
will not only be able to control an SEM to study their samples, but will also be
able to explore images of the internal and external 3D structure of at least one
of their specimens during each session. This proposal will benefit at least
eleven funded research groups with more than fifty graduate students. The
projects of the primary users are focused on the development of self-healing
materials through the use of microvascular channels, scaffold structures for
artificial bone replacement, microfluidic fibers for optical networks, and the
study of bone degradation in micro-gravitational environments. The secondary
user projects are varied and include the study of colloidal crystal systems, the
microstructure of concrete and masonry materials, the characterization of
polymeric and ceramic microscale structures, the condensed matter physics of
charged complex fluids, and the archaeology of ancient materials. Micro-CT will
be a new technique on campus, and it will provide materials researchers from
varying departments with the ability to noninvasively image the internal
structure of nearly any sample up to 20 mm in diameter with 5-micron resolution.
%%% The Imaging Technology Group (ITG) at the Beckman Institute, University of
Illinois, is purchasing a microtomography to provide high-resolution three-
dimensional cross-sections of the internal structure of. The instrument will be
integrated into a successful K-12 outreach project called Bugscope. ITG has been
running the Bugscope project since 1999, allowing children from more than 150
classrooms across the country to remotely control an Environmental Scanning
Electron Microscope (ESEM) to image their insect specimens. S tudents will not
only be able to control an scanning electron microscope to study their samples,
but will also be able to explore images of the internal and external 3D
structure of at least one of their specimens during each session. This proposal
will benefit at least eleven funded research groups with more than fifty
graduate students. The secondary user projects are varied and include the study
of crystal systems, the microstructure of concrete and masonry materials, the
characterization of polymeric and ceramic microscale structures, the condensed
matter physics of charged complex fluids, and the archaeology of ancient
materials. This new technique on campus will provide materials researchers from
varying departments with the ability to noninvasively image the internal
structure of nearly any sample up to 20 mm in diameter with 5-micron resolution.

