* 0414777
* Insect Herbivore Guild Interactions and Tall Thistle Population Dynamics:  A Test of Conflicting Hypotheses
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Svata Louda, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2005
* USD 369,999.00

Plants have a wide array of natural enemies, but the quantitative prediction of
the consequences of interactions among these plant feeders (herbivores) remains
difficult. Fundamental, unresolved questions include: (i) How do interactions
among herbivores affect plant populations? (ii) Do interactions have synergistic
or conflicting impacts? and, (iii) Does the outcome depend upon resources? There
is an urgent need to improve our understanding of such interactions. The
information is essential to our basic understanding of biological interactions
in nature. Further, knowledge about such interactions has practical significance
for advancing effective, environmentally safe biological control of weeds. This
project examines the interaction of native insects with the native tall thistle
(Cirsium altissimum) as a model system with four specific aims. These are to
determine: (1) whether plant performance differs in relation to feeding by the
main types of insect herbivores; (2) if herbivores have neutral, synergistic, or
inhibitory effects on plant dynamics, (3) if the outcomes are related to
resource availability; and (4) which of two current, conflicting hypotheses best
explains the effects of multiple herbivores. These leading hypotheses are:
first, that reductions in plant reproduction and density are highest when plants
are exposed to a single, highly effective insect herbivore species; and, second,
that these reductions are greatest when multiple insect herbivores attack
different plant organs (e.g. roots, leaves, flowers). The four aims will be
achieved by intensive measurement of insect feeding in natural C. altissimum
populations along resource gradients, by insect exclusion experiments, and by
development of an integral projection model. This research is significant
because it addresses important, under-explored questions about ubiquitous
biological interactions and because it has practical application in weed
biocontrol. This research project also will expand educational opportunities for
students from rural communities, an underrepresented group in higher education.