* 0414552
* Comparative Osteology and Phylogenetic Systematics of Fossil and Living Sturgeons (Actinopterygii, Acipenseriformes), Part 2
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Lance Grande, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2009
* USD 192,856.00

0414552 Hilton Sturgeons, paddlefishes and their fossil relatives form a small
group of fishes that is believed to have split off from other ray-finned fishes
(the actinopterygians) some 150 million years ago, and have a reputation as
"living fossils." This study of fossil and living sturgeons by Eric Hilton and
Lance Grande is the continuation of a long-term project exploring the skeletal
anatomy, paleontology, and evolution of sturgeons. The first goal of this study
is make a detailed description of the skeleton of the shortnose sturgeon
(Acipenser brevirostrum), a small species of sturgeon from the coastal rivers of
eastern North America. This study will be based on several types of specimens,
including dry skeletons, hand cleaned skeletons that are stored in alcohol, and
cleared and stained skeletons (in which the soft tissue is made clear, cartilage
is stained blue and bone is stained red). Specimens representing many life
history stages will be studied, from the earliest embryos to the oldest
specimens available. Such an approach allows observations of changes of
morphology due to growth and development of the skeleton. This part of the study
will serve as a baseline for comparisons among all living species of sturgeons.
Additionally, most fossils identified as sturgeons are very fragmentary, and
only after a detailed study of the living members of a group can such specimens
properly be interpreted. The second part of this study concerns the evolutionary
relationships among living and fossil sturgeons. Grande and Hilton have obtained
a new specimen of a 70 million-year old fossil sturgeon from Montana. This new
specimen, which represents a species new to science, is preserved well-enough
that its skeleton can be described in incredible detail and can be compared
directly with the skeletons of living sturgeons. By combining data from the new
fossil with new data on the skeletons of living sturgeons, Hilton and Grande
will formulate new hypotheses of relationships among all sturgeon species.

Sturgeons are perhaps best known as the premier source of caviar. All species of
sturgeons are afforded some form of protection, with many listed as endangered.
The precarious conservation status of many species of sturgeons makes studies of
their evolutionary history critical. Clear and detailed studies that rigorously
describe species and investigate patterns of relationships serve as an important
baseline for the construction of conservation and management plans for
endangered species. All previous anatomical studies of the relationships of
sturgeons are inadequate for various reasons. For instance, many studies have
looked only at relationships of sturgeons from a particular geographic region or
country. Hilton and Grande's study is the first to incorporate morphological
data for all sturgeons no matter where they come from in geologic time or
geographic space.

