* 0414649
* IMR:  Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope to Promote Research and Education in Materials Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* David Serrano, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 339,088.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
Research Instrumentation program will enable the University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez to purchase a Field Emission Gun Scanning Electron Microscope (FEG-SEM)
and ancillary equipment. The instrument will be used in on-going materials
research activities and educational projects in several departments at the
College of Engineering. The instrument will have specifications which will
allow:(1) a study structural features from nano to micron scale in conductive
and poorly conductive materials over large sample areas, (2) to obtain the
chemical composition and elemental distribution in different regions of the
sample, (3) remote access and control via the internet, for on-line class
demonstrations at the graduate and undergraduate level. The instrument will have
tremendous impact in enhancing multidisciplinary research and education at a
predominantly minority institution as well as in minority serving industry in
the island.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
Research Instrumentation program will enable the University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez to purchase a Field Emission Gun Scanning Electron Microscope (FEG-SEM)
and ancillary equipment. The instrument will be used in on-going materials
research activities and educational projects in several departments at the
College of Engineering. The instrument will have specifications which will
allow:(1) a study structural features from nano to micron scale in conductive
and poorly conductive materials over large sample areas, (2) to obtain the
chemical composition and elemental distribution in different regions of the
sample, (3) remote access and control via the internet, for on-line class
demonstrations at the graduate and undergraduate level. The instrument will have
tremendous impact in enhancing multidisciplinary research and education at a
predominantly minority institution as well as in minority serving industry in
the island.