* 0414447
* SGER:     Talking with You:     Exploring Interpersonal Information-Seeking
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Karen Fisher, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2006
* USD 73,380.00

This research aims to explore why people turn to other people for information
with the purpose of guiding future study while informing professional practice
and, in the long run, system design. The study focuses on everyday situations in
which information is needed, ranging from finding new jobs and lower mortgages,
to healthcare, housing, childcare, social activities, and other aspects of daily
life. It aims to expand empirical and theoretical knowledge of interpersonal
information seeking with a long-term focus on devising ways for improving
information services; involving students and underrepresented groups in varied
capacities; collaborating with cognate business, community and academic
organizations; communicating the results to national and international
audiences; and facilitating a community of interest and practice around
enhancing information behavior as it occurs in everyday contexts. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The study will be conducted using a naturalistic approach that will
yield rich insights into two groups of people (stay-at-home mothers and
preteens) to discern key aspects of their everyday information behavior,
particularly regarding interpersonal information seeking over different
synchronous and asynchronous media (e.g., face-to-face, telephone, email, chat
rooms, newsgroups, etc). Using a grounded theory approach along with Chatman's
theory of normative behavior and Friedman's value sensitive design, data will be
collected using multiple methods, including different forms of observation,
interviews, participant diary keeping, and focus groups with approximately 15-20
participants for each population. Data may be collected in-person and/or online
depending on the nature of each group and which methods appear most viable.
During field observation, participants' interactions with other people will be
watched for incidents of information sharing while contextual background
evidence also will be gathered. During interviews participants will be asked
such questions as with whom they discuss particular situations (finding a job,
illness, childcare needs, relationships, home maintenance, etc.,) and why, how
they can tell if someone needs information, how they personally manage everyday
information, etc. Potential participants will be located at "information
grounds"-places where they gather naturally for an activity but subsequently
engage in information sharing. Data collection and analysis will occur
iteratively and combined with the generation of theoretical propositions.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study results will be used to derive the initial
framework for a theoretical model of interpersonal information seeking that will
be highly relevant to scholars and professionals working in any field related to
the design and delivery of information systems and services. These fields range
from information science and computer science to business, engineering, medicine
and healthcare, social work and education. To-date virtually no framework exists
from a user and information perspective that can explain why people turn to
other people for information and that can be used for supporting human behavior.
The framework's richness will stem from the study's naturalistic and grounded
theory approach together with its focus on a broad range of participants as they
engage in daily life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Undergraduate and
graduate students will participate in formal and informal capacities throughout
all stages of the project, as will partners at different organizations such as
the United Way and Microsoft Research. Concrete suggestions for improving
professional practice will be drafted by working with different stakeholders in
the nonprofit and profit sectors, and disseminated broadly.