* 0414817
* Technician Support: (U-Th)/He laboratory at the University of Kansas [Phase I]
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Daniel Stockli, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2010
* USD 203,376.00

&lt;br/&gt;0414817&lt;br/&gt;Stockli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years,
(U-Th)/He dating of U- and Th-bearing accessory minerals has attracted
tremendous interest as a means of constraining the timing and rates of a wide
spectrum of upper-crustal to near-surface geological processes. The rapidly
increasing demand for high-quality low-temperature thermochronological data
exceeds the current analytical capacity of the few operating laboratories. This
is clearly expressed by the large number of researchers interested in utilizing
the KU facilities and the number of ongoing collaborative projects. The biggest
obstacle toward meeting the demand for (U-Th)/He data is the availability of
personnel to carry out the analytical work and assist visiting scientists. The
addition of a full-time technician dedicated to the KU (U-Th)/He laboratory will
ensure the smooth and efficient operation of the laboratory, dramatically
accelerate research productivity and sample throughput, and allow the laboratory
to engage in additional collaborations and to host visiting scientists and
students that want to use the laboratory. The addition of a full-time technician
to the KU (U-Th)/He laboratory represents an important investment into the
national and international thermochronology research infrastructure with the
prospect of a high payoff for the geosciences community in terms of scientific
merit and educational impact. KU and visiting graduate and undergraduate
students will work one-on-one with the technician in the KU (U-Th)/He
laboratory, gaining invaluable hands-on experience important to their
intellectual growth.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;