* 0414667
* Expanding the Desktop:    Transforming Personal Computing through Large Pixel-Space Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* John Stasko, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2009
* USD 483,688.00

Since the rise of personal computers with bitmapped displays in the 1970's and
1980's, the model of one display or monitor per computer has been the dominant
paradigm for desktop computing. The PI argues that this constraint has strongly
influenced the visual interfaces built for software applications and how people
have interacted with computers, and in many cases has limited productivity and
innovation. As LCD monitors that require far less desk space have become more
popular and less expensive, the use of multiple monitors per computer is
becoming more common. In order for computers with large pixel-spaces to be of
most benefit, however, new interaction methods and space management operations
are needed. Furthermore, large pixel-space computers will enable new forms of
software systems (e.g., the extra screen area will be available for new styles
of peripheral awareness tools that allow people to monitor important information
in their work and personal lives). Consequently, personal computers will become
information control centers that facilitate data-intensive tasks and analysis
activities. To implement this vision, the PI will explore research in three
related areas. First, he will study existing practices in window and space
management, particularly how current methods do or do not succeed on multiple
monitor machines, and he will develop new space management operations more
specifically focused on easing navigation and task management when the display
area is so large that standard direct manipulation techniques become slow and
limiting. Second, the PI will examine whether the increased screen area is
beneficial for and will lead to new capabilities in multi-window, information-
rich software systems such as Integrated Development Environments and
Information Visualization systems. Third, the PI will explore how the extra
screen real estate can be used to provide the user with peripheral awareness of
important information such as the progress of work projects, communications from
colleagues or friends, and current news and events, while not being disruptive
distractions. All of these research threads will combine to build an
understanding of the capabilities and potential benefits, the strengths and
weaknesses, of multi-monitor and large pixel-space
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If large pixel-space computers
do become commonplace, people will need easier and better methods for managing
the screen space and the tasks being performed there. Even relatively modest
improvements in space and window management can provide huge cumulative
benefits, because computers are so pervasive in society. Concretely identifying
the advantages of machines like this, if the advantages do exist, can serve to
inform people who are considering a change to a multi-monitor machine and are
seeking to understand the benefits that can result. This research has the
potential to develop new and fundamentally different ways of managing tasks and
interacting with user interfaces for everyone, so that they become more
productive. Furthermore, the project will create new forms of information
visualization and peripheral awareness systems that will help transform personal
computers into information control centers.