* 0414852
* Approximate Distributed Stream Tracking: Enabling the Next Generation of Data-Streaming Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Shanmugavelayu Muthukrishnan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 08/31/2009
* USD 270,000.00

This research develops models, algorithmic methods and software solutions for
tracking of massive data streams for monitoring applications such as IP
(Internet Protocol) network traffic analysis. Such monitoring applications are
inherently distributed, relying on correlating multiple streams, and therefore
present challenges in terms of severe communication constraints. In addition,
such massive streams are also faced with the traditional storage and per-item
processing time constraints even in the centralized or the single stream cases.
Under such severe constraints, monitoring is necessarily approximate. This
research project develops principled methods for performing essential monitoring
tasks on distributed streams under the accumulation of all such constraints. In
particular, new methods are developed that trade off accuracy of analysis for
meeting communication, space and time constraints.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed monitoring of massive data streams arises in
many communication systems, primarily in security applications. The resulting
models and solutions address such applications and yield better understanding of
how to perform detailed data analyses within existing resource constraints. This
research is carried out in collaboration with industry researchers (Minos
Garofalakis and Rajeev Rastogi of Lucent) who bring extensive knowledge of
stream data mining and provide data sets for testing the new algorithms for
approximate distributed stream tracking. In addition, the industrial
participation in this project increases the impact of this project via
technology transfer. Studying the algorithmic, database and networking aspects
of the problem jointly will lead to significant new insights and training.
Solutions and resulting software programs will be made freely available via the
project's Web site (http://www.cs.rutgers.edu/~muthu/adst.html). &lt;br/&gt;