* 0414019
* SGER:    Hydrophobic Forces in Particle Adhesion
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Stephen Beaudoin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 02/28/2005
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract CTS-04014019 S. Beaudoin, Purdue University

The role of hydrophobic forces in particle adhesion to surfaces in aqueous
environments is not adequately understood. There is a need for the collection of
data that will allow the hydrophobic effect to be quantified, and also for the
development of theory to describe this effect. In this proposed work, atomic
force microscopy will be used to measure directly the adhesion between particles
and substrates of interest in aqueous solutions. The roughness of the substrate
and the roughness and geometry of the particles will be measured before and
after the adhesion forces are measured. The elastic properties of the particles
and substrates will also be determined. With this information, particle adhesion
models developed in the Beaudoin lab at Arizona State University will be used to
quantify the van der Waals (vdW) and electrostatic (ES) interaction forces
acting in these systems. These models take into account the effects of
deformation and nonuniform geometry and morphology on the adhesion. After the
vdW and ES forces are evaluated, the remaining forces in these systems will be
attributed primarily to hydrophobic phenomena. In this fashion, a systematic
experimental investigation of the hydrophobic interaction force for a number of
particles of different size and geometry interacting with a number of surfaces
will be performed. Contact angle measurements will be performed on flat sheets
of material with the same composition as the particles and substrates used in
the adhesion studies, so that the interfacial energies of the materials involved
in the adhesion studies will be quantified. This data will provide the basis for
a systematic evaluation of hydrophobic interactions between particles and
surfaces. Once the form and magnitude of the effect of hydrophobic forces on the
particle interactions has been established, it will be possible to develop
appropriate theory to describe these effects. The intellectual merit in this
proposed work lies in the measurement of the adhesion of deformable, rough,
nonuniform particles to deformable, rough surfaces in aqueous solution using an
atomic force microscope, and the use of recently developed, experimentally-
validated models to describe vdW and ES forces in the adhesion of these
particles. This will allow hydrophobic forces to be isolated for these systems.
In this fashion, realistic particle-surface interaction forces can be measured
with minimal confounding effects from the measurement technique, and the
hydrophobic force isolated. The resulting data set will provide a comprehensive
view of hydrophobic effects on particle adhesion that will serve as the basis
for model development. The broader impacts of the proposed work lie in the
importance of enhanced understanding of vdW, ES, and hydrophobic forces in a
spectrum of high technology applications. Understanding and controlling the
relative strengths of these forces will have a profound impact on the cleaning
and sterilization of medical implants, the cleaning of wafers during
semiconductor processing, the design of low-fouling coatings for high
performance applications, and the development of new approaches for producing
highly engineered surfaces with minimal contaminant levels during the
fabrication of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). The results will be
disseminated at meetings of the Adhesion Society, the NSF/SRC Center for
Environmentally-Benign Semiconductor Manufacture, the American Institute of
Chemical Engineers, and the Electrochemical Society. The results will be
published in the Journal of Adhesion.

