* 0414895
* IMR:  Development of an Acoustic Phonon Spectroscopy System for Materials Research, Education and Outreach
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Keith Nelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 600,000.00

Instrumentation will be developed to permit optical generation and time-resolved
measurement of coherent acoustic waves at nearly all wavelengths that propagate
through most materials. This extraordinary range will permit tabletop
experimental study of structural disorder on the same range of length scales,
from nearly 1 millimeter, i.e. clearly macroscopic, to as short as 10
nanometers. It also will provide direct experimental access to dynamical changes
in structure that occur over a similarly wide range of time scales, from faster
than 1 picosecond to many microseconds, given by the acoustic frequency range of
roughly 10 MHz - 500 GHz to which access will be gained. This unique materials
research capability will be used for fundamental study of complex liquids,
amorphous solids, and partially disordered crystals whose key properties are
mediated by structural variation on these length and time scales. The
instrumentation also will be used for characterization of advanced structures
including thin films and multilayer assemblies of interest in microelectronics
and many other applications. The instrumentation will provide access to
coherent, narrowband acoustic phonons across most of the Brillouin zone in bulk
and thin film materials. Non-Technical Summary

Sound waves with wavelengths of meters or millimeters are commonly used to
probe structures of comparable size, such as features within the earth's mantle,
two-by-four beams behind drywall, or fingers and toes (and their motions) inside
the womb. The same principles of ultrasonic imaging and probing can apply to
much smaller length scales as well, and there are plenty of micrometer and
nanometer size structures that need characterization. These include multilayer
thin films in microelectronics devices; nanospheres, nanorods, and other
structures fabricated for nanotechnology; the constituents of heterogeneous
materials like alloys, suspensions, and gels; and even transient irregularities
that form during natural fluctuations or flow in viscous liquids, polymers, and
biological fluids. But generating acoustic waves with such short wavelengths,
directing them along or through the material of interest, and then detecting
them often present daunting challenges. In recent years, novel methods have been
developed through which finely tailored laser pulses may be used to generate and
detect acoustic waves with specified wavelengths or frequencies. In some cases,
a "comb" of laser light is used to imprint the acoustic wave pattern directly
onto the material of interest, just as a real comb that suddenly, gently touches
a water surface might generate acoustic waves whose wavelength matches the comb
spacing (except that the laser light fringes are only microns apart!). In other
situations, a timed sequence of laser pulses is used to launch an acoustic wave
into a material, just like sequential taps on the side of an aquarium might send
acoustic waves into the water within it (except that the light pulses are only
picoseconds, i.e. 10X( -12) seconds, apart!). The acoustic waves are not only
generated but also detected optically, so no mechanical contact with the sample
is needed. These methods have been used to measure nanometer thicknesses of film
layers and lateral dimensions of tiny features, transient evolution of
viscoelastic fluctuations that govern polymer processing or biological system
responses, and a host of other small structures and their dynamics. In this
project, equipment will be developed that will permit optical generation and
detection of acoustic waves with essentially all possible wavelengths and
frequencies that can propagate within a wide range of materials and structural
elements. The equipment will be designed to make these measurements not only
possible but robust, such that they can be made by high school students in an
outreach lab as well as by Ph.D. science and engineering students. In this
manner, a new window into microscale and nanoscale structure and behavior will
be made widely available.