* 0414650
* IMR: Acquisition of Cryogenic STM Head and Electronics for Education and Research in Spintronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Vidya Madhavan, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 176,596.00

There has been a recent surge of interest in dilute magnetic semiconductors due
to their potential application as 'spintronic' materials. The emerging field of
spintronics is based upon the idea of harnessing the electron spin to make
functional devices. This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
program will be used to procure a commercially available low temperature
scanning tunneling microscope (STM) head and electronics and optimize it to
perform as an ultra high vacuum (UHV), 5K, spin-polarized STM. The instrument
will be used to study the electronic properties of dilute magnetic
semiconductors. Spin-polarized spectroscopy will provide important data on the
spatial distribution of spins in these materials. It is anticipated that
experiments will shed some light on the chief ingredients required to make up a
theory that successfully explains ferromagnetism in the magnetic semiconductors
and might point scientists in the direction of how room temperature spintronic
materials can be obtained. The instrument will be used in one-day outreach
program on nanoscience geared towards middle school girls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been a recent surge of interest in
dilute magnetic semiconductors due to their potential application as
'spintronic' materials. The emerging field of spintronics is based upon the idea
of harnessing the electron spin to make functional devices. If we could
successfully generate, manipulate and detect spin-polarized currents, a new
generation of devices will emerge that will be faster and will require lower
power. This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will
allow Boston College to acquire a low temperature scanning tunneling microscope
(STM) head and electronics and optimize it to perform as an ultra high vacuum,
spin-polarized STM. With a low temperature STM researchers can image surfaces
with atomic resolution, manipulate atoms to form artificial structures, and
measure a very important property of materials, the local density of states
(LDOS). This instrument will be used to study dilute magnetic semiconductors.
Dedicated STM research on dilute magnetic semiconductors will point the way
towards making spintronic technology viable. The outreach program is aimed at
decreasing the substantially large gender-gap for women in physics and
engineering. A recurring theme in all outreach programs will be to generate
excitement for physics and technology by exposure to the marvels of nanoscience
and the potential for future applications.&lt;br/&gt;