* 0414439
* Mayer-sampling Methods for Calculation of Statistical - Mechanical Cluster Integrals: Nanotechnology and Other Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* David Kofke, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2008
* USD 299,987.00

Kofke, David A. / SUNY Buffalo

"Mayer-Sampling Methods For Calculation Of Statistical-Mechanical Cluster
Integrals: Nanotechnology And Other Applications."

Intellectual merit. This project aims to develop and apply methods for
calculating cluster integrals that appear in statistical mechanical theories of
fluids. In the general approach, Monte Carlo sampling is performed on a number
of molecules equal to the order of the integral, and configurations are weighted
according to the absolute value of the integrand. Ensemble averages yield the
value of the cluster integral in reference to a known integral. Preliminary
studies have shown the technique to be very effective for cluster-integral
calculations. This general approach is called Mayer sampling, and in its basic
form it has similarities to the umbrella-sampling method for free-energy
calculation of condensed phases. Some of the objectives of this work are to
build upon this basic idea, and examine the efficiency and effectiveness of this
and other free-energy based methods for the calculation of cluster integrals in
general, and virial coefficients in particular. One consideration includes
formulation of strategies for conducting the calculations on parallel computing
architectures, while another is concerned with developing facilities for
generating the many clusters needed in some of the calculations. In addition to
these development activities, the work also has objectives to apply the methods
to understand and predict fluid properties. The methods are used to calculate
virial coefficients for a range of model potentials and their mixtures, allowing
for the first time examination of high-order coefficients for realistic model
systems. One aim of this activity is to understand how well these few-molecule
simulations can be used, via the virial equation, to estimate critical
properties. Another aim is to uncover features that can improve understanding
complex phenomena, such as hydrophobicity other behaviors important to
nanotechnology and environmental applications.

Broader impact. Several special forms of dissemination are performed to ensure
that others readily adopt this work. First, molecular simulation modules are
developed for use in instructional settings, such as undergraduate courses. Each
includes a simple interactive, graphically-oriented simulation that performs a
particular calculation of the type developed here, supplemented with supporting
material describing its use, all presented via a web-based interface. Second, a
graphically-oriented software application is developed and made available via
the web. This software is designed to permit the user to calculate cluster
integrals using the methods being developed in the project, and is extensible so
that the user can apply it to any model system of interest. Finally, a web site
devoted to the description and generation of clusters is developed. A visitor to
the site can specify features of a cluster set, and will have returned a listing
of all clusters (numbering just a few, or perhaps thousands, depending on the
specification) meeting the given criteria, in a form suitable for use by his or
her own computer codes; alternatively the clusters can be presented pictorially
for instruction or contemplation. Development of methods for routine calculation
of high-order cluster integrals would have a very large impact on chemical
physics and applied thermodynamics. This in turn can impact a broad range of
applications, such as the development of environmentally benign materials and
processes. Elegant and powerful theories developed over many decades have been
hindered by an inability to calculate some of the key quantities appearing in
them, and consequently they are being supplanted by brute-force molecular
simulation. The infusion of molecular simulation methods into these treatments
will imbue them a new practicality, and renew their application and development.
Such efforts could inspire many advances, including new ways for handling
multiscale systems and modeling for nanotechnological applications.