* 0415195
* Collaborative Research:    Data Management Tools for Web Services
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Richard Hull, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2009
* USD 270,000.00

The use of Web services revolutionizes the way that many e-commerce, consumer
software, scientific computing, and telecommunications applications are
provided. The key to realizing the full potential of the Web services paradigm
will be automated discovery, composition, analysis, and monitoring of web
services. Achieving this requires advances in many aspects of computer science,
including programming languages, data management, workflow, transaction
management, distributed computing, knowledge representation and automated
reasoning. This project provides key foundations and advances in data and
information management needed for success of the Web services paradigm. This
project expands on existing work to develop models of the semantic and
behavioral characteristics of web services. The automata-based models can
specify a "behavioral signature", that represents abstractions of both the
"local" behavior of individual Web services and the "global" behavior of Web
service compositions. Using semantics, behavior and I/O signatures, the project
develops new approaches to automated composition, and studies global properties
of compositions, including characterizations of the global behavior and static
analysis of how data is passed and manipulated. It also lays the foundations for
the query languages and frameworks useful in supporting automated web service
discovery and composition in a scalable context. In addition to the study of
formal models, the research develops various software tools that will be
available via the project's Web site (http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~su/NSF0415195/).
The resulting formalism will improve the quality of deployed web services since
properties of their behavior can be verified, and foster web service adoption
and reuse since compositions of services could be synthesized and analyzed. This
is a collaborative university (Jianwen Su, University of California, Santa
Barbara)/industry (Rick Hull, Lucent) research project. This will facilitate
transferring the theoretical results to practice and finding realistic
applications to test the techniques. The project exposes students and academic
researchers to industry needs and industry practitioners to university research
through a plan of mutual visits.