* 0415390
* LTREB: Ecosystem Structure and Function in Palouse Grasslands - Nitrogen, Plants, Grasshoppers and Birds
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Gary Belovsky, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2009
* USD 319,000.00

ABSTRACT Title: LTREB: Ecosystem structure and function in Palouse grasslands -
nitrogen, plants, grasshoppers and birds PI: Belovsky, Gary Institution:
University of Notre Dame

This LTREB project continues monitoring and manipulations of grasshopper
populations that have been conducted in four habitats in Montana for 17, 15, 14
and 10 years, respectively. The monitoring measures grasshopper, predator, and
plant abundances, along with nutrients and plant production. The manipulations
vary grasshopper density and predation on grasshoppers to assess impacts on
nutrients and plant production. Grasshoppers are dominant herbivores and
influence nutrients and plant production. Because grasshopper abundance varies
dramatically between years, grasshopper influence also varies. Grasshopper
herbivory can influence a habitat by either diminishing nutrients, which
decreases plant production, or by increasing nutrients, which increases plant
production. The purpose of this study is to understand how grasshoppers and
their predators affect nutrients and plant production. Long term databases like
this study are critical for assessing how ecosystem structure (species
abundances) influence ecosystem function (nutrients and production). This is a
central question in ecology with several applications. First, grasshoppers are
widely considered to be pests that must be controlled. This study assesses when
control may be beneficial or even detrimental. Second, the study helps to
understand the human impacts on ecosystems for conservation and restoration.
Finally, educational benefits accrue by involving high school, undergraduate and
graduate students, especially Native Americans.