* 0415689
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course on Advanced Techniques in Plant Science
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 06/30/2007
* USD 231,014.00

The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory is giving a summer course on Advanced
Techniques in Plant Science. This is a 3 week combined laboratory and lecture
course for students ranging from advanced graduate student to faculty.
Scientists come from universities, medical schools, research institutes and
industry. Laboratory work includes projects using Arabidopsis thaliana as a
model plant, as well as a number of other species, including maize and tomato,
reflecting current research interests in many US and international laboratories.
The course allows students to take advantage of a wealth of genomic resources
and to focus on one system as they learn the more general biological or
technical principals being taught. At the same time, they will be exposed to
recent advances in several systems, including genetic, genomic and comparative
studies. The course is designed to fulfill a continuing demand within the plant
science community for training in these areas. The intention is (1) to teach
state of the art molecular techniques to scientists already involved in plant
research so that they can apply these technologies to their own future research
and (2) to teach scientists familiar with microbial, animal or plant systems
about current research in plant biology. The course consists of a rigorous
lecture series, a hands-on laboratory and informal discussions. Speakers will
provide both an overview of their specialty and an in-depth discussion of their
work. Many of these speakers will be experts in plant systems other than
Arabidopsis; others will be non-plant scientists who are expert in disciplines
that apply to all biological systems. The laboratory sessions provide an
intensive training in modern techniques in plant biology and reinforce the
lessons learned in lectures.