* 0415840
* IMR: Development/Acquisition of a Mixed-Mode Fracture Testing Instrument for Research and Education in Adhesion Science
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* David Dillard, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 02/29/2008
* USD 169,695.00

Adhesive bonding has become an essential means for joining components in a wide
range of applications, including automotive, aerospace, civil infrastructure,
biomedical, and microelectronic fields. Satisfactory performance of these bonds
requires retaining structural integrity over the service life where they are
often subjected to dead loads, impact, and/or fatigue, while exposed to
environmental challenges such as temperature and humidity. A significant need
exists for improved understanding of the fracture resistance of bonded joints,
and how these properties can be incorporated into meaningful and robust design
procedures for bonded structures. Joints often fail by fracture propagating
under some combination of mode I (opening), mode II (forward shear), and mode
III (tearing) loading. Because fracture energies depend on mode mixity,
comprehensive failure envelopes for a range of mode mixities are generated by
conducting pure and mixed mode tests. This proposal seeks funding to develop a
unique instrument capable of easily varying the mode mix for fracture testing of
adhesively bonded beam specimens. Currently, different mode mixities are
achieved by using different test configurations, increasing complexity and
obscuring meaningful comparisons. Several fixtures have been developed to vary
the mode mixity over a limited range for a given specimen geometry, but these
techniques are cumbersome to use and limited in their applicability. These
complications are a major hindrance to developing an improved understanding of
the effects of mode mixity on fracture properties and locus of failure. These
limitations will be largely overcome by the unit proposed herein, which offers
significant potential for new scientific insights gained through use of a
convenient and efficient test method relevant to many fields. The proposed
instrument will be built around a customized load frame complete with dual
actuators, load cells, displacement transducers, controllers, and data
acquisition system. By independently adjusting the magnitude and phase of the
actuators, any desired fracture energy and mode mixity may be applied to
commonly used, ASTM standard, double cantilever beam specimens. Because the mode
mixity can be easily changed during a test, one can investigate the effects of
mode mix, even as a debond propagates within a single specimen. The instrument
will have unique scientific and engineering capabilities for characterizing
mixed mode fracture, developing fracture envelopes, and investigating the
complex interactions between stress state and spatially varying material
properties and how they affect locus of failure. The unit is expected to be
useful in many areas of adhesive utilization and can also be readily extended to
other disciplines, such as the study of interlaminar properties of composites or
other laminated materials, important for many aerospace, automotive, and
infrastructure applications. In addition to the scientific merits, companies
producing or using adhesives and composite materials for many industrial fields
are expected to gain from the insights that can conveniently be obtained with
this simple unit. Because the specimens are already an ASTM standard and are
easily fabricated, barriers will be reduced for the use and broader adoption of
this technology. In essence, we will be able to gain a great deal of additional
information about the material performance using specimens that are already in
common use. A graduate student and an undergraduate student will participate in
the development effort, obtaining significant experience in instrument design,
construction, and calibration, along with computer interfacing and programming
skills. The unit will be used by a diverse group of students and faculty
associated with our interdisciplinary Center for Adhesive and Sealant Science.
This unique research capability will nicely complement the wide array of
equipment we have available for characterizing adhesion and composite
properties, and is expected to attract significant interest from current
sponsors as well as potential sources of future funding, including industry and
government laboratories. The unit will offer a very flexible instrument to
enhance the research of mechanical properties of adhesives, and also provide
useful new insights related to polymer and surface science in this
interdisciplinary field of adhesion.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;Adhesive bonding
has become an essential means for joining components in a wide range of
applications, including automotive, aerospace, civil infrastructure, biomedical,
and microelectronic fields. Satisfactory performance of these bonds requires
retaining structural integrity over the service life where they are often
subjected to dead loads, impact, and/or fatigue, while exposed to environmental
challenges such as temperature and humidity. A significant need exists for
improved understanding of the fracture resistance of bonded joints, and how
these properties can be incorporated into meaningful and robust design
procedures for bonded structures. Joints often fail by fracture propagating
under some combination of tensile and shear mode loadings. Because fracture
energies depend on mode combinations, comprehensive failure envelopes for a
range of mode combinations are generated by conducting pure and mixed mode
tests. These provide important understanding of the failure process, and avoid
non-conservative design space. This proposal seeks funding to develop a unique
instrument capable of easily varying the mode mix for fracture testing of
adhesively bonded beam specimens. Currently, different mode combinations are
achieved by using different test configurations, increasing complexity and
obscuring meaningful comparisons. Several fixtures have been developed to vary
the mode combination over a limited range for a given specimen geometry, but
these techniques are cumbersome to use and limited in their applicability. These
limitations will be largely overcome by the unit proposed herein, which offers
significant potential for new scientific insights gained through use of a
convenient and efficient test method relevant to many fields. The proposed
instrument will be built around a customized load frame complete with dual
actuators, load cells, displacement transducers, controllers, and a data
acquisition system. By independently adjusting the magnitude and phase of the
actuators, any desired fracture energy and mode mix may be applied to commonly
used, double cantilever beam specimens. The instrument will have unique
scientific and engineering capabilities for characterizing mixed mode fracture
for design and scientific applications. The unit is expected to be useful in
many areas of adhesive utilization and can also be readily extended to other
disciplines, such as the study of interlaminar properties of composites or other
laminated materials, important for many aerospace, automotive, and
infrastructure applications. In addition to the scientific merits, companies
producing or using adhesives and composite materials for many industrial fields
are expected to gain from the insights that can conveniently be obtained with
this simple unit. Because the specimens are already an American Society for
Testing and Materials standard and are easily fabricated, barriers will be
reduced for the use and broader adoption of this technology. In essence, we will
be able to gain a great deal of additional information about the material
performance using specimens that are already in common use. The development of
the device will promote the training and research effort in adhesion science,
scientific instrument design and programming for a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students associated with faculty in our
interdisciplinary Center for Adhesive and Sealant Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;