* 0415511
* Genomic analysis of phosphatidylinositol synthesis in yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2008
* John Lopes, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 03/31/2008
* USD 394,405.00

The long-range goal of the Lopes lab is to understand the regulation of
phospholipid biosynthesis in eukaryotes using Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a
model system. This project is focused on regulation of PIS1 expression. This
gene is required for the synthesis of phosphatidylinositol (PI). PI and its
metabolites play important roles in a myriad of processes, including: chromatin
remodeling, export of mRNA from the nucleus, vesicle trafficking, and signal
transduction. In spite of the importance of PI to the cell, relatively little is
known about how its levels are regulated. This project tests the hypothesis that
multiple cellular processes are coordinated with the synthesis of PI. To address
this hypothesis, a genomic analysis of PI biosynthesis will be conducted. By
screening a yeast gene deletion set, the Lopes lab previously identified 120
genes that affect expression of a PIS1 reporter. These genes suggest that
processes such as peroxisomal function and DNA repair are coordinated with PI
synthesis. The role in PI biosynthesis will be determined for a select set of
these genes, and which among the five PIS1 promoter elements required for their
action will be identified. The direct regulators of PI biosynthesis will also be
identified. The Lopes lab has previously identified transcription factors and
promoter elements that regulate PIS1 expression. These results suggest
regulatory networks that will be tested for effects on PI biosynthesis.
Collectively, this project will identify networks that regulate PI biosynthesis.
Dr. Lopes has a strong record of mentoring undergraduate, graduate, and high
school students in basic research. This commitment is based on the philosophy
that advances in research must be integrated with the development of the next
generation of scientists and educators. This project will provide students the
opportunity to address an important biological question: how is phospholipid
synthesis coordinated with other cellular processes?