* 0415293
* Ion Hydration and New Structural Methods in Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Evan Williams, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2008
* USD 492,500.00

Professor Evan Williams of the U of Cal Berkeley is supported by the Analytical
and Surface Chemistry Program to study hydration of amino acids in the gas phase
using new methods in mass spectrometry. The research is in two areas, both
involving ion formation by electrospray ionization (ESI) and mass analysis by
Fourier/transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FT/ICR MS). The
first area focuses on the structures of amino acids that are cationized by added
metal ions and also contain a varying number of water molecules. The structures
of these systems are investigated by blackbody infrared radiative dissociation
(BIRD) and by infrared (IR) spectroscopy. The main goal of these studies is to
determine how many water molecules are needed for the amino acids to change from
a nonzwitterion structure (most common in the gas phase) to a zwitterion
structure (prevalent in aqueous solution). The PI has already conducted BIRD
studies on solvated ions of lithiated and sodiated valine, which showed that at
least three water molecules are necessary for the zwitterion structure to become
more stable in the gas phase (as it is in bulk aqueous solution). The renewed
research project extends such studies to more complex amino acids (proline,
glutamine, lysine), whose solvated ions will additionally be investigated by IR
spectroscopy using a laser. The second area of research focuses on the
development of a new method for the dissociation of large ions, which cannot be
dissociated using BIRD. Heated filaments are used to provide the higher energies
needed to dissociate larger systems. Taken together, these experiments should
provide a better understanding of how heteroatoms in amino acid side chains and
water molecules solvate charge in proteinaceous environments. They also should
provide information about how water and the dehydration process in ESI affects
ion structure.

Mass spectrometry plays an ever increasing role in analytical science, and the
proposed research will educate and train scientists in this growing field, which
is extensively applied in biology, medicine, and biotechnology research. In
addition, this fundamental research on the building blocks of proteins will
enable researchers to sequence proteins more rapidly and accurately.