* 0415923
* Advancing the Performance of Word Sense Disambiguation by Finding  Consistent Criteria for Sense Distinctions
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Martha Palmer, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/28/2007
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to provide automatic word sense disambiguation
systems based on a principled English sense inventory geared to information
processing needs. Polysemy, the many possible interpretations, or senses, of a
word, is one of the major bottlenecks to accurate and focused information
processing. Past attempts to use a public domain resource, WordNet, as a sense
inventory for creating training data have not been successful due to vague and
subtle sense distinctions that lead to poor inter-annotator agreement. We are
experimenting with approaches to group fine-grained WordNet senses into more
coarse-grained sense distinctions that can be annotated more rapidly and more
accurately. Using linguistic evidence, we are refining our methodology for
grouping word senses and our annotation process while creating large amounts of
sense-tagged text. This new sense inventory has links to WordNet, FrameNet, and
VerbNet, with clear criteria associated with the sense distinctions that
facilitate accurate human sense tagging. Using the annotated data we are
developing accurate supervised and semi-supervised automatic word sense
disambiguation systems by experimenting with different machine learning
algorithms and feature sets.

The sense inventory, the tagged data, and the trained systems will all be in the
public domain for both national and international access, providing a stable
English sense inventory geared to computational applications. The availability
of broad coverage automatic word sense disambiguation systems will provide a
major boost in performance to information retrieval, information extraction,
question answering and machine translation, improving our ability to stay
abreast of the information avalanche.