* 0415302
* Advanced Technology Solar Telescope (ATST) Construction under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA)
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2010,09/30/2015
* Michael Knoelker, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* David Boboltz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 146,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;AST 0415302&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic fields control the
inconstant Sun. The key to understanding solar variability and its direct impact
on the Earth rests with understanding all aspects of these magnetic fields. This
is the ?dark energy? problem of solar physics since the magnetic fields lie
beyond the resolution limits of current solar telescopes, are obscured by
Earth's atmosphere, or hidden by the glare of the solar disk in the outer solar
atmosphere. The Sun provides the laboratory where crucial properties of non-
linear dynamics in highly ionized magnetic plasma can be observed and
understood, and models can be tested and refined. The technology now exists to
resolve and measure the Sun?s magnetic fields and how they control the solar
atmosphere. All aspects of the Advanced Technology Solar Telescope (ATST) design
are optimized to study these fields in our astrophysical backyard. With it, we
will understand the life cycle of magnetic fields, how they are born by dynamo
mechanisms, evolve by convective and explosive phenomena, and dissipated by
resistive and reconnective magnetic events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ATST will
be a 4-m aperture, off-axis solar telescope with integrated adaptive optics,
low-scattered light, infrared, coronagraphic, and polarimetric capabilities. It
will resolve the essential, fine-scale magnetic features and their dynamics that
dictate the varying release of energy from the Sun?s atmosphere. The ATST design
is optimized (throughput, scattered light and instrumental polarization
properties) to make vector magnetograms down to its diffraction limit (0.03
arcseconds at 500 nm). Its collecting area, which is a factor of 16 greater than
today?s solar telescopes, will provide the sensitivity to measure both weak
fields and rapidly evolving stronger fields. It has a factor of 64 greater
collecting area than the largest existing coronagraph, and will provide the
sensitivity and coronagraphic capability needed to measure the weak, fine-scale
coronal magnetic fields. The new technologies, and our increased awareness of
what we know we must learn, make ATST the necessary and logical successor to the
solar telescopes built in the 1960s and 1970s, and is a natural complement to
space missions such the Solar Dynamics Observatory, STEREO, and Solar
Orbiter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ATST offers tremendous opportunity for the
training of students and recruitment of post-docs and faculty in solar physics
who will become users of the ATST and the instrument builders and theoreticians
of the future. ATST plans to establish a strong synergy with the education and
outreach programs at the collaborating institutions, including programs for the
K-12 classroom, internships, public outreach through tours, hands-on exhibits,
and displays. The ATST program has and will continue to actively involve large
segments of the US and international solar physics community, helping to
strengthen solar astronomy programs at universities and national
centers.&lt;br/&gt;