* 0415563
* Community Structure Before and During a Record Drought: The Impact of Climate Change on Biodiversity.  Does It Matter?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2008
* USD 424,300.00

Portions of the western United States are experiencing one of the worst droughts
in a century, but little is known about how such climate change affects
biodiversity (the number of species and their abundance), extinction,
interactions among species, and the genetic basis of these interactions, all of
which ultimately determine the health of these ecosystems. The investigators'
21-years of observations and experiments with pinyon pine span the wettest and
driest periods of recorded history, allowing them to address these critical
issues. During a long-term wet period, the PIs quantified how environmental
stress and the genetic attributes of pinyon pine trees affected ~400 species of
fungi and insects. Now, after 7 years of drought, they will revisit earlier
study sites to: (1) determine how drought-induced changes in biodiversity affect
the ability of pinyon pine to re-establish in areas where most trees have
succumbed to drought; (2) determine if drought stress has resulted in increased
numbers of herbivorous insects that attack drought-sensitive trees, which in
turn alters the rest of the community; (3) determine if drought has reduced
beneficial soil fungi that are necessary for tree survival and that allow the
associated community to recover from drought; and (4) test whether tree rings
can be used to predict how future climatic conditions will affect biodiversity.
Because pinyon is a widespread conifer of the third most widespread vegetation
type in the U.S., results from this work is likely to to apply to other areas of
the U.S. Also, given that the frequency and severity of drought is predicted to
increase in many areas of the world, and that the fungi and insects that form
the focus of our biodiversity studies are important components of ecosystems
world-wide, this research may help to predict changes in other systems. The
research program includes training of graduate and undergraduate students,
including Native Americans and Hispanics, and provides outreach to land managers
and the local community interested in the impacts of drought on ecosystems.