* 0415213
* Phylogenetic Systematics and Biogeography of Asclepias
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Mark Fishbein, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 01/31/2006
* USD 327,062.00

0415213&lt;br/&gt;Fishbein&lt;br/&gt; Milkweeds are well known flowering plants
of temperate North America. They have been widely studied by pollination
biologists, evolutionary biologists, and chemical ecologists, and have served as
a model system in studies of plant-insect coevolution. They are perhaps best
known as the host plant of the Monarch butterfly - the discovery of the role of
cardiac glycosides produced by milkweeds and sequestered by Monarchs for use
against avian predators was a classic development in evolutionary ecology.
However, research on milkweed species relationships has lagged far behind the
tremendous progress in studies of the population biology and chemistry of
milkweeds. A much deeper understanding of well-studied ecological and
evolutionary processes and the ability to assess the generality of these
phenomena will be gained from this investigation of the phylogenetic
relationships among milkweed species. Research by Dr. Mark Fishbein at
Mississippi State University will result in an improved classification of the
milkweed genus (Asclepias), analyses of past and current hybridization, and
elucidation of the biogeographic link between North American and African
species. The inferred phylogeny of Asclepias will be used as a framework for
answering several key evolutionary and biogeographic questions: 1) Are all
American milkweeds derived from a single African colonist, or are several
ancestrally African lineages represented among the American species?, 2) Did
milkweeds arrive in North America via a North Atlantic crossing or via South
America?, and 3) Is there evidence for past hybridization and introgression
between morphologically disparate species that are no longer capable of
hybridization? Elucidating the evolutionary history of Asclepias will give
important insights into a group that has given rise to ubiquitous weeds and some
of the rarest species in North America. It also will provide a crucial basis for
future studies of the coevolution of milkweeds and their specialist insect
herbivores. &lt;br/&gt; The results of this project will likely impact
disciplines beyond systematics, evolution, and ecology. Milkweeds are
increasingly being used in horticulture as garden perennials and cut flowers.
Increased understanding of milkweed relationships will foster development of new
horticultural materials by identifying close relatives of cultivated species
that can be grown using established protocols. Studies of plant chemistry based
on milkweeds will be enhanced, especially research targeting pesticide
development. Because of the importance of Asclepias species as the primary host
plant of the Monarch butterfly, this project will contribute to the conservation
of threatened Monarch butterfly populations. Field and laboratory work with
Mexican colleague Zamudio Ruiz and British colleague D. J. Goyder will enhance
international collaboration. In addition, the PI is developing milkweed as a
model system for understanding how hybridization occurs between species, which
is critical for understanding the ecological impacts of genetically modified
organisms. This project will significantly impact graduate and undergraduate
training in molecular systematics and evolutionary biology. Mississippi State
University provides an excellent opportunity to increase the research
opportunities of underrepresented groups in biological sciences. Students will
present the results of their research at regional and national meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;