* 0415838
* IMR: Development of a Confocal X-ray Fluorescence Microscope for Three-dimensional Composition Analysis and Student Training
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Sol Gruner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 01/31/2007
* USD 199,957.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program supports
Cornell University to develop a fast scanning, confocal, x-ray fluorescence
(XRF) microscope for three-dimensional composition mapping of complex solid-
state materials. The microscope consists of two x-ray optics arranged as shown
at the right: one optic focuses the incident beam onto the sample, and a second
optic collects x-ray fluorescence. The overlap of the two focal regions is
several tens of microns in extent, and defines the active, or confocal volume of
the microscope. Feasibility work over the past year at CHESS has demonstrated
that a depth resolution of several microns can be achieved. This microscope will
meet a pressing demand in art conservation to nondestructively determine the
composition of paint layers as a function of depth in historic oil paintings.
This project represents a fruitful, interdisciplinary collaboration between
scientists and students from Cornell University, the University of Delaware, and
the Winterthur Museum, and will result in knowledge and tools having both
general interest and broad application. This knowledge will be disseminated via
journals and conferences in each of these fields of study, and via the
Winterthur museum itself.

Throughout history, painters have reused old canvases, painting over their own
work or the work of earlier artists. This practice has led to the presence of
unseen works by old masters such as Rembrandt, Tintoretto and Van Dyck. For this
and a variety of other reasons, art conservators, museum scientists, and art
historians wish to obtain information about paint layers below the presentation
surface of a painting. Scientists working in collaboration with conservators and
curators have devised a number of tools for the inspection of paintings. Most of
those tools, however, only look at the surface of the opaque paint. What they
miss is a view of the buried layers of paint beneath (and all of the art
historical information that these layers contain). A new tool called an "x-ray
confocal microscope" will give art historians the unprecedented ability to study
multiple, buried layers beneath a painting surface without harming the painting
in any way. Developed by scientists at Cornell University, University of
Delaware and the Winterthur Museum, this advanced microscope uses depth-
sensitive x-ray measurements to probe beneath the surfaces of paintings and
produce detailed maps of paint layers with precise chemical sensitivity. The
microscope works by focusing a small x-ray beam (approximately 20 micrometer in
size) into the painting and collecting the resulting fluorescent scattered
x-rays from only a specific depth. The x-ray signal from the buried paint layers
can be analyzed to identify which specific atoms are present in the paint. The
x-ray measurements can be done without touching or harming the original painting
in any way, a matter of great concern to the art conservators and curators
charged with the care of these beautiful and irreplaceable works.



