* 0415277
* REVSYS: Revisionary Systematics of the Burrowing Anemone Subfamily Edwardsiinae (Cnidaria: Anthozoa: Actiniaria)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Marymegan Daly, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott D. Snyder
* 06/30/2009
* USD 239,847.00

Abstract DEB 0415277 Marymegan Daly

This revision of the sea anemone subfamily Edwardsiinae (Cnidaria: Anthozoa:
Actiniaria) addresses the diversity of one of the most speciose and poorly known
groups of sea anemones. Edwardsines are burrowing anemones, and they inhabit
some of the most threatened inshore habitats, including tidal marshes and mud
flats; the pressures on these sensitive ecosystems has led to the documented
decline of edwardsine populations in Australia, Ireland, the United Kingdom, and
the United States. Elsewhere, edwardsines dominate macrofaunal communities,
reaching densities of hundreds or thousands of individuals per square meter.
Edwardsiinae is one of the few truly cosmopolitan groups of sea anemones, with
all genera comprising species found in soft sediments at all depths in all
oceans. The diversity and global distribution of edwardsines permits a variety
of ecological, biogeographic, and evolutionary hypotheses to be examined,
including: the correlations between habitat type and life history attributes,
the relationship of polar and deep sea taxa, and evolution of burrowing. This
project is the first such examination for any member of Actiniaria.

The described diversity of Edwardsiinae centers on the North Atlantic, with a
handful of species known from tropical and polar oceans. Because edwardsines are
globally distributed and may be locally abundant, edwardsines are frequently
collected during biodiversity surveys, oceanographic expeditions, and in
ecological monitoring projects. Most specimens of Edwardsiinae in museum
collections are unidentified, either because they belong to undescribed species
or because identification is difficult, relying on attributes accessible only
through histological examination. This project will document and describe
species collected in the Pacific and Southern Oceans and re-evaluate the status
of species from the North Atlantic and Arctic oceans, providing a comprehensive
assessment of the biodiversity of Edwardsiinae. The establishment of identity
for samples collected during faunal surveys and monitoring projects increases
the value of such studies, and allows for more nuanced comparisons between
sites. By describing species from under-studied regions and by producing
electronic keys to the species of Edwardsiinae that facilitate identification by
non-specialists, both bottlenecks in the identification of edwardsines are
addressed.