* 0415345
* IMR: Development of an X-ray Modified Rheometer for Synchrotron Polymer Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Benjamin Chu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 120,000.00

The purpose of this project is to develop a unique stress-controlled rheometer
to be adapted in the synchrotron scattering facility (e.g. Advanced Polymers
Beamline, APB, (X27C) at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS),
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)) and in combination with Raman spectroscopy
at Stony Brook. The modifications of the stress-controlled rheometer, including
the installation of x-ray paths, x-ray windows, beam monitoring device, sample
monitoring system and translational stages for beam targeting, which will enable
in-situ scattering/diffraction studies, and minor modifications for adaptation
with the fiber optic Raman Spectrometer at Stony Brook. The proposed
instrumentation is the first of its kind for synchrotron research in the world.
It will be particularly useful for the polymers and soft materials communities
to engage cutting-edge research projects, such as flow-induced phase transitions
and hierarchical structural changes in polymer melts, block copolymers,
nanocomposites, complex fluids, structured gels and biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to develop a
unique stress-controlled rheometer to be adapted in the synchrotron scattering
facility (e.g. Advanced Polymers Beamline, APB, (X27C) at the National
Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS), Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)) and in
combination with Raman spectroscopy at Stony Brook. The X27C beamline was
commissioned in 1997 by a group of scientists from Stony Brook University and
several industrial and government laboratories. The X27C facility is the first
synchrotron beamline in the United States dedicated to chemistry/materials
research (with emphasis on polymers). It uses state-of-the-art simultaneous
small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) and wide-angle x-ray diffraction (WAXD)
techniques to characterize structural changes of materials with length scales
from 1 to 1000 Angstroms. The major benefit of this facility to the materials
community is that no extensive synchrotron experience and equipment preparation
are required from general users to carry out cutting-edge experiments. Today,
X27C has become a major workhorse serving the U.S. polymer community for time-
resolved and in-situ SAXS/WAXD studies. More than 350 users from over 100 user
groups (i.e. over 70 research institutes) have carried out experiments at these
beamlines in the past six years. Thus, we envision that this unique instrument
will not only provide new capability to discover fundamental phenomena in
materials, but will also provide new education opportunities to students,
scientists and engineers with little x-ray and/or rheological
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;