* 0415516
* "Beyond a Supramolecular Approach to Structure and Reactivity of Organic Molecules"
* MPS,CHE
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2007
* Nicholas Turro, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,026,806.00

Professor Nicholas Turro, of the Department of Chemistry at Columbia University,
is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his studies
that will (1) investigate the EPR characterization of the structure and dynamics
of molecules adsorbed on the external surface of a series of monodispersed
zeolite crystals; (2) study the stereoselectivity of the reaction of singlet
oxygen with enecarbamates adsorbed on the internal surface of zeolites; (3)
examine the interactions of macromolecules end-labeled with an electronically
excited state, a reactive radical or an electron spin polarized state with small
molecules (as a model for the propagation step in free radical polymerization)
and with the ends of other macromolecular chains (as a model for the termination
step in free radical polymerization); and (4) explore the simultaneous
absorption of two photons to induce photochemistry with long wavelength light.
Each of these research activities will be investigated through a multi-technique
approach including time resolved spectroscopic methods (UV-VIS absorption,
fluorescence, phosphorescence, infrared, electron paramagnetic resonance and
nuclear magnetic resonance).

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program continues its
support of the research activities of Professor Nicholas J. Turro of Columbia
University where in addition to its intrinsic scientific interest, the zeolite
characterization project in this proposal is of practical significance given the
importance of zeolites as catalysts in various industrial processes. The polymer
kinetics project has obvious industrial significance as well. The multiphoton
studies could lead to a method of tagging biological macromolecules with
fluorescent probes that can be activated in vivo by long wavelength light that
is only weakly absorbed by the tissues. Broader impacts of Professor Turro's
activities include the integration of research and education through the use of
the twin themes of spectroscopy and photochemistry as a conceptual basis for
developing chemistry lectures and chemistry laboratories in undergraduate
courses. During the past funding period Professor Turro has contributed to
diversity in the human resource pool for science by serving as a mentor for 15
graduate students, 23 postdoctoral associates, 10 undergraduates and 3 high
school teachers. This group included 11 women and 6 minority students.