* 0415190
* Data Mining in the Presence of Quantitatively and Qualitatively Diverse Information
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Anne Denton, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2009
* USD 272,557.00

Real data often show a more complex structure than is assumed in much of
statistics, machine learning, or data mining. Objects may be characterized by
diverse types of information such as numerical quantities, text, and properties
of a network neighborhood. The goal of the project is to develop techniques to
integrate information components that differ both quantitatively and
qualitatively. Classification algorithms that are based on homogeneous
attributes can be evaluated exclusively by their overall classification quality.
In the presence of qualitatively and quantitatively diverse information, the
search space of all possible combinations of techniques and parameters is too
large to be evaluated by any reasonable amount of test data. Three goals are
pursued: (1) defining intermediate, homogeneous attributes that allow effective
use of uniform classification and clustering techniques; (2) developing robust
criteria that allow identification of suitable intermediate attributes and do
not exclusively rely on overall classification accuracy; and (3) developing
efficient and effective approaches to generate intermediate attributes from data
with network connectivity, time-dependent data, text and other types of data.
Starting with a specific classification problem in bioinformatics, the project
attempts to find solutions that are applicable to a wide range of data mining
problems. The work is ideally suited to teach students a broad range of research
activities from fundamental concepts to applications, both in thesis and course
work. Results will be of relevance to a large number of practical applications
in bioinformatics and other sciences. The project Web site
(http://www.cs.ndsu.nodak.edu/~adenton/IDM/) is used for dissemination of up-to-
date results, including software, demonstration of newly developed techniques,
comprehensive examples based on biological data to benefit researchers from
biological sciences, and generally understandable examples (such as for a movie
database) will enhance outreach, and demonstrate generality of
results.&lt;br/&gt;