* 0415553
* Boronate-Linked Extended Polymer Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* John Lavigne, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2007
* USD 342,000.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program support Professor John Lavigne
of the Department of Chemistry at the University of South Carolina, for his work
on self-assembling boronate-linked supramolecular networks, which represents a
new paradigm in designing molecular aggregates. The proposed systems are based
on the covalent yet reversible boronate ester formation utilizing trigonal
planar boron compounds and diol compounds in non-aqueous media, forming boronate
esters between the building blocks. This approach is in contrast to the majority
of molecular recognition literature on boronic acid/ester equilibria which
focuses on the assembly of two molecular units. Given the covalent, reversible
nature of the boronate ester formation, these assemblies should form in a highly
ordered manner. These porous networks will still maintain their structural
integrity even if crystalline materials are not obtained. These assemblies are
expected to find utility in any of the applications predicted for other self-
assembled networks. However, considering the nature of the assembly mechanism,
improved stability and therefore enhanced properties would be expected. Compared
to their covalently bonded organic counterparts, boronate-linked supramolecules
should be assembled with greater ease and higher efficiency; compared to the
non-covalently bonded equivalent (such as hydrogen bonding), the boronate linked
materials should display enhanced stability given the stronger intermolecular
interaction. Furthermore, the directionality and selectivity of this interaction
will allow for the introduction of additional functionality thereby creating
well-defined, highly functionalized
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this Award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the research activities of Professor
John Lavigne at the University of South Carolina that focuses on the synthesis
and characterization of the boronate-linked networks. The assembly strategy
could be extended to lead to the development of new nano-scale materials for
potential applications in the areas of separations, sensing, catalysis, chemical
and information storage, as photonic materials, and a wealth of other practical
applications. Students will be exposed to a wide range of topics including
organic chemistry, physical chemistry, and supramolecular materials. Students
will receive training in a highly multidisciplinary environment and will be
prepared for research careers in polymers, pharmaceuticals and analytical
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;