* 0415573
* Phylogenetic Systematics of Nolana (Solanaceae) and Biogeographic Implications for the Atacama and Peruvian Deserts
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Dillon, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

0415573 Dillon The Peruvian and Atacama coastal deserts of South America (8-28
degrees S latitude) are the planet's driest and most inhospitable landscapes,
often compared to those found on Mars. Although these deserts are largely devoid
of plants, there are "oases" of vegetation made possible by local seasonal
accumulation of fog precipitation. Biologists have studied speciation in oceanic
islands, but, less studied are "virtual" islands that exist within continental
ecosystems and are isolated by intervening habitats. In the coastal deserts,
such communities are called "lomas formations" and occur as discrete islands of
vegetation, separated by varying distances of hyper-arid habitat. The lomas
formations represent a virtual archipelago, largely unstudied. They offer the
perfect laboratory for examining evolutionary patterns and testing biogeographic
hypotheses. With 85 species, the plant genus Nolana (Solanaceae or Potato
Family) is one of the most frequently encountered members of the Atacama and
Peruvian desert flora, with at least one species occurring on every lomas
island. Nolana species exhibit extensive variation in growth habit, vegetative
and floral morphology, and ecological preferences, making them an ideal subject
for investigating evolutionary models, taxonomic relationships, and distribution
patterns. Dr. Michael Dillon and his colleague Dr. Jun Wen at the Field Museum
of Natural History will conduct comprehensive field studies in coastal Chile and
Peru to collect at least 75 species of Nolana. Three nuclear genes (GBSSI,
nitrate reductase (NIA) introns, ribosomal 5S) and two chloroplast genes (trnC-
trnD region, ndhF ) will be DNA-sequenced from all these samples to measure
mutational differences and to examine the evolution and biogeographic history of
Nolana. Molecular and morphological results will be used to test hypotheses of
broad-scale distribution patterns in the coastal deserts. Further, the
evolutionary history of Nolana holds clues to the age and origin of the coastal
deserts and their reactions to short-term events (ENSO or El Nino phenomena) and
longer-term events (glacial cycles and sea-level changes). Additional products
from the research will include a comprehensive taxonomic monograph of Nolana and
extensive development of website accessible information. Islands and their
biotas have long interested students of evolution and biogeography. The results
of this project will provide important insights into the genetic diversity of
Nolana and will establish strategies for the conservation of threatened and
endangered species within coastal desert environments. The project will provide
training for a graduate student and a post-doctoral researcher in both field and
laboratory methodologies in plant systematics and biogeography. The research
will be developed in close collaboration with scientists and students in Chile
and Peru. Our discoveries will be of interest not only to plant scientists and
ecologists, but also to climatologists, ecophysiologists and geoarcheologists.

