* 0415429
* A Photophysical Study of Stimuli-Responsive Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Lisa Kelly, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 337,620.00

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports Professor Lisa Kelly
of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Maryland-Baltimore County
(UMBC) who will fabricate and study a new class of polymers that have utility as
stimuli-responsive materials. Professor Kelly proposes to improve our
understanding of how polymer structure controls mechanism and temperature
dependent spectral changes by using acrylamide based copolymers, which can be
varied in the hydrophilic-hydrophobic phase transition ratio. The project will
provide a strong foundation to develop stimuli-responsive polymers, including
nanometer sized particles for biosensing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Lisa
Kelly of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Maryland-Baltimore
County is developing a research program that could provide a strong foundation
leading to the development of stimuli-responsive polymers, including nanometer
sized particles for biosensing applications. Professor Kelly's work will provide
interdisciplinary training in the fields of organic, physical, and polymer
chemistry. Undergraduate and graduate research students will work as a team with
the PI to develop styrene, acrylamide, and hydrogel polymers that have
covalently attached molecules known to form an excited state complex. The
research team will apply fundamental models in physical chemistry to understand
how the response occurs. UMBC has a strong tradition of training outstanding
underrepresented minorities (URM) at the undergraduate and graduate level. Over
the past 7 years, the PI has regularly mentored URM students in her research
lab. The PI is actively involved in the Women in Science and Engineering group
at UMBC and has been a successful role model for students working in her lab.
Her research students are involved in all aspects of research, including
manuscript and proposal preparation, external reviewing, and research
presentations at national meetings. By virtue of the interdisciplinary nature of
the project, the training activities will prepare students working with the PI
for a variety of research and educational careers, while providing ample
opportunity to network with leaders in the chemistry community.&lt;br/&gt;