* 0415439
* Lavakas: investigating extreme erosion in Madagascar
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Ronadh Cox, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 225,230.00

Extreme erosion characterizes Madagascar's central highlands. The country has a
"world-record &lt;br/&gt;erosion rate" according to the World Bank, and the
widespread hillslope gullies called lavaka are &lt;br/&gt;featured in every
guidebook as examples of the catastrophic denudation of the country.s
&lt;br/&gt;landscape. Lavakas, which have been described as .cat claw-marks. on
the landscape, initiate &lt;br/&gt;suddenly and grow rapidly, shedding sediment
volumes on the order of 8000 m3 in a few months. &lt;br/&gt;They cause
substantial infrastructural problems because they undermine roads and bridges,
and &lt;br/&gt;because the debris flows that issue from them swamp agricultural
land. They are widely cited as &lt;br/&gt;being largely or entirely
anthropogenic in origin, and the major source of high sediment loads in
&lt;br/&gt;Madagascar's rivers. Neither of these interpretations is based on
hard data, however, and in spite &lt;br/&gt;of the importance of this issue,
both from an economic and an environmental point of view, of &lt;br/&gt;erosion
are largely unstudied. Strong statements abound, but there are no data to
constrain the &lt;br/&gt;rates at which lavakas form, or their relative
contribution to regional sediment budgets; and the &lt;br/&gt;geological
controls on their formation are largely unknown. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will address the issue of modern erosion in Madagascar by investigating
&lt;br/&gt;rates of lavaka formation and geological controls on their
initiation. Analysis of changes in lavaka &lt;br/&gt;distribution and size will
be achieved by combining air photo mapping of lavaka distributions 60
&lt;br/&gt;years ago and field mapping of present-day lavaka distributions in a
GIS database. This will &lt;br/&gt;permit evaluation of decadal-scale sediment
generation volumes, as well as lavaka evolution &lt;br/&gt;rates. Cosmogenic
isotope analysis will produce sediment generation rates on the millennial
&lt;br/&gt;scale, which can be compared with the mapping-derived rates of recent
erosion to evaluate &lt;br/&gt;whether erosion rates have in fact increased in
recent time as has been frequently asserted but &lt;br/&gt;never demonstrated.
Quantification of human effects on lavaka formation and growth will be
&lt;br/&gt;achieved by GIS analysis of mapped distributions of lavakas and their
relationship to different &lt;br/&gt;land-use categories. Understanding of
geologic controls on the location of lavakas will come &lt;br/&gt;from detailed
mapping of the structural geology of underlying saprolitized bedrock and slope
&lt;br/&gt;characteristics. &lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will be of
significance to studies of human interactions with the &lt;br/&gt;landscape in
general. They will have direct relevance for environmental planning and erosion
&lt;br/&gt;mitigation strategies for Madagascar. Establishment of geologic
criteria predisposing some &lt;br/&gt;slopes to lavaka formation could save
enormous amounts of money by providing preventive &lt;br/&gt;planning strategies
for road and dam building organizations. Above all, understanding the role of
&lt;br/&gt;lavakas in sediment generation; the role of humans in lavaka
formation; and whether Madagascar &lt;br/&gt;is naturally characterized by high
erosion rates or whether they are of recent and anthropogenic &lt;br/&gt;origin,
will solidify thinking about ecological strategizing in Madagascar and
contribute to a &lt;br/&gt;better understanding of the islands exogenic system
as a whole. &lt;br/&gt;This project will be a wonderful way to train students in
the process of approaching a scientific &lt;br/&gt;problem that has direct
societal relevance. Linking education and international collaboration is
&lt;br/&gt;also a key component of this project. Undergraduate students, both
American and Malagasy, will &lt;br/&gt;get intense one-on-one mentoring and
training in the field and in the lab, as well as hands-on &lt;br/&gt;experience
with a variety of analytical tools and GIS/remote sensing techniques. The
project will &lt;br/&gt;provide opportunities for third-world Malagasy students
to travel to the U.S. for education and &lt;br/&gt;training, and will also
create career training and research opportunities for Malagasy
&lt;br/&gt;collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Division of Earth Science and the Office of International Science and
Education.&lt;br/&gt;