* 0415585
* RUI: Ecological Dominant Discharge: Developing a New Concept in Stream Ecosystem Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Randall Fuller, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Russell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 154,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological Dominant Discharge: Developing a New Concept in
Stream Ecosystem Studies &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River discharge is a primary
influence on stream ecosystems, and discharge has been substantially modified by
humans via irrigation, dam operation, and climate change. These changes are
known to affect the physical properties of rivers, but their ecological impacts
are poorly understood. Our goal is to systematically analyze how stream
ecosystem processes vary with differences in discharge, and to synthesize this
information into a single metric that we call the "Ecological Dominant
Discharge," which is that discharge responsible for controlling the majority of
stream ecosystem processes for a given site. We will investigate this concept by
studying four rivers in the Adirondack Park of upstate New York (2 dam-modified
rivers, one of which has regular releases of water and 2 natural, unmodified
rivers). These rivers possess a range of both physical parameters (e.g.,
variations in discharge) and ecological parameters (e.g., transport of
particulates, etc.). &lt;br/&gt;The information derived from this research will
be highly relevant to the management of rivers impacted by flow regulation, and
for guiding potential river restoration efforts. The physical and ecological
impacts of flow regulation are becoming better understood, but unifying these
impacts into a single concept has been difficult in the past, and the concept of
ecological dominant discharge will potentially alleviate these problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;