* 0415581
* Understanding the Fertilization Signalsome
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Kathleen Foltz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2009
* USD 375,000.00

Overview The activation of the quiescent egg during fertilization is the
remarkable first step in the development of a new organism. Despite a long
history of descriptions of the process, surprisingly little is known about the
molecular details of fertilization in any system. In the eggs of all
multicellular animals studied to date, a rise in intracellular Ca2+ plays a key
role in egg activation. How is this Ca2+ rise mediated? In echinoderm (sea
urchin and starfish), ascidian, and perhaps in some vertebrate eggs, sperm
somehow trigger activation of a Src Family Kinase (SFK), a non-receptor tyrosine
kinase, which in turn activates a phospholipase (PLCg) enzyme to cause
production of the small molecule, inositol trisphosphate (IP3). This IP3 then
causes opening of Ca2+ gates in the egg's endoplasmic reticulum, and thus
cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels rise - all of this occurring in less than 1 minute after
sperm-egg interaction. The Ca2+ is necessary and sufficient for many egg
activation events, including the permanent block to polyspermy, DNA synthesis,
and first cleavage. This proposal describes experiments designed to test
hypotheses about the molecular mechanisms of the very early events of egg
activation. How are the SFKs regulated? Do they have multiple roles in early
activation? What are the target proteins of the SFKs? Echinoderm eggs, which are
available in large quantity, easy to manipulate and to microinject, and which
are exquisitely synchronous in their response to sperm, will be used to
investigate (i) the role of SFKs in various egg activation events; (ii) the
physical and functional interactions of SFKs with upstream regulators; and (iii)
the identities and roles of other proteins that interact with SFKs to
orchestrate the events of egg activation.

Intellectual Merit Because the rise in intracellular calcium is conserved across
metazoans and because it is absolutely required to activate development, any
information gained about the molecular mechanism of fertilization is useful. Now
that specific reagents are available (the results of the previously funded NSF
proposal), it is possible to dissect the roles of the SFK(s) in signal
transduction during fertilization. Further, the advent of the sea urchin genome
project opens new doors for exploring this question and thus a proteomics-based
approach to the activation question is proposed. The echinoderms represent the
best-understood model system currently in place for dissecting the egg
activation pathway. In addition to the basic fertilization biology is the
phenomenon of the signal transduction "switch" - the molecular control of
cellular decision making. Eggs (especially the highly synchronous echinoderm
eggs) offer an exciting example of digital signaling, based on protein-protein
interactions, that toggle the cell from "off" to "on" in seconds. Thus,
understanding the details of fertilization will provide insight into the general
phenomenon of signal transduction as well.

Broader Impacts The project provides many opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to receive training and experience in modern biochemistry and
molecular biology and especially in proteomics. Due to the nature of the
research question, there will be emphasis on the quantitative aspects and ample
opportunity for interaction with colleagues in other areas such as
bioinformatics, computer science and engineering. This will be facilitated
through participation in seminars and workshops in the newly developing "Systems
Biology" area at UCSB. As with any research in fertilization biology, there is
potential for the scientific progress/results to impact human contraception or
IVF technologies. More immediately, however, this project (like the previously
funded NSF projects) is amenable to participation by students enrolled in summer
programs such as UC LEADS and CAMP, both of which are geared to bring students
of under-represented groups into science and engineering. In addition, the
proposed work will be a continuation of the "Fertilization Project" as part of
the over-arching K-12 Outreach Program at UCSB. Local K-12 students and teachers
will gain hands on experience with fertilization biology and research
design/implementation. Graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in the PI's
laboratory will continue to participate in the training and mentoring of
students involved in these programs. This will extend beyond traditional
interactions in the laboratory setting to include participation in mentoring and
leadership workshops, teaching experiences, and public speaking, all of which
are integral parts of the summer and outreach programs already in place at UCSB
and particularly through the Marine Science Institute.