* 0415144
* IMR:  Acquisition of a Physical Property Measurement System for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* John Ketterson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 155,050.00

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports
Northwestern University with the acquisition of a Physical Properties
Measurement System (PPMS) and some key options. This instrument is manufactured
by the Quantum Design Corporation of San Diego, California, which is the sole
supplier offering the required options. This instrument will broadly support a
wide range of materials-based programs, much of it nanoscience oriented, here at
Northwestern University (and some surrounding institutions) involving various
disciplines including Chemistry, Materials Science, Physics, Mechanical
Engineering, and Electrical Engineering. The Instrument will greatly extend the
capability at Northwestern University faculty to synthesize and characterize a
wide range of new materials. Briefly, the instrument will measure static/dynamic
magnetic response, electrical/thermal transport properties, and specific heat,
at temperatures in the range 0.4K to 400K and at magnetic fields to 9T. A sample
rotator will permit studies of the angular dependence of the transport
properties. A program to extend the capabilities still further will be initiated
including: the static/dynamic magneto-optical Kerr-effect (MOKE) and other
optical measurements, sound propagation, and microwave response (there being
sufficient sample space in the new cryostat to locate the necessary components).
Some programs which will immediately benefit from the instrumentation include
chalcogenide crystal chemistry, magnetic semiconductors, novel Josephson
junctions (qubit candidates), and nanocrystalline
wires.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Instrumentation for Materials
Research program supports Northwestern University with the acquisition of a
Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) and some key options. This
instrument is manufactured by the Quantum Design Corporation of San Diego,
California, which is the sole supplier offering the required options. This
instrument will broadly support a wide range of materials-based programs, much
of it nanoscience oriented, in Chemistry, Materials Science, Physics, Mechanical
Engineering, and Electrical Engineering at Northwestern University and some
surrounding institutions. Northwestern faculty are generally recognized for
their ability to synthesize a wide range of new materials and the PPMS will
greatly extend their ability to characterize these materials. Briefly, the
instrument will measure magnetic, thermal and electrical properties of materials
at various magnetic fields and temperatures. Most measurements are performed by
graduate and undergraduate students associated with the various faculty, and the
presence of the instrument will give the students the opportunity to learn about
the underlying measurement science associated with the properties being
studied.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;