* 0415647
* Laser Spectroscopy of Gas Phase Metal Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Morse, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 446,487.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Michael Morse of the University of Utah will
investigate the chemical bonding and electronic structures of diatomic
transition metal molecules and polyatomic metal cluster oxides, nitrides, and
carbides by means of electronic spectroscopy. The methods include resonant two-
photon ionization spectroscopy, laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy, and
dispersed fluorescence spectroscopy. Diatomic molecules to be investigated
include Pd2, VMo, NbMo, Re2, Hf2, Os2, Ir2, ScAu, TiAu, VAu, PtAu, and AuSi.
Examples of polyatomic metal clusters are the triatomic species AlNAl, AlOAl,
Al2Cl, Si2O, and AlSiO. The goal is to obtain detailed structural information
about these species, including bond lengths, bond angles, vibrational
frequencies, dissociation energies, ground and excited electronic state
symmetries and spin multiplicities, etc. The spectroscopy of molecules with
heavy transition metal atoms is challenging owing to the simultaneous presence
of relativistic and electron correlation effects. These features make it very
difficult to study such molecules even with the most modern quantum chemical
methods. This research promises to provide accurate experimental data that will
serve as benchmarks for the development of appropriate quantum chemical
theories. Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this research.
They will thereby acquire knowledge and skills in preparation for advanced
studies or entry into the scientific/technological workforce.