* 0415633
* RUI - The Evolution of Placentas in the Poeciliid Fishes: An Empirical Study of the Evolution of Complexity
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Michael Ghedotti, Regis University
* Continuing grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2010
* USD 172,000.00

The placenta is a complex organ that is a composite of many adaptations that
must be well integrated for proper function. David Reznick and Michael Ghedotti
will study the evolution of the placenta in the fish family Poeciliidae. They
will develop a "family tree", based on DNA sequence and morphology, to determine
if the placenta evolved independently on different branches and to define groups
of species that do or do not have the placenta. Experiments on 30 species of
those fish that are closely related and have different forms of maternal
provisioning will test the predictions of a recent theory for the evolution of
the placenta. Working together, the biologists will provide insights to refine
the theory, while theoreticians will provide insights to suggest new lines of
experimental inquiry.

In the Origin of Species, Darwin included a chapter entitled "Difficulties on
Theory", considering the most serious challenges to the theory of evolution by
natural selection. One was the origin of complex organs: it seemed improbable
that evolution could integrate many traits at once. He proposed that complexity
could evolve by small steps if each represented an adaptation. These fish
provide an opportunity to test Darwin's proposition. The research will also
offer multidisciplinary training for students, be relevant to several fields of
biology, and present a case study in evolution.