* 0415351
* Species-level Diversity and Evolution in Phytoplanktonic Coccolithophores Using Molecular, Morphological, and Fossil Data.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Marie Aubry, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 07/31/2007
* USD 212,945.00

0415351&lt;br/&gt;de Vargas&lt;br/&gt; The surface layers of Earth's oceans are
largely dominated by unicellular organisms that play fundamental roles in global
biogeochemical cycles. The most successful groups of marine planktonic protists
can build micro-skeletons that are remarkably preserved in kilometers-thick
layers of deep-sea sediments, representing a unique archive for the study of
paleo-climate, stratigraphy and evolution. However, studies of their biology and
evolution at the species and population levels have been hindered by the huge
dimension and extremely fast-changing conditions of their oceanic habitat, as
well as the relative absence of morphological characters for species
recognition. The conventional paradigm is that the microplankton is composed of
a limited number of morphologically distinct species, each with broad ecological
tolerances and transoceanic distribution. Preliminary molecular data have
challenged this model and promoted the hypothesis that all conventional
morphological species are in fact clusters of a few sibling species, which may
have diverged several million years ago but are separated by only subtle
morphological characters. Drs. De Vargas and Aubry and their colleagues will
examine global biodiversity and evolutionary patterns underlying the origin and
maintenance of species in the oceanic phytoplankton group of coccolithophores.
Innovative approaches combining advanced molecular and microscopy methods will
allow gathering genetic and morphological information at the single-cell level
from numerous near-shore and open ocean stations across the Pacific, Atlantic
and Indian Oceans. The data will allow reconstructing the evolutionary history
of the coccolithophores, defining boundaries between species, and recognizing
their ecological niches in the three-dimensions of the global ocean. Molecular
clocks calibrated against the excellent coccolithophore fossil record will be
used to estimate the divergence times of the sibling species within a
morphological "species". The characters of the skeleton that permit recognition
of the genetic species will be stratigraphically tracked within well-preserved
sediment cores, allowing their geological first appearance to be compared to the
molecular-age estimates.&lt;br/&gt;This research, incorporating systematic
biology, paleontology, and oceanography, will create a variety of broad
scientific and societal impacts. By analyzing the time scale and ecological
factors controlling diversity dynamics in the ocean, this project will help to
predict how pelagic biodiversity may react to the increasingly severe climatic
changes projected in the near future. The project will provide essential
taxonomic, genetic, and ecological data to the scientific community using the
micro-skeletons of marine protists as routine tools to analyze past oceanic and
climatic changes. The project will involve an intense education effort serving
K-12 students, educators, and large public audience through a collaborative work
with the education staff at Rutgers University and a new website. It will
directly involve undergraduate and graduate students through different programs
at Rutgers University and the international partner
Institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;