* 0415932
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Connectivity in a Heterogeneous Landscape: The Genetics and Population Dynamics of Olympic Marmots
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Mark Taper, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2007
* USD 43,685.00

It is known that connectivity, or movement across a landscape, can be critical
to the persistence of animal populations. Although there have been astonishing
advances in the measurement of connectivity using radiotelemetry, non-invasive
DNA sampling, and computer analysis, there is not yet a framework to unify these
approaches. This project will develop such a general framework, applying it to
the Olympic marmot, a species found only in the high-elevation meadows of the
Olympic Peninsula, Washington. DNA analysis of samples obtained non-invasively
(from hairs left on sticks placed in marmot burrows), coupled with telemetry,
and observation, will provide input to a novel computer model that will portray
likely marmot movement paths across the landscape. &lt;br/&gt;There are only
2,000-4,000 individuals of this species, and their apparent recent declines are
of considerable concern to Olympic National Park. Comparison of findings of this
project to previous work on Olympic marmots will permit determination of whether
this species has declined. The computer model developed with field data will
also indicate potential effects of global climate change on marmot connectivity,
as snowpack or vegetation community types are shifted. By identifying mechanisms
of connectivity and population decline, the project will facilitate management
of Olympic marmots while at the same time developing a general approach
applicable to many species facing fragmentation.&lt;br/&gt;