* 0415401
* Incorporating Genomics into the MBL Microbial Diversity Course to be held at The Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, MA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Thomas Schmidt, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2008
* USD 369,361.00

This award will facilitate the incorporation of genome-enabled science into the
Microbial Diversity Summer Course at the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods
Hole, MA. Thomas Schmidt (Michigan State University) and William Metcalf
(University of Illinois) will be co-directors of the course, which is an
intensive 6.5-week lecture and laboratory-based experience designed for graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows and established investigators. The Microbial
Diversity course takes advantage of the diverse natural environments found near
Woods Hole: microbial mats in salt water marshes, anaerobic communities in
freshwater bogs, pelagic and benthic communities in marine ecosystems, and the
many marine animals and plants that harbor microbial
symbionts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The emphasis on culture-based approaches has
been the historical backbone of the course; however, the revolution in molecular
methods and their impact on the study of both cultivated and yet-to-be
cultivated microorganisms will not be ignored. The continued infusion of genomic
approaches into the course will provide instruction in the use of sequence-based
methodologies, molecular phylogenetics, and comparative genomics to mine the
riches of diverse microbes. A significant new addition to the course will be the
inclusion of modules exploring the use of metagenomics as a tool for examining
the genetic traits that allow microbial populations to thrive in their
environments. By integrating principles from evolutionary and genomic sciences,
the course will offer a perspective of metabolic diversity that is informed by
the natural selective forces that have shaped microbes and their genomes. One of
the broader impacts of offering such a course is that participants form around
the world and from underrepresented groups in the sciences will be in a position
to share a unified, contemporary vision of microbiology with colleagues at their
home institutions. Discovery based research will be used as a vehicle to teach
both the cultivation and molecular approaches to study microbial biodiversity.
Importantly, a significant portion of the course is devoted to in-depth
independent research projects, allowing each student to tailor their course
experience to their respective educational needs and interests. A series of
mini-symposia on current topics of interest in the areas of microbial diversity,
genomics, and ecology are also planned. These allow students the opportunity to
meet and interact with world-renowned investigators, as well as young
investigators conducting cutting-edge research in microbiology. &lt;br/&gt;