* 0415407
* Synthetic, Mechanistic, and Catalytic f-Element Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 02/29/2008
* USD 575,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Dr. Tobin J. Marks at Northwestern University to
investigate fundamental aspects of new catalytic transformations involving
lanthanide and related early transition metals. The strengths of bonds being
made and broken in organometallic/catalytic processes will be quantified.
Reaction calorimetry will be used to quantify the strengths of metal-ligand
multiple bonds, of metal-main group ligand single bonds, and to "anchor" the
data on an absolute scale. This fundamental scientific information will then
used to: elucidate bonding, rationalize known reaction patterns, and develop
principles for the invention of new, useful catalytic processes. New catalytic
mechanisms will be investigated pertaining to transformations in which element-H
bonds are added to unsaturated carbon-carbon bonds (hydroelementation) to
selectively create heteroatom- containing organic molecules. The primary focus
is on selective C-N, C-P, C-B, and C-S bond-forming processes, studying a range
of precursor structures (C=C, C=C=C, C=C-C=C), characterizing rates,
selectivities, substituent effects, and comparing intramolecular vs.
intermolecular processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic cascades in which
controlled sequences of coupled bond-forming processes (e.g., C-N + C-C) take
place at single and proximate metal centers will also be studied and refined as
ultimate routes to useful fine chemicals and bio-active molecules, as well as to
establish new catalytic principles. Organolanthanide-catalyzed polymerization
processes will be investigated that involve single or closely poised multiple
metal centers coupled to element-H/metal-C exchange processes or to
hydroelementation processes that produce new types of polymer chains "end-
capped" with a heteroatom (e.g., Si, Sn, B, Al). The properties of chiral
complexes having various symmetry environments will be studied with respect to
structure, stability, and efficacy in enantioselective variants of catalytic
transformations. Unusual chelating ligand structures having sulfur and
phosphorus donor atoms will also be studied. In addition, actinide complexes
will be investigated to compare/contrast electronic structure effects on
catalytic properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
organometallic/catalytic/materials chemistry in order to effect, characterize,
understand, and disseminate to the community, unusual and potentially useful new
stoichiometric and catalytic reactivity principles applicable to making more
efficient, atom- economical catalytic processes for the production of fuels,
plastics, pharmaceuticals, and other economically important chemicals.
Participation in this multifaceted/multidisciplinary project, including
interactions with industrial scientists, will prepare graduate, undergraduate,
and postdoctoral students, having diverse backgrounds, for productive careers in
industry, government laboratories, and academe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;