* 0415914
* Pre-Columbian Urban Form in the Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Alexei Vranich, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 108,640.00

For nearly half a millennium, from AD 500 to 1000, the city of Tiwanaku,
Bolivia, was the center a powerful polity that exerted its influence over the
southern Andes. Tens of thousands of tourists now visit the ruins to gaze upon
the most megalithic constructions prior to those of the Inca Empire.
Archaeologists are also drawn for similar reasons, and because Tiwanaku
represents one of the rare example of primary state and urban formation. Dr.
Alexei Vranich, who has been directing a collaborative project with a core group
of North American and Bolivian researchers on site since 1996, will be expanding
the scope of this investigation over two consecutive field seasons with the
support of the National Science Foundation.

This research explores the manner that the elaborate architecture of the city
organized and directed social interactions and ultimately gave structure to the
social dynamics that maintained this dense urban center. Though in its prime
Tiwanaku was a city of elegant temples, stone pyramids and extensive adobe brick
compounds, centuries of stone robbing and a harsh environment has transformed
this planned city into a flat grassy plain with an occasional mound and
platform. Traditional large-scale horizontal excavations, and their subsequent
conservation, are prohibitively expensive and politically unfeasible on such a
high profile site of national importance. Using a combination of non-invasive
ground penetrating technology to quickly survey large areas, followed by
selective archaeological excavation on identified areas of high architectural
and artifact potential, the intent of this investigation is to quickly and
efficiently develop a broader understanding of spatial organization of the
monumental center. This information will be presented on a virtual format that
goes beyond the flashy computer reconstructions now commonplace on television
programs and popular magazines, offering instead a three-dimensional database of
existing and hypothetical architecture than can be modeled to test the effect of
architecture had on human interaction, perception and movement. Since this
research considers an alternative perspective for urbanism to those based on
economic and political variables, this investigation will be of interest to a
wide range of scholars in the process of generating new models and challenging
previous assumptions for the rise of archaic pre-industrial states.

This research addresses the pressing need to refine a methodology for generating
a broad spatial understanding of a complex site in a quick and efficient manner.
For the future Tiwanaku scholar, the site will be transformed from a flat plain
and isolated monument, to a three-dimensional geography of archaeological
potential that can be accurately targeted for future investigation. This
investigation is actively training and offering research opportunities for both
Bolivian and international graduate and undergraduate students to continue this
effort, providing a crucial human resource to the chronically under-funded
archaeology and cultural resources management efforts of Bolivia. This
methodology that develops from this project will also be applicable across the
world where archaeologists are struggling to pursue broad research questions
while adhering to the conservation requirements stipulated for archeological
sites with high cultural and touristic value.

