* 0415732
* Role of Pax Genes in the Patterning of Spiralian Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* S. Martin Shankland, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 05/31/2007
* USD 391,822.00

Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial patterning of developing embryos has
only been studied in detail for a small number of model system species, and the
generality of those findings is unclear. This application proposes to examine
the molecular basis of spatial patterning in embryos of the leech Helobdella
robusta. Leeches are members of the Lophotrochozoa, one of the three major
subdivisions of bilaterally symmetric animals (1). For a variety of historical
reasons, molecular analysis of lophotrochozoan development lags far behind that
of the other groups. H. robusta is a good system for addressing this deficiency
because it is amenable to a wide variety of experimental procedures (2-6) and
displays a widely conserved mode of lophotrochozoan development called spiral
cleavage.&lt;br/&gt;The experiments proposed here focus on the role of Pax gene
family transcription factors in the development of the H. robusta embryo. The
trunk tissues of the mature leech arise from a defined set of five embryonic
stem cells, and preliminary data are presented which suggest that two of these
stem cell lineages are uniquely distinguished by early embryonic expression of
specific Pax genes. One of these genes (PaxIIIa-Hro) has been cloned, and
circumstantial evidence suggests that a second cloned sequence (PaxIIIb-Hro)
accounts for the observed protein expression in the second stem cell lineage.
&lt;br/&gt;This application has five specific aims that will further elucidate
the role of Pax genes in the development of spiralian embryos. Specific Aim 1
will complete the molecular characterization of the already identified genes
PaxIIIa and PaxIIIb. &lt;br/&gt;Specific Aim 2 will analyze the developmental
function of PaxIIIa and PaxIIIb, primarily by reducing or abolishing endogenous
gene expression through intracellular injection of gene-specific antisense
morpholino oligomers. Additional experiments will pursue the misexpression of
these gene products in other stem cell lineages where they are not normally
expressed.&lt;br/&gt;Specific Aim 3 will investigate the developmental
mechanisms responsible for the differential specification of the embryonic stem
cells, using PaxIIIa and PaxIIIb expression as molecular markers of stem cell
identity. &lt;br/&gt;Specific Aim 4 will undertake the cloning and initial
characterization of additional members of the H. robusta Pax gene family. As-
yet-unidentified Pax genes may be playing roles parallel to PaxIIIa and PaxIIIb
during the development of the other three stem cell lineages.&lt;br/&gt;Specific
Aim 5 is a comparative analysis of Pax gene expression in other spiralians.
Antibodies that recognize Pax III gene products will be used to immunostain the
embryos of other related species, and the observed patterns of expression
compared to those seen in H. robusta.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
proposal lie primarily in the area of teaching and training. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in the practice of scientific techniques,
and in the interpretation, written description, and oral presentation of
experimental results. Students will be urged to attend and present their own
research findings at scientific meetings. The P.I. has a track record of
training graduate and undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented
groups, and will continue to make this a priority in the studies proposed
here.&lt;br/&gt;