* 0415509
* Altering the Course of Quantum Dynamics Phenomena
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Herschel Rabitz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 07/31/2007
* USD 490,200.00

Hersch Rabitz of Princeton University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to develop new theoretical concepts for the
control of quantum phenomena and to extract mechanistic and other physical
information from the control process. The overall research program has two
components: theoretical analysis of controlled quantum phenomena, and
development of laboratory executable algorithms for the control and analysis of
quantum phenomena. The design and analysis studies serve as forerunners to the
advanced laboratory algorithm developments. Although this research project is
theoretical and computational in nature, the goal of the work is to have a
direct impact on enhancing the success and value of laboratory quantum control
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to advance the
capabilities for manipulating molecular processes and more general quantum
phenomena while simultaneously extracting as much physical information as
possible. Since the invention of the laser, chemists have dreamed of selectively
exciting regions within a molecule and thus causing a controlled chemical
reaction to occur. However, that energy redistributes in molecules so rapidly
that it is it not possible to concentrate enough energy in a selected bond to
cause it to break. With the advent of laser pulse modulation techniques and the
application of quantum control theory, it now appears that laser selective
chemistry could potentially become a reality with ultimately practical
applications.