* 0415583
* Regulatory Fit and Value Transfer
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2010
* E. Tory Higgins, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 02/28/2010
* USD 400,000.00

People experience a "regulatory fit" when they pursue a goal in a manner that
sustains their initial orientation toward the goal. For example, when people
have a promotion orientation toward a goal as something they hope or aspire to
attain, then pursuing that goal in an eager manner (i.e., seeking out all means
of advancement) will sustain that orientation and produce an experience of fit.
In contrast, when people have a prevention orientation toward a goal as a duty
or obligation they must fulfill, then pursuing that goal in a vigilant manner
(i.e., being careful not to make mistakes) will sustain that orientation and
produce an experience of fit. Previous research has found that regulatory fit
(e.g., promotion/eager; prevention/ vigilant) makes people "feel right" about
what they are doing, and this experience transfers value to both the goal
pursuit itself and to other objects evaluated later. Non-fit (e.g.,
promotion/vigilant; prevention/eager) makes people "feel wrong" about what they
are doing. The studies in this grant investigate for the first time the
implications of the fit experience for the outcomes associated with
interpersonal negotiation. The grant studies will explore the implications of
regulatory fit for central variables in negotiation: (a) buyer vs. seller roles;
(b) reservation point vs. aspiration point; (c) demand vs. expand processes; (d)
acceptance vs. rejection responses; and (e) knowing vs. developing one's BATNA
(Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement). It is predicted that regulatory
fit will enhance not only the contractual benefits of the negotiation (e.g.,
financial agreements) but also the relationship between the negotiation
partners. For example, greater value from the negotiation should be created by
emphasizing expand over demand processes, acceptance over rejection responses,
and developing over knowing one's BATNA when negotiators have a promotion
orientation, whereas the reverse should be true when negotiators have a
prevention orientation. Negotiation successes or failures contribute
significantly to people's quality of life. By discovering how regulatory fit can
contribute to successful agreements and positive feelings for negotiation
partners (e.g., spouse, friend, teacher, boss), negotiation outcomes could be
improved in the future that would enhance quality of life.

