* 0415344
* Structure, Reactivity and Selectivity of Hydrocarbon Radical Cations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Olaf Wiest, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2008
* USD 348,000.00

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the
work of Professor Olaf G. Wiest of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
at the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN. The research will continue the
PI's experimental and computational investigations of the chemistry of
hydrocarbon radical cations, a class of reactive intermediates that have
significant potential for new scientific insights and applications. Radical
cations, which are formed through electron transfer, typically react many orders
of magnitude faster than their neutral counterparts. After back electron
transfer, this results in a very effective method for the acceleration of
reactions through electron transfer catalysis. Stereochemical and isotope effect
studies will be used to elucidate the mechanistic details of these reactions
that are often controlled by factors absent or less important in their neutral
counterparts. The reactivity and selectivity of electron transfer reactions in
ionic liquids, in which polarity facilitates radical cation formation, will be
investigated. These experimental studies will be complemented by high-level
quantum mechanical calculations of reaction dynamics. These investigations will
yield basic information that will provide the means to control electron transfer
catalysis and facilitate its application in modern synthetic organic chemistry.
Such fundamental knowledge is essential for the application of this technique to
other areas of chemical, biological and material science.