* 0415146
* International Meeting for the Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology, Lisbon, Portugal, July 2004
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Juli Wade, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 04/30/2005
* USD 30,000.00

This grant will provide support for trainees at the 8th annual meeting of the
Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology (SBN) to be held July 26-30, 2004. The
meeting will be hosted by the Eco-Ethology Research Unit, Integrative
Behavioural Biology Lab, of the Instituto Superior de Psicologia Aplicada at the
Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation in Lisbon, Portugal. A founding principle of the
SBN is a commitment to undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows. These individuals are the future of scientific enterprise,
and the annual SBN conference is an opportunity to enhance their education,
reward their efforts, appreciate their contributions, and as they enter the
academic community. The SBN is a multidisciplinary, international society that
promotes research and education concerning hormones, the brain and behavior. The
annual SBN conference brings together scientists from diverse fields, including
physiological and developmental psychology, behavioral ecology, animal behavior,
chronobiology, psychoneuroendocrinology, neuroscience, cellular and molecular
endocrinology, developmental biology, and genetics. In particular, the society
encourages the integration of cellular and molecular concepts into a functional
framework. The funds from this proposal will be used for three purposes: (1) a
Young Investigator's Symposium, in which eight of the most talented postdocs and
senior graduate students will present talks (selected by competition and funding
used to defray expenses for attending the meeting); (2) smaller travel awards to
students and postdocs presenting posters (also selected by competition), and (3)
two professional development workshops. The abstracts from talks and posters
presented at the conference will be published in Hormones and Behavior, and full
manuscripts from the data are then commonly published in a variety of journals
focusing on neuroscience, endocrinology and/or behavior.