* 0415161
* IMR: Acquisition of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer for Research and Education on Spintronics and Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Ryan Doezema, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 91,000.00

This is an instrument acquisition proposal from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research Program to the University of Oklahoma Norman Campus. The
University of Oklahoma Norman Campus will acquire a Fourier Transform Infrared
Spectrometer for research and education on spintronics and semiconductor
nanostructure. Spintronics and nanoscience are two prevailing themes in
materials research today. Far infrared spectroscopy is potentially useful in
both areas, since relevant energy levels for materials design are typically in
the far infrared. The main experimental challenges in both areas are due to low
signal strength. The new instrument will allow researchers to overcome these
challenges with a vacuum-pumped, Fourier Transform Infrared spectrometer. Vacuum
pumping will remove the far infrared water vapor absorption lines that obscure
data obtained by flushed spectrometers. It will open a spectral window that has
broad utility in the fields of spintronics and semiconductor nanostructures.
Students will use the spectrometer for summer projects, undergraduate senior
projects, and graduate theses. The proposed project will provide an excellent
opportunity for student training on an instrument that is used widely in many
scientific fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an instrument
acquisition proposal from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to
the University of Oklahoma Norman Campus. The University of Oklahoma Norman
Campus will acquire a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer for research and
education on spintronics and semiconductor nanostructure. Spintronics and
nanoscience are two prevailing themes in materials research today. Far infrared
spectroscopy is potentially useful in both areas. The instrument will allow
researchers to overcome these major experimental challenges. It will open a
spectral window that has broad utility in the fields of spintronics and
semiconductor nanostructures. Students will use the spectrometer for summer
projects, undergraduate senior projects, and graduate theses. The proposed
project will provide an excellent opportunity for student training on an
instrument that is used widely in many scientific fields.&lt;br/&gt;