* 0415030
* New Models for Statistical Machine Translation
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Michael Collins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2008
* USD 324,924.00

Statistical approaches to machine translation (MT) have been the subject of a
great deal of recent research in natural language processing. A seminal piece of
work in the field is that of researchers at IBM in the early 1990s; many of the
original concepts within statistical MT were introduced within this paper, and
much of the more recent work in statistical MT has built upon these ideas.

This project involves research that investigates alternative approaches to the
IBM models. In particular, we are investigating the use of global feature-vector
representations of translations, along with discriminative training methods. A
first aim of the project is to develop a new framework for statistical machine
translation. A second aim is to use the approach as a testbed for new features
in machine translation systems. Our goal is to use the new approach to make a
systematic study of issues such as word-sense disambiguation and the use of
syntactic knowledge in statistical MT systems.

Improvements in the quality of machine translation systems could have a major
impact on society. Recently, users of the world wide web or digital libraries
(English speaking or otherwise) face a huge amount of text written in foreign
languages. Human translation of any significant proportion of this text is not
feasible. Machine translation systems could make a major impact on our ability
to access natural language information in electronic form. In addition, this
research will facilitate research on a wide range of features in MT systems, by
a wide range of researchers.