* 0415356
* Studies on RNA Cleavage: Catalyst Design and Mechanism
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Janet Morrow, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 06/30/2010
* USD 729,500.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports Professor Janet R. Morrow at the State University of New York at
Buffalo to investigate the mechanism of action of a series of mono and dinuclear
catalysts of RNA cleavage, which will guide the design of optimal catalysts. The
project includes: (1) Characterization of a transition-state analog for
phosphodiester cleavage catalyzed by a dinuclear Zn(II) complex to test the
hypothesis that the large catalytic effect for these catalyzed reactions results
from selectivity in binding of the dianionic reaction transition state at a
densely charged cationic catalytic core. (2) Determination of the solvent
deuterium isotope effect over a broad range of pH for cleavage of a dinucleoside
substrate catalyzed by the dinuclear Zn(II) complex, which will show whether the
catalyzed reaction proceeds through a formal proton transfer from an acidic site
at the catalyst to the leaving group. (3) The synthesis of new catalysts that
incorporate the following design elements. (a) Specificity for binding of
nucleosides involving new dinuclear catalysts in which one Zn(II) macrocycle
provides binding specificity for a uridine-nucleoside and a second Zn(II)- or
Ln(III)- macrocycle acts as the active catalyst of phosphodiester cleavage. (b)
Maximization of charge density at a catalytic core of a dinuclear catalyst using
a dinuclear Zn(II) complex utilizing a linker alkoxide group that acts to draw
the Zn(II) cations together at a catalytic core.

The projects on catalysis by lanthanide ions will utilize the new laser facility
for lanthanide (Ln) luminescence research at the University of Buffalo (UB),
which was established with support from the NSF-MRI program and is expected to
foster synergistic interactions and the exchange of ideas. The laser system will
also have a positive impact on the training of undergraduate and graduate
students at UB, outside graduate universities and at four-year colleges.
Experiments that focus on Eu(III) luminescence will be developed and added to
the undergraduate curriculum at UB. Interactions are planned with educators at
Hunter College, the University of Iowa and Skidmore College that will involve
underrepresented minority students from these universities and colleges in
projects that utilize this laser.