* 0415896
* IMR: Acquisition of Tunable Ultrafast Light Source for Materials Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Jie Shan, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 10/31/2006
* USD 105,811.00

The award from the Instrumentation for Material Research programs (IMR) will be
used to acquire instrumentation for a tunable ultrafast light source. The
equipment, combined with an existing fixed-wavelength amplified femtosecond
laser system, will provide wavelength-tunable (0.3-10 um) pulses of
100-femtosecond duration and powers approaching 1 GW. When combined with
currently available capabilities for terahertz time-domain spectroscopy, the
apparatus will provide ultrafast light pulses tunable over a spectral range from
the near UV to the far infrared. This coherent light source will permit a
variety of experimental approaches to probing materials using time-resolved and
nonlinear spectroscopic techniques. Initial research will focus on the
application of these experimental capabilities to the following three broad
themes: (i) charge transport in insulators: electron-phonon coupling and
polarons; (ii) charge transport in nanostructures; and (iii) vibrational
spectroscopy of nanostructure interfaces. The scientific results will be of
significance not only in their immediate disciplines of condensed-matter and
materials physics, but also have the potential to influence several important
technologies. The equipment will dramatically enhance capabilities for research,
education, and collaboration at Case Western Reserve University. It will also
impact undergraduate and high-school students in the Cleveland and Northeast
Ohio area through ongoing outreach and education programs.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant will fund the acquisition of a light source
for measuring how novel materials respond to rapid light pulses. The equipment
will provide variable wavelength pulses of very short duration and extremely
high power. When combined with currently available capabilities the apparatus
will provide ultrafast light pulses from the near ultra-violet to the far
infrared. This will permit a variety of experimental approaches to probing
materials such as insulator and semiconductor nanostructures. The scientific
results will be of significance not only in their immediate disciplines of
condensed-matter and materials physics, but also have the potential to influence
several important technologies. The equipment will dramatically enhance
capabilities for research, education, and collaboration at Case Western Reserve
University. These capabilities will also impact undergraduate and high-school
students in the Cleveland and Northeast Ohio area through ongoing outreach and
education programs.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;