* 0415441
* An Integrated, Multidisciplinary Investigation of Early Horse Pastoralism in Northern Kazakhstan
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Sandra Olsen, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2008
* USD 173,089.00

&lt;br/&gt;Horse domestication changed societies in myriad ways, affecting
geopolitics as much as any other event in prehistory. Countless empires rose and
fell depending on their equestrian acumen and cavalry size. Horses aided in
transporting goods and people and greatly accelerated the spread of technology
and languages. In the beginning, however, horses were most important for their
contribution to human diet, both as meat products and for transporting hunters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although early horse domestication has undergone extensive
research, few sites have provided sufficient information about how it happened.
Traditional methods for identifying incipient livestock domestication are
problematic for horses. Size and morphological changes are too variable in early
horse populations and slaughter age patterns are equally complex. Incomplete
data on the mid-Holocene geographic distribution of Equus ferus, the domestic
horse's most likely ancestor, compounds the problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
large Copper Age Botai settlements of northern Kazakhstan hold the greatest
promise for understanding this pivotal accomplishment in human history, because
of their location, age, and massive collections of horse remains. After years of
investigation there, this international team is now poised to consummate its
work with definitive evidence for nascent horse domestication and an
understanding of the lifeways of early horse herders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sandra Olsen will investigate the animal bones from two
settlements, over 90% of which are from horses. Olsen will explore evidence for
hunting, the use of packhorses, butchery, fat extraction, milk production, and
ritual sacrifice. Mechanical tests shattering frozen horse bones will determine
whether certain fracture patterns indicate winter occupation. Richard Evershed
will analyze pottery residues to look for milk fat lipids. Finding mare's milk
would provide strong evidence for domestication, since wild horses would not
have been milked. Koumiss, or fermented mare's milk, would be an extremely
beneficial source of vitamins. &lt;br/&gt;Analysis of the stone tool assemblages
by Bruce Bradley will be accompanied by exploration for prehistoric quarries.
The study will investigate behavior modification once packhorses became
available to transport heavy stone from distant quarries to the settlements.
Remote sensing, performed by David Maki, will locate possible horse corrals to
be tested for the presence of horse manure. The techniques to be employed
include soil micromorphological analysis by Charles French, pollen analysis by
Robert Scaife, and soil chemical analysis by Richard Evershed to detect sterols
and bile acids typically found in horse feces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will have broad impact on Eurasian archaeology in clarifying the myriad
roles of horses in prehistoric societies. A detailed understanding of early
horse domestication will illuminate the rise of Eurasian pastoralists and their
impact on neighboring sedentary communities. The team of scientists will attack
this elusive subject using a combination of fresh approaches, uniting local
Kazakh archaeologists' knowledge with innovative Western methods in a
synergistic manner. This endeavor in such an archaeological frontier will
provide a unique opportunity for international scientific exchange through
professional collaboration and training of young Kazakh and American scientists.
The research results will be disseminated through a variety of popular media,
including radio, television, newspapers, museum exhibits, and the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;