* 0415168
* Collaborative Research: Novel Approaches to Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Jill Drury, Mitre Corporation Virginia
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2008
* USD 135,929.00

Robot developers focus mostly on programming behaviors, particularly in regards
to the robot's navigation and sensor systems. All too often, the human-robot
interaction (HRI) design is an afterthought, if any thought is given to it at
all. Lessons learned from decades of research in human-computer interaction
(HCI) are rarely applied to robotic systems. In this project, the PIs will
attempt to bridge this gap by studying existing human-robot interfaces and
developing novel interfaces using HCI techniques modified for robot
applications. To these ends, the PIs will first evaluate the current state of
HRI for urban search and rescue, by studying the AAAI Rescue Competition and
through formal testing with domain experts. Particular emphasis will be placed
in this study on: discovering best practices for providing situation awareness
in HRI where the operator is physically separated from the robot; discovering
the best methods for HRI when switching autonomy levels in a robot system,
either when the switch is robot-driven or human-driven; and investigating how
HRI is affected when a robot can change its shape. The PIs will abstract from
their study guidelines for designing effective HRI; these in turn will inform
the PIs' design of a system for urban search and rescue, where the design of the
robot's behaviors occurs simultaneously with the design of the robot's
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Evaluation methods for human-
robot interaction in general, and improved HRI for urban search and rescue
applications in particular, will directly benefit society as a whole. Insights
acquired in this project into data presentation and fusion will inform the
design of future human-machine systems that involve decision-making in safety-
critical situations. Similarly, better understanding of the types of awareness
required of the human in a human-robot system will impact the multi-user
computing domain in general. Since robots often carry more than one on-board
sensor (such as video and sonar), information visualization techniques developed
during this project that combine disparate sensor information will be applicable
to systems such as air defense systems or mass transit control rooms.