* 0415343
* Genetic Architecture of Reproductive Isolation Between Pheromone Strains of the European Corn Borer
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Richard Harrison, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 09/30/2009
* USD 499,329.00

The European corn borer moth (ECB) has two pheromone strains, between which gene
exchange is limited by differences in pheromone communication and (at some
localities) by differences in life cycle. Richard Harrison's project focuses on
characterizing the genetic structure of ECB populations and divergence between
strains and will examine DNA sequence variation for multiple regions across the
ECB genome. In the context of a genetic linkage map, differentiated regions of
the genome (regions in which gene flow between strains is low or absent) will be
identified and characterized. The importance of major genes that determine
pheromone communication and life cycle will be evaluated as potential barriers
to gene exchange.

ECB provides an exceptional model system for examining the genetic causes and
consequences of reproductive isolation and how patterns of gene exchange vary
with genome region. Characterizing gene flow in natural populations is essential
for understanding to what extent new variants will spread. The fundamental
observation that the amount of gene flow depends on genomic region has
potentially profound implications, not only for control of ECB populations
(which are major economic pests), but also in other contexts, e.g., with respect
to the issue of hybridization between transgenic plants and their wild relatives
and for conservation of threatened or endangered populations/species.