* 0415938
* Desert Microbial Activity in the Rhizosphere Oasis
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Daniel Gage, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2008
* USD 535,625.00

In desert ecosystems, plant growth and reproduction are limited by water
availability, but also by nitrogen and other soil nutrients. Soil fungi and
bacteria are responsible for recycling nutrients from dead material into forms
that plants can use, but low water availability can limit the ability of soil
microbes to carry out such transformations. Interestingly, the roots of some
deep-rooted desert plants can act as conduits for passive water movement from
moist soil layers into shallow, drier layers where detritus is abundant, in a
process called hydraulic redistribution. Microbial activity may be stimulated
around roots by this movement of water into dry soil. This research project will
include integrated greenhouse and field studies that take advantage of the
ability of Artemisia tridentata (common sagebrush) to redistribute water from
wetter to drier soil layers in Western U.S. landscapes. Using microbiosensors in
greenhouse experiments, and soil, plant, and microbial assays in Utah field
sites, hydraulic redistribution of water by sagebrush roots will be examined for
its ability to promote soil nutrient cycling and nutrient availability. Enhanced
nutrient availability may in turn lead to enhanced photosynthesis, growth, and
reproductive yield of plants actively redistributing water. As a companion to
the research, an exhibit will be developed at the Worcester Ecotarium that
provides several primary messages, including: 1. Soil is alive with beneficial
microbes, and 2. Roots are two-way streets which can both take up and release
water. &lt;br/&gt;