* 0415745
* THz Spectroscopy of Candidate Prebiotic Species: Exploring the Conformational Energy Landscape of Flexible Molecules and the Limits of Interstellar Molecular Complexity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Geoffrey Blake, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 05/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division and the Galactic Astronomy Program of the Division of
Astronomical Sciences, Prof. Geoffrey Blake of the California Institute of
Technology will conduct a research program in Terahertz (THz) spectroscopy of
prebiotic species, including 3C sugars, amino acids, and dipeptides. Specific
target molecules are glyceraldehyde, 1,3-dihydroxy-2-propanone, glycine (gly),
and alanine (ala). Also to be investigated is the structurally related 3C
compound dimethylcarbonate. These investigations form the basis for subsequent
studies of the simplest dipeptides namely gly-gly, gly-ala, ala-gly, and ala-
ala. The results of the laboratory studies will be used to undertake
astronomical searches for these species. The results of quantum chemical
calculations will be used to narrow down the THz search windows and also to
construct accurate models of intramolecular force fields. The sensitivity of the
available THz spectrometers will be improved to enable the observation the
spectral signatures of the most complex species to be studied in the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted with the assistance of
graduate and undergraduate students, including women and members of
underrepresented minorities. In addition to these activities, the group headed
by Prof. Blake is strongly involved in the Caltech SEED and CAPSIK-12
educational programs, and is developing new teaching modules in spectroscopy and
astronomy for a variety of grade levels. &lt;br/&gt;