* 0415501
* FASEB Conference on Mechanisms in Plant Development; August 7-11, 2004; Saxtons, VT
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* John Schiefelbein, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Susan J. Lolle
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Plants grow and develop in ways that are fundamentally different from animals.
An understanding of plant development is therefore important for solving
problems in basic biology (e.g. what developmental strategies have evolved in
life on Earth) as well as applied biology (e.g. how can plant growth be
manipulated to enhance productivity in marginal soils). Currently, only a
rudimentary understanding of the molecular mechanisms that plants use to grow
and develop properly has been achieved. This research conference, entitled
"Mechanisms in Plant Development", is devoted to disseminating and discussing
the recent findings from many of the leading investigators in the field of plant
developmental biology. The emphasis will be on comparing diverse approaches and
experimental systems to uncover the common molecular mechanisms employed by
plants to accomplish their developmental programs. The conference will bring
together researchers engaged in studying a broad range of developmental problems
and using different methodologies. To stimulate interactions, the sessions are
organized by developmental topic, rather than by the experimental organism or
approach employed. The conference is expected to provide the participants with
an up-to-date view of the field, to enhance their research productivity by
generating new directions for future research, and to stimulate collaborations
between investigators with complementary interests. A broader impact of this
conference is that numerous graduate students, postdoctoral scientists, and
junior researchers will have an opportunity to learn about the most recent
findings in this field directly from the principal investigators. In addition,
all of the participants will be able to employ the knowledge they gain at this
conference to provide better training of researchers in their groups and to
improve the content of the courses they
teach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;