* 0415261
* SGER:    Investigation of Domain Engineered Ferroelectrics
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Jiashi Yang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 03/31/2006
* USD 60,000.00

Proposal 0415261&lt;br/&gt;PI - Li, University of Nebraska at
Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary - SGER: Investigation of Domain-Engineered
Ferroelectrics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivations and Objectives: The goal of this
exploratory research plan is to develop a multi-scale modeling framework for
domain engineered ferroelectrics. These are exciting times for ferroelectrics
from both scientific and technological perspectives. On one hand, quantum
mechanical calculations provided us tremendous insight on the fundamental
origins of ferroelectricity; on the other hand, significant progress has been
made to fabricate ferroelectric nanostructures, which are envisioned to possess
novel and superior functional properties. These advances highlight the
importance of multi-scale microstructural phenomena in ferroelectrics, which
ultimately determine their macroscopic functional properties, yet are beyond the
capability of quantum mechanical calculations. As such, we propose a multi-scale
modeling framework, which will not only provide a deep understanding of
ferroelectrics at multiple length scales, but will also enable the design and
optimization of domain engineered ferroelectrics. This is a high-risk
exploratory investigation due to the difficulty in understanding the fundamental
size effects at different length scales. Yet it offers high-payoff if
successful, which could lead to leading to novel ferroelectric materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Research: To accomplish our goal, we
propose three major research themes: (1) Establishing a fundamental
understanding of the nanoscale phenomena in erroelectric, including the effect
of domain walls and domain wall motion. (2) Developing a multi-scale theory for
ferroelectrics that incorporates the nanoscale phenomena to analyze the
complicated microstructural phenomena in ferroelectrics. The equilibrium domain
configuration will be determined first using energy minimization, and the
evolution of domain configuration will then be simulated based on the motion of
domain walls. Homogenization techniques will be adopted to analyze the
structure-property relationships, and a combined top-down and bottom-up approach
will be developed to enable the modeling and simulation of ferroelectrics across
different scales. (3) Analyzing, designing and optimizing the domain engineered
ferroelectrics using the multi-scale modeling framework we propose to establish,
including ferroelectric single crystals and nanocrystalline ferroelectric
ceramics, with the objective to identify the optimal domain structures for
superior functional properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the multi-scale modeling framework we
propose to develop, which will lead to a fundamental scientific understanding on
ferroelectrics at multiple length scales that is currently lacking. The insight
obtained will be used to enable the design and optimization of domain engineered
ferroelectrics for superior functional properties, and as a result, technology
innovation in ferroelectric devices and systems is
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: We also envision the broader
impact of this project due to the expected property enhancement in
ferroelectrics, widely used as sensors and actuators in structure health
monitoring, biomedical devices, and anti-terrorism systems. In addition, through
a series of education activities, we will encourage students into science and
engineering, and train undergraduate and graduate research assistants. As a
result, more students will be attracted into science and engineering to meet the
evolving demand of skilled workforce in U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;