* 0415652
* Surface Chemical Functionalization of Technologically Important Semiconductors:    Silicon, Germanium, and Silicon Carbide
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Yves Chabal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 04/30/2008
* USD 662,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-
0415652&lt;br/&gt;Chabal/Rutgers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, Professor Chabal and his colleagues in
the Laboratory for Surface Modification at Rutgers University are examining the
detailed surface chemistry of silicon, germanium, and silicon carbide. Studies
of oxidation, nitridation, chlorination, attachment of organic functionalities,
and metallization are being carried out. High resolution infrared spectroscopy
coupled with theoretical studies of the structure and electronic properties of
the modified surfaces provides the fundamental understanding of these important
processes. The results of this work are directly applicable to the development
of semiconductor process chemistry, the understanding of new nanomaterials
synthesis methods, and the development of biological sensor devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of the reactions of oxygen, nitrogen,
halogens, and hydrocarbons with semiconductor surfaces is essential to the
development of electronic and optoelectronic device processing methods.
Fundamental structural and kinetic information is needed to obtain this
understanding. Using infrared spectroscopy and electronic structure
calculations, the fundamental mechanisms of these reactions are being examined
on silicon, germanium, and silicon carbide surfaces. Undergraduate and graduate
students are being trained in the fundamental surface science that is crucial to
these technologies. &lt;br/&gt;