* 0415998
* Collaborative Research: Pheromones, Polyandry, and Female Reproductive Success in Cephalopods
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Roger Hanlon, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 12/31/2009
* USD 112,584.00

Chemical signal molecules are important for coordinating reproduction and are
often used in conjunction with other signals. In Loligo squid, which swim in
schools, the sight of the white egg finger masses, laid in the open (the visual
signal), attracts males to the spawning site, and chemical signals from eggs
trigger a behavioral change from schooling to male-male competition. In Sepia
cuttlefish (typically solitary), visual and chemical cues may be used the other
way around. Chemical cues from hidden eggs may attract males to the laying
grounds, while the sight of other males is known to trigger male-male
competition. A laboratory y-maze will be used to test&lt;br/&gt;whether chemical
cues from eggs actually attract male Sepia. The chemicals that are active in
coordinating reproduction in both Loligo and Sepia are found in the eggs, and
probably originate in either the ovary or the oviducal gland. These chemicals
will be isolated and their molecular properties characterized. The behavioral
responses of aggression (Loligo) and arousal or attraction (Sepia) will be used
to confirm that the isolated chemicals are bioactive.&lt;br/&gt; Results will be
of interest to investigators studying chemical&lt;br/&gt;communication and
reproduction, and will result in the training of 6-12&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;