* 0415202
* IMR: Acquisition of a Biased Target Ion Beam Deposition System for Materials Research & Integrated Education Activities
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Gregory Spencer, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 200,000.00

This project will adapt a novel pulse-biased multi-target deposition instrument
for supporting Texas State University's growing advanced materials research and
integrated education activities. The Biased Target Ion Beam Deposition (BTIBD)
instrument will permit the fabrication of a wide variety of artificially-
structured layered films and alloys with precisely-controlled sub-nanolayer
features and adjustable surface/interface characteristics. The instrument
implements a pulsed biased target approach that overcomes many of the
limitations of traditional ion beam and (pulsed) magnetron sputtering
techniques, and is a major evolutionary advancement of Texas State's pioneering
radical atom assist ion beam sputtering tool. Major goals of this project will
be: (1) the demonstration of the combinatorial capabilities of this new tool for
fabricating tailored artificially-engineered nanolayered materials and alloys,
(2) the demonstration that BTIBD is capable of implementation as a simpler
sputtering counterpart to the atomic layer deposition technique, and (3) the
demonstration of the feasibility of the BTIBD approach for industrial
implementation in advanced device manufacturing. This proposed project will
result in a BTIBD multi-target prototype system developed in close collaborative
interaction with 4 Wave, Inc, the pioneers of this biased deposition concept.
The BTIBD system will be used to fabricate complex film materials including
magnetic photonic garnet waveguide materials; ZnO-based and GaN-based wide-
bandgap semiconductor materials; rare-earth/transition metal oxides for MOS and
magnetic tunnel junction applications; polycrystalline and epitaxial
ferromagnetic alloy films for magnetic anisotropy and magnetostriction
investigations; and transition metal-silicides (for ULSI gate stack
applications). These are materials of interest for both fundamental and applied
(device-related) investigations, with potential impact towards applications
including magnetic storage, microelectronics, telecommunications and
microelectromechanical systems.

This project will explore a new thin-film deposition system. The system will be
able to rapidly prototype new thin-film materials with many different
constituent atoms, and provide the means for tuning the atomic profiles at
interfaces in the films, which is very important for controlling material
properties in these systems. The system will be used to produce a variety of
films that are useful in electronic, optical and magnetic applications.
Development of this system is being done in conjunction with a private company
and delivery of this system will provide a prototype deposition which may be
duplicated later at other institutions.