* 0415340
* Overwintering Requirements of the Monarch Butterfly in Mexico: Habitat Selection Versus Habitat Suitability
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Linda Fink, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2008
* USD 361,775.00

Every autumn, up to a billion monarch butterflies across most of eastern North
America migrate south to the mountains of Mexico. By the tens of millions they
cluster in forests on a handful of acres. These high altitude sites have few
flowers on which butterflies can feed, so the butterflies must stay cold to slow
their expenditure of the energy reserves (lipids) they accumulated during their
migration. The sites are subject to severe winter storms, and the forest canopy
serves as a protective blanket and umbrella. In this project, cold tolerance
experiments and lipid analyses will develop a stronger picture of how climate
affects both butterfly survival and the rate at which individuals deplete their
energy reserves. Detailed studies of microclimate within colonies and in nearby
sites not selected by the butterflies will help explain why the butterflies are
so selective in their habitat use. Using aerial reconnaissance and satellite
imagery, exploration will search for additional overwintering areas in forests
identified as having suitable microclimate. Geographic information system (GIS)
analysis will integrate all of these components to determine the current extent
of suitable habitat, and will quantify how suitable habitat has changed over the
past forty years. &lt;br/&gt;Humans are altering the forests where the monarchs
overwinter, through logging, fires and ecotourism. The longterm persistence of
the monarchs' unique migration depends upon the persistence of appropriate
wintering sites. This research has conservation implications, therefore, for
scientists, policymakers and citizens concerned about this extraordinary
wildlife spectacle.&lt;br/&gt;