* 0415187
* IMR: Development of an Amplified Ultrafast Laser System with Time-Resolved Electron Diffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Pascal Bellon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 305,200.00

The PIs will purchase a commercial, ultrafast laser system that will be used
together with an apparatus for time-resolved electron diffraction studies of
fast materials processes. The apparatus for time-resolved electron diffraction
will be developed by the PIs and will be used by the PIs and their collaborators
to advance fundamental understanding of the kinetics of rapid glass formation
and recrystallization, laser processing of supported nanocrystals, structural
transformations in complex oxides, and the evolution of steady-state
nanostructures in laser-driven alloys. Furthermore, the laser system will be
used independently of the electron diffraction apparatus for ultrafast
processing of carbon nanotube suspensions, sample preparation for atom-probe
microscopy, micron-scale modifications of substrates for epitaxial crystal
growth, and experiments on shock induced phase transformations. The new
equipment will open broad new areas of materials research and will be made
available to the wider community of materials researchers, educators, and
students by operation within the Center of Microanalysis of Materials, a multi-
user facility located in the Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory at
the University of Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in laser
science have produced a revolution in the maximum power that can be delivered by
a pulse of light; lasers that produce light pulses of duration less than a
trillionth of second and peak powers measured in billions of watts are now
routine and scientists and engineers are exploring the applications of these
modern ultrafast lasers in a wide variety of fields: for example, dental and eye
surgery, medical imaging, and the manufacturing of electronic and optical
devices. The group of materials scientists, physicists, and chemical engineers
at the University of Illinois will use their grant from the Instrumentation
Program to purchase an ultrafast laser and will integrate the laser system with
a novel tool-based on the scattering of ultrashort pulses of electrons-for
probing laser-induced changes in metals, semiconductors, and ceramics that occur
on time-scales of only a few trillionths of a second. This new equipment will be
made available to a diverse community of materials researchers at the University
of Illinois and throughout the country; and will serve a critical role in
scientific education by providing a state-of-the art laboratory for the training
of young scientists in the rapidly advancing field of ultrafast laser
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;