* 0415383
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Multivariate Controls on Community Assembly and Ecosystem Function
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Evan Weiher, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2009
* USD 330,330.00

Two of the most fundamental questions in ecology still remain poorly understood:
First, although every ecological community is a subset of the local pool of all
available species, what factors determine which species coexist together?
Second, how does the outcome of community assembly (the composition and
biodiversity of the communities) affect the basic functioning of the ecosystem?
These questions remain poorly answered partly because ecosystems are
characterized by many factors that vary simultaneously. Important factors
affecting how communities are assembled include: the chance history of species
arrival, competition for resources, and interactions with beneficial species.
Rather than ignoring some of this variation or simply trying to demonstrate that
one particular factor can affect communities, the investigators are using an
integrative approach to better understand the relative importance of these
factors in affecting prairie plant and soil fungal communities. The
investigators will also address the relative importance of these factors in
determining plant production, nitrogen cycling, and soil carbon storage, all of
which are critical ecosystem processes. This research will also examine key
attributes of the focal plant species, and this will provide for greater
generality when comparing to other regions with different species. With less
than 1% of the original prairie habitat remaining, this project will provide
valuable information for restoration efforts and soil conservation.
Undergraduate and graduate students will also design their own experiments that
will piggy-back on the larger project. This outdoor laboratory will similarly
provide educational opportunities for the local community.