* 0415808
* RUI:  Species Recognition Versus Mate- Quality Recognition in a Unisexual-Bisexual System: Asexuals Looking For Sperm
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Caitlin Gabor, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 07/31/2008
* USD 311,389.00

Lay Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPECIES RECOGNITION VERSUS MATE-QUALITY
RECOGNITION IN A UNISEXUAL-BISEXUAL SYSTEM: ASEXUALS LOOKING FOR
SPERM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Caitlin R. Gabor &amp; Andrea S.
Aspbury&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In unisexual-bisexual species complexes
individuals must discriminate between potential mates of their own species
(conspecifics) and individuals of closely related species (heterospecifics).
Mating individuals can further benefit from recognizing high quality
conspecifics. When heterospecifics resemble high quality conspecific mates there
can be an antagonistic relationship between the two processes. One unisexual,
all female, species is the clonal Amazon molly (Poecilia formosa), who sexually
parasitizes male sailfin mollies (P. latipinna). Amazon mollies rely on sperm
from these males to initiate egg development. However, the male's sperm does not
contribute genes to the females' offspring. Where the two species overlap, male
sailfin mollies may forgo using traits such as large body size as mate-quality
cues, to avoid heterospecific matings, while males from populations where they
do not co-occur may retain preferences for larger body size. This would suggest
that there is a conflict between mate-quality and species recognition. The
research described in this proposal will provide information on the process by
which individuals recognize their own species and either avoid compromises
between mate-quality and species recognition or sacrifice mate-quality at the
expense of mating with a heterospecific. To examine differences in male
discrimination ability between populations, we will examine: (1) male mating
preferences, (2) differential sperm production, and (3) differential sperm
allocation between conspecific and heterospecific females. These results will
ultimately provide information on the process of
speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;