* 0415970
* Expression and Functional Analyses of Tropic Stimulus-Responsive Genes in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Emmanuel Liscum, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2008
* USD 499,999.00

Plants, unlike animals, are unable to run away from adversity (e.g., herbivores
and drought) or toward their next meal (e.g., sunlight and water). Instead
plants have evolved strategies that involve organ-bending in order to respond to
changes in their environment. Dramatic, rapid, and reversible changes in
morphology can result from differential growth -- unequal cellular elongation in
one position of an organ relative to an opposing position. One set of
differential growth responses that are extremely important for the normal
development of plants are the tropic responses, such as phototropism (organ
bending in response to directional light) and gravitropism (organ bending
oriented by gravity). Analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse ear cress) mutants
that affect various aspects of phototropism have defined several components of
the signaling system regulating the response, and have led to the development of
a model for the induction of phototropic bending in response to low intensity
light. First, it has been proposed that light activates the photoreceptor
phototropin 1, which is in a physical complex with a novel plant-specific
protein NPH3; this complex influences the activity and/or localization of
transporters of the plant growth hormone auxin. This proposed change in
transporter activity is believed to lead to the formation of a lateral gradient
of hormone across the stem, with auxin accumulating on the "shaded" side away
from the directional light stimulus. Next it is hypothesized that the increased
level of auxin in the "shaded" side of the stem stimulates the destruction of
MSG2/IAA19, a protein that otherwise complexes with and inhibits NPH4/ARF7,
releasing a repressed state and allowing for NPH4/ARF7-dependent expression of
genes necessary for increased cell elongation on the "shaded" side. This drives
the differential growth response. A number of "tropic stimulus-responsive genes"
have been identified which are likely controlled by NPH4/ARF7. The current
project is aimed at 1) understanding how the expression of these genes is
regulated in a temporal and spatial context in Arabidopsis thaliana where
mutants can be brought to bear, and 2) determining the function of "tropic
stimulus-responsive genes" in the development of phototropism and gravitropism.
Results from these studies will provide fundamental new insights into the
regulation of stimulus-driven changes in cell growth in plants, as well as how
plants integrate signals from multiple sources, both endogenous and exogenous.
The broader impacts of these studies are several-fold. This project will provide
theoretical and practical training for at least one high school student, two
undergraduate students, two PhD students, and one technician. The high school
student, one undergraduate, and the technician are all female, and one of the
graduate students is Hispanic. A conscious effort will be made to recruit into
the remaining undergraduate position a female and/or under-represented minority.
Each of the individuals trained will be in a position to add dramatically to the
scientific work force in the US when they leave the project. Moreover, insights
into the regulation of plant growth resulting from these studies, which will be
published in publicly-accessible and high-profile scientific journals, can be
utilized in crop improvement programs aimed at increasing economic and
ecological aspects of US agriculture.