* 0415457
* Experimental Studies of Friction and Nuclear Motion in Electron Tunneling in Supermolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* David Waldeck, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2007
* USD 461,300.00

Professor David H. Waldeck, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Pittsburgh, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for
his studies of electron transfer in supramolecular systems. The current project
examines an aspect of electron transfer reactions involving both electron
displacement and the displacements of atoms. Professor Waldeck will test the
most common assumption, or hypothesis, that the reaction rate is controlled by
either the electron's movement or the movement of the atoms. The proposed
studies will test this hypothesis and develop our understanding of how electron
transfer reactions evolve between these two limiting cases. This work is in an
exceptionally important area since electron transfer impacts all areas of
chemistry, physics and biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor David H. Waldeck, of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh, will build upon the
success of his on-going NSF-sponsored research into the factors that control the
kinetics of electron transfer-at-a-distance. In particular, the roles of solvent
dynamics, and of intervening groups that are not covalently bonded to the donor
or acceptor centers, are to be examined. These are hot topics in the electron
transfer field at present, and Dr. Waldeck's research has excellent potential to
make a significant contribution to our understanding of the electron transfer
phenomenon, particularly in biological systems. The results of this work will be
communicated through scientific conferences and publications. Student training
is an essential element of this research program with particular emphasis being
placed on attracting students from underrepresented groups. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in modern laser methods, spectroscopy,
and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;