* 0415738
* Collaborative Research:  CMG: Stochastic Representation of Parameter Uncertainty within Model Predictions of Future Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mrinal Sen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2008
* USD 490,059.00

Abstract: 0415738 &amp; 0415251&lt;br/&gt;CMG COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Stochastic
Representation of Parameter Uncertainty Within Model Predictions of Future
Climate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This study will develop new
efficient methods to estimate climate model prediction uncertainties stemming
from the combined influence of multiple, non-linearly related parameters and
explain the large disparity that exists among climate models in their response
to projected increases in atmospheric CO2 concentration. Initial attempts to
quantify parameter uncertainties will use Bayesian Stochastic Inversion based on
Multiple Very Fast Simulated Annealing (Multiple VFSA), a stochastic importance
sampling technique developed and successfully applied to the interpretation of
geophysical data. In parallel, stochastic sampling strategies will be reviewed
from a Monte-Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) perspective to advance this theory's
applicability to problems that are currently limited by the number of samples
that may be feasible to consider either because of computational cost (e.g.
climate models) or the size of data sets (e.g. interpretations of geophysical
data). Specific objectives include 1) estimating a multidimensional probability
&lt;br/&gt;distribution for a set of parameters related to clouds, convection,
and radiation within the latest version of CAM2 (the climate model developed at
NCAR) that are significant sources of climate model prediction uncertainty, 2)
evaluate sampling biases within Multiple VFSA and prototype new efficient and
robust methods of statistical inference from a MCMC perspective, 3) the
calculation of an ensemble of doubled CO2 experiments with a coupled atmosphere-
mixed layer ocean model that is representative of the combined uncertainty in
these parameters, and 4) evaluate the climate processes that explain differences
in model response to changes in CO2 forcing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Quantifying the main sources of climate model uncertainty is the first
step toward reducing differences between different models forced by the same
inputs. There is potentially useful data from both the instrumental record as
well as paleoclimate archives that have not been fully exploited. The proposed
research provides a methodological foundation for using these data sources to
address these objectives. The results from the proposed research will
demonstrate for the first time the feasibility of exploring atmospheric GCM
parameter space in a comprehensive and systematic manner. With current
inexpensive but powerful distributed computing architectures and the ability to
automatically navigate parameter space, parameter choices can be more easily
optimized for model performance. The proposed research activity will also
contribute to the training and support of two graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;