* 0415021
* SPICE: Speech Processing Interactive Creation and Evaluation Toolkit for New Languages
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Alan Black, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

Speech technology potentially allows everyone to participate in today's
information revolution and can bridge the language barrier gap. Unfortunately,
construction of speech processing systems requires significant resources. With
some 4500-6000 languages in the world, traditionally speech processing is
prohibitive to all but the most economically viable languages. In spite of
recent improvements in speech processing, supporting new languages is a skilled
job requiring significant effort from trained individuals. This project
overcomes both limitations by providing innovative methods and tools for a users
to develop speech processing models, collect appropriate data to build these
models, and evaluate the results allowing iterative
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the existing GlobalPhone and
FestVox projects, knowledge and data will be shared between recognition and
synthesis such as phoneme sets, pronunciation dictionaries, acoustic models, and
text resources. User studies are applied to indicate how well speech systems can
be built, how well tools support their efforts, and what must be improved to
create even better systems. This research increases the knowledge of how to
rapidly create speech recognizers and synthesizers in new languages.
Furthermore, archiving the data gathered on the fly from many native cooperative
users will significantly increase the repository of languages and
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating speech recognition and synthesis
technologies into an interactive language creation and evaluation toolkit usable
by unskilled users, speech system generation will be revolutionized. Data and
components for new languages will become available to everybody improving the
mutual understanding and the educational and cultural exchange between the U.S.
and other countries.&lt;br/&gt;