* 0415130
* Electronic Detection of BioMolecules
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

This project focuses on the investigation of conformational dynamics of
biomolecules using nanoscale electronic structures where the sensing element is
a carbon nanotube or a nanotube network. Such sensors are small and fast (the
active area is compatible with individual proteins or DNA) and are extremely
sensitive since all the current flows at the surface of the nanotube conducting
channel, and thus passes through the detection point. The objective of the
research is to use these nanoscale electronic devices as bio-sensors and also
explore their potential in real-time detection of conformational changes of
biomolecules in a buffer environment. Three areas will be explored. First,
duplex formation as well as the melting of the DNA duplex will be examined using
oligomers of different lengths and sequences. Second, interactions between
proteins will be studied using the biotin-streptavidin, ligand-receptor model
system. The feasibility of detecting conformational changes will be explored
using bacteriorhodopsin as a model system. Third, direct detection of protein
binding to nanotubes, and the subsequent conformational changes, will be
monitored in real time using devices where individual nanotubes span the source
and drain of the electronic device. Experiments on electronic detection will be
conducted hand-in-hand with spectroscopic measurements and with direct imaging
of the devices. In the broader sense, electronic detection schemes may offer
alternatives of optical detection in diverse areas of biotechnology, including
gene chips and protein chips, and also medical diagnostics. The electronic
detection schemes to be explored may complement other single molecule detection
techniques, including optical methods, ESR and NMR techniques.

