* 0415184
* Cloud Parameterization Frameworks
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* David Randall, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,318,277.00

The PI will continue his development of parameterizations of convective cloud
systems and the planetary boundary layer (PBL). His new PBL parameterization
will include a mechanistic representation of the vertical transport of
horizontal momentum by roll circulations. The model predicts the width and
orientation of the rolls, and the perturbation wind field is diagnosed. This
information is used to compute the perturbation pressure field from the
anelastic pressure equation, and this in turn is used to compute the pressure
correlations needed to predict the vertical velocity variance and other
statistics. The parameterization will be tested using large-eddy simulation
(LES) results. The PBL parameterization will be altered to use an explicit PBL
depth, with about 10 or fewer layers inside. The PI's intention is to test this
parameterization in the Colorado State University general circulation model and
eventually in the Community Climate System Model. In order to predict the depth,
he must parameterize the entrainment rate. He will develop an entrainment
parameterization that is designed for use with a vertically resolved PBL and
predicted statistics such as the skewness of the vertical velocity field. This
fresh look at the entrainment problem, from a different perspective, may lead to
an improvement in the understanding of the basic physics. Some emphasis will be
placed on the role of evaporative cooling in enhancing the entrainment rate and
reducing the fractional cloudiness. The top-hat probability density function
(PDF) used in his earlier work will be replaced by a more realistic and flexible
"spatial distribution function." Finally, the new parameterization will include
a representation of precipitation processes. The parameterization of deep
convection will be altered to abandon the Arakawa-Schubert approach based on an
entraining plume cloud model with a spectrum of cloud types. In its place the PI
will put a single convective updraft at each level, but with a resolved internal
structure. This will improve the scaling of the parameterization as the vertical
resolution of the model is increased. Convective downdrafts and stratiform
clouds will also be included in this framework. The PI's revised
parameterization of deep convection and the attendant stratiform clouds will
make use of a new cloud model for parameterization. In the Arakawa-Schubert
parameterization there are many cloud types, each with a crudely idealized
internal structure. The PI will replace this by a single "cloud type" with a
more realistic internal structure, including joint variations (at a given level)
of the vertical velocity and the thermodynamic variables. Convective downdrafts
will be represented through a second PDF. The PDF of the cloud model can include
both convective and stratiform clouds in a unified framework. In fact, the PDF
can even include such things as spatial variability of the water vapor mixing
ratio in clear air. It has been suggested that humid mesoscale regions
(surrounded by much drier air) can provide nurturing environments for the growth
of deep cumuli, and that in the absence of such mesoscale humid regions deep
convection is suppressed. By parameterizing the mesoscale variability of water
vapor in clear air, the PI can explore this idea in the context of a large-scale
model. His work will be guided by the results obtained with high-resolution
cloud models. To complete the parameterization, his new cloud model will be
combined with a prognostic closure. He will predict multiple moments of the
vertical velocity as functions of height, as well as multiple moments of the
thermodynamic variables. This research will represent a step towards unification
of the parameterizations of the PBL and deep convection.

Broader Impacts: The research will pave the way for improved weather forecasts
and improved simulations of climate change. Deficiencies in cloud
parameterizations are widely acknowledged to be among the most serious obstacles
standing in the way of more reliable simulations of climate change. The research
will also contribute to the training of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers for careers in atmospheric science.