* 0415713
* The Stator Subunits of the ATP Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2010
* Pia Vogel, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2010
* USD 880,753.00

&lt;br/&gt;The FoF1-ATP synthase catalyzes the synthesis of the universal energy
carrier, ATP, by using the energy of a proton gradient across energy coupling
membranes. Nature's elegant design to solve the problem of energy transduction
has intrigued researchers over the last decades. The finding that rotation of
some of the subunits of FoF1 are part of the catalytic mechanism has brought the
attention of investigators also to the structure and function of those subunits
that most likely do not participate in rotation, especially the stator subunits
beta. Special focus has been placed on the structure of the beta-dimer because
it may be a means to store and deliver elastic energy during rotational
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three main goals to this project: (1)
The dimer interactions and helical packing of the subunit beta dimer will be
studied in a truncated, water soluble version of beta to determine the
quaternary structure of this second stalk of the ATP-synthase. Site-specific
spin labeling and ESR-spectroscopy will be used to determine inter-spin and
inter-helix distances. This will allow the construction of a model for the
structure of the beta - dimer. (2) The use of beta subunits that contain double
mutations within one beta monomer will shed light on potential tertiary
structures of beta and will solve the question concerning the overall length of
the beta subunit compared to the F1-structure. To reach this goal, spin-labels
will be introduced at defined positions along a single beta -chain. The
distances of the spins as determined by dipolar spin interactions will provide
information about the tertiary structure of beta. (3) It is hypothesized that
the structure of the beta - dimer may change upon interaction with F1 or in the
complete FoF1-complex due to changed protein interaction surfaces. Introduction
of the mutants from project 1 into a cys-less FoF1-background will allow studies
of potential differences in the tertiary and quaternary structure of the beta -
dimer in the complete, detergent-solubilized FoF1-complex. The data in all
projects will be refined using high-field ESR
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed investigations are organized to
involve undergraduate and graduate students. Small projects will be made
available also to interested high school students. Both teaching and learning
experiences will be important for the development of a new generation of
scientists. The students joining this laboratory will therefore be able to get
first hand experience with state of the art techniques in biophysics. A
molecular modeling course using the available Silicon Graphics hardware and
modeling software will be developed for students at the graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;