* 0415453
* Molecular Genetic Studies of Neurogenesis in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Barry Yedvobnick, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2008
* USD 358,771.00

The Notch pathway is one of a small group of signaling systems which underlie
metazoan development. Originally described in Drosophila for its role in nervous
system formation, the pathway has attracted much wider interest due to its
fundamental roles in a range of developmental and disease-related processes.
Despite intensive analysis, Notch signaling is not well understood, and it
appears that additional pathway components need to be identified and
characterized. This proposal is designed to address this issue through the
characterization of newly-isolated loci that may be implicated in Notch
signaling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After ligand activation of the Notch receptor,
an intracellular segment (N IC ) translocates to the nucleus. N IC associates
with the Suppressor of Hairless [Su(H)] and Mastermind (Mam) proteins during
target gene activation. Mam contains an N-terminal basic domain that interacts
with N IC and more carboxy terminal acidic regions that likely function in
transcriptional activation. Truncated versions of Mam that lose these carboxy
regions, but retain the basic domain, elicit dominant negative phenotypes when
they are overexpressed under GAL4-UAS regulation in the wing, eye, notum and
embryo. These phenotypes derive from a depression of Notch pathway function that
is associated with diminished activation of target loci. Loss or gain of
function for Notch pathway genes can enhance or suppress truncation-associated
phenotypes (respectively), suggesting that truncation expression sensitizes the
system. Such conditions are appropriate for genetic modifier screens, and two
different screens have been performed using the Mam truncations: Enhancer-
Promoter (EP) overexpression, and EMS mutagenesis. Both screens rovided a number
of modifier loci that need to be further characterized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three major objectives are proposed here: 1. The initial
overexpression screen was limited to a few thousand inserts, therefore EP -based
screening will continue. 2. Several loci identified as modifiers in the EP
screen are promising candidates for Notch pathway loci, and more detailed
studies of these loci will be initiated. 3. In collaboration with the Artavanis
lab, ~ 66 modifier complementation groups (enhancers and suppressors) were found
in the EMS screen. Various strategies will be used to sort out the most
promising complementation groups, and a small number will be selected for
subsequent SNP mapping and molecular cloning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The Notch pathway is a critical component of metazoan development, and
Mam plays an essential role in the function of this pathway. A more complete
characterization of loci described in this proposal will ultimately provide
significant information on signal ransduction mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project typically involves a number
of students who learn a range of molecular genetic methods and principles during
their training. The lab has integrated a very diverse group of students and
technicians, including women, African Americans, and Asians. Five undergraduate
research students are coauthors on papers from our progress in the last funding
period: this includes two women and two Asians.&lt;br/&gt;