* 0415310
* Computer Vision-Based Terrain Sensors for Blind Wheelchair Users
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* James Coughlan, Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2008
* USD 682,156.00

Approximately one in ten blind persons are confined to wheelchairs, and
independent travel is currently next to impossible for this population.
Conventional blind wayfinding techniques - cane or guide dog - become extremely
difficult or impractical in a wheelchair, requiring great physical dexterity and
coordination. The traveler's loss of direct contact with the ground also removes
vital feedback. It is easy to miss hazards such as obstacles and drop-offs ahead
of or alongside the chair. While some technologies have been developed to aid in
wheelchair navigation, they are either restricted to controlled environments or
detect only a limited range of obstacles very close to the chair. As a result,
independent travel is so difficult that few attempt it, resulting in a
widespread lack of awareness of this severely disadvantaged population. The PI's
long-term goal is to make independent travel feasible for blind wheelchair
users. In this project, he will tackle the problem of sensing terrain features
that are relevant to wayfinding in a wheelchair using computer vision
technology. Computer vision algorithms for interpreting visual scenes will be
developed to infer important visual information, in real time, about nearby
terrain, obtained from images collected by cameras mounted to the wheelchair.
This information will include the detection of hazards such as obstacles and
drop-offs ahead of or alongside the chair, as well as detecting veer, finding
curb cuts, finding a clear path, and maintaining a straight course. It will be
communicated to the traveler using synthesized speech, audible tones and/or
tactile feedback, and is meant to augment rather than replace the information
from existing wayfinding skills. The traveler will use this information to
control the wheelchair himself/herself (rather than relying on robotic control
of the chair). The outcome will be a prototype system that helps prevent veering
off the sidewalk by performing the following functions: detect and locate drop-
offs and other obstacles; detect and locate curbs and curb cuts; and detect and
locate the shoreline (i.e., edge of the sidewalk bordering grass or other
terrain, or adjoining a wall), as well as
sideslopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Beyond the tremendous benefits
that the technology resulting from this research may impart to the population of
blind wheelchair users, the research will also advance the understanding of
computer vision algorithms applied to terrain analysis and interpretation. The
unique research environment at Smith-Kettlewell will draw upon the expertise of
in-house blind engineers (one of whom is a post-doctoral fellow), who will
assist in the design and assessment of the proposed system. In addition, the
study will provide an opportunity for minorities and blind persons to gain
exposure to science while participating in the gathering of data as research
subjects. Finally, the results of the research will be disseminated in several
public forums, including demonstrations of the system at local high schools and
at the Exploratorium Science Museum of San Francisco.