* 0415228
* IMR:  Acquisition of an Amplified Ultrafast Laser System for Terahertz Spectroscopic Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Ajay Nahata, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 177,800.00

The award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program (IMR) will be
used to acquire an amplified femtosecond laser system. The availability of such
pulsed visible radiation will open up exceptional opportunities for the
utilization of intense pulsed electromagnetic radiation, both optical and far-
infrared. This latter spectral region is of great scientific and technological
significance, but high-intensity coherent radiation for spectroscopic
measurements has typically only been available from sources such as synchrotrons
or free-electron lasers. The production of high-intensity radiation in the far-
to mid-infrared will be accomplished via optical rectification of the visible
laser pulses. This method will produce single-cycle electromagnetic pulses with
spectral content extending beyond 30 THz. In addition to allowing research on
the physics and fundamental limitations of these nonlinear optical frequency
conversion processes, the requested equipment will permit important new
spectroscopic techniques to be developed. The primary areas of application
planned for these enhanced capabilities are to the study of both dynamic and
nonlinear processes in a variety of materials, including both electronic and
biological. In addition to the impact that the laser system will have on the
PI's research effort, the unique capabilities of a high-intensity broadband
terahertz spectroscopic system will enhance and expand collaborative
opportunities with members of the Physics, Chemistry, Materials Science and
Engineering, Biology, and Electrical and Computer Engineering Departments. The
broader impact of these interactions is related primarily to the research
training of students from many different disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award from the Instrumentation for
Materials Research program (IMR) supports the acquisistion of an amplified
femtosecond laser system. The availability of such pulsed visible radiation will
open up exceptional opportunities for the utilization of intense pulsed
electromagnetic radiation, both optical and far-infrared. This latter spectral
region is of great scientific and technological significance, but high-intensity
coherent radiation for spectroscopic measurements has typically only been
available from sources such as synchrotrons or free-electron lasers. The
production of high-intensity radiation in the far- to mid-infrared will be
accomplished via optical rectification of the visible laser pulses. This method
will produce single-cycle electromagnetic pulses with spectral content extending
beyond 30 THz (i.e., &gt; 1000 cm-1). The primary goal of the research effort
will be in developing new and unique spectroscopic applications that allow for
the measurement of materials properties that were previously difficult or
impossible. Linear time-domain terahertz spectroscopy is a technique that has
been well developed over the last decade to measure the linear, static
dielectric properties of a medium. However, there is a relative paucity of data
involving the application of time-resolved terahertz spectroscopic measurements
or nonlinear THz spectroscopy. In the former technique, one can probe electronic
charge transport in a wide variety of materials, such as liquids, insulators,
and quantum dots. The technique is all-optical, no electrical contacts are
required, and the approach can be applied to materials exhibiting low intrinsic
conductivity or short recombination lifetimes. These capabilities are expected
to yield valuable information that includes the properties of the nonlinear
susceptibility in the far-infrared. When applied to liquids, the approach will
yield valuable information about the timescale for orientation relaxation. In
addition to the impact that the laser system will have on the PI's research
effort, the unique capabilities of a high-intensity broadband terahertz
spectroscopic system will enhance and expand collaborative opportunities with
members of the Physics, Chemistry, Materials Science and Engineering, Biology,
and Electrical and Computer Engineering Departments. The broader impact of these
interactions is related primarily to the research training of students from many
different disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;