* 0415653
* Evolution of Photoperiodic Time Measurement in the Pitcher-Plant Mosquito, Wyeomyia smithii
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2005
* William Bradshaw, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 46,124.00

At temperate latitudes, no life cycle is complete without the ability to exploit
the favorable season, to avoid (migration) or mitigate (dormancy) the
unfavorable season, and to make a timely transition between the two lifestyles.
Many temperate arthropods, birds, fish, and mammals use the length of day as a
seasonal clock to anticipate seasonal change and physiologically prepare in
advance for that change. The genetically-determined "setting" of this clock
varies with climate over the geographic ranges of animals, but it is not clear
to what degree the clock mediating seasonal events is genetically independent of
the (circadian) clock mediating daily events in the lives of animals. Towards
understanding the genetic connection between the seasonal and daily clocks,
replicate lines selected for divergent expression of the seasonal clock have
been developed in the pitcher-plant mosquito, Wyeomyia smithii through prior NSF
support. They are unique: No other such lines exist for any animal. Maintenance
of the selected lines is essential for their future use in this and other labs
for determining the physiological processes responsible for seasonal adaptation.
Understanding these processes is important because, ultimately, they affect how
animals are able to disperse over broad geographical ranges where they encounter
novel seasonal environments, and to persist when confronted with rapid climate
change, including global warming. This award will be used to support the
maintenance of the selected lines, an important biological resource.