* 0415699
* The Role of the  GLH Proteins in C. elegans P Granules
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Karen Bennett, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2008
* USD 365,800.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is truly amazing that you and I were
once each a fertilized egg no bigger than the period at the end of this
sentence. Much of the basic knowledge of how humans develop has come from
research using simple organisms that allow molecular and genetic analyses. The
Bennett laboratory is interested in those genes critical to the establishment
and maintenance of the germline. In most organisms germline precursor stem cells
are set aside during embryogenesis; these precursors will proliferate later in
development and some of the daughters will undergo meiosis to produce male and
female gametes. In the free-living soil nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans, the
germline is established very early in development. By the fourth cell division a
single cell, P4, has become the germline founder cell. During these first
divisions and throughout the life of the worm, non-membrane-bound cytoplasmic
complexes called P granules are specifically present in the germline lineage.
Similar germ granules are found in all higher eucaryotes that have a dedicated
germline. This laboratory was one of the first to identify P granule components,
reporting that the GLH proteins, germline RNA helicases, localize to P granules.
The GLHs are critical to the development of the germline lineage. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this work is to determine the biochemical
function of the GLH proteins. With previous NSF funding, mutant strains for each
of the four glh genes have been generated. While neither glh-2 nor glh-3 seems
to have a role in germline development under laboratory conditions, the combined
loss of glh-1 and glh-4 by RNAi (RNA interference) causes a dramatic block in
oogenesis at meiosis and results in complete sterility. With renewed funding the
genetic analysis of each glh mutant and the construction of a glh-1;glh-4 double
mutant strain will be carried out, Specific Aim 1. Upstream regulators of the
GLH proteins are the focus of Specific Aim 2. A yeast two-hybrid screen
previously identified proteins that interact with the GLHs including: KGB-1, a
novel serine/threonine kinase; CSN-5, a CSN signalosome component; and PAN-1, a
novel protein containing F-box signatures. In other organisms proteins similar
to each of these GLH interactors are implicated in protein degradation pathways;
therefore, it was predicted these partners regulate GLH protein levels. Recently
the sterile kgb-1(um3) allele, which is likely a null, has been used to detect a
genetic interaction between GLH-1 and KGB-1. When KGB-1 is missing, GLH-1 levels
are inappropriately high. Suppression of kgb-1 sterility by csn-5 RNAi has also
been observed, indicating these two GLH partners interact with each other. These
and several other findings led to the hypothesis that KGB-1 targets GLH proteins
for degradation and that the CSN complex normally protects GLH protein
stability. In Specific Aim 2 a model of how GLH protein stability is regulated
will be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this application
is based upon using the model organism Caenorhabditis elegans for lineage
determination studies, arguably the most appropriate model to address this area
of inquiry. Germline RNA helicases are the most conserved components of
vertebrate and invertebrate germ granules, adding to the likely importance of
the GLH proteins in evolution. Since most other C. elegans P granule components
are novel, the GLH germline helicases should provide a key link from P granules
in worms to the germ granules of flies, frogs and humans. The broad impacts of
this project are two-fold. This work in C. elegans relates to the important
topics of reproduction, fertility and the maintenance of the species. Because
nematodes are major contributors to agricultural and world health problems, with
Ascaris being the most common helminthic parasite in the world, this work has
the potential to be translated into benefits for mankind (4). The project will
also provide training to a postdoctoral fellow, graduate and undergraduate
students. With the previous NSF award, three underserved minority undergraduates
worked in the Bennett laboratory. Publications from the last award resulted in
four undergraduate authors. It is anticipated the trainees supported by this
award will have similar success from their research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;