* 0415784
* Free Energies in Biomolecular Systems: Theoretical Development and Application of Computational Approaches
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Benoit Roux, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/2006
* USD 475,703.00

The objective of this project, jointly funded by Molecular Biophysics in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, is to extend current
theoretical and computational approaches used in the modeling of biomolecular
systems and to develop and test protocols that will provide increased accuracy
and reliability in estimating free energies while remaining computationally
tractable. Molecular recognition phenomena involving the association of ligands
to macromolecules with high affinity and specificity play a key role in biology
and is a problem of central importance in computational biophysics. In
principle, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations free energy perturbation (FEP)
methods based on atomic models are arguably the most powerful and promising
approaches to address such questions. Test calculations have shown that MD/FEP
is much more reliable than simpler scoring schemes to compute relative binding
affinities in important biological systems and that it can naturally handle the
influence of dynamic flexibility. However, despite the outstanding developments
in simulation methodologies, carrying out MD/FEP calculations of large
macromolecular assemblies surrounded by explicit solvent molecules often remain
prohibitive. For this reason, it is necessary to seek ways to decrease the
computational cost of MD/FEP calculations while keeping them accurate. Although
the fundamental microscopic interactions giving rise to molecular recognition
are relatively well-understood, designing computational schemes to accurately
calculate binding free energies remains very challenging.

The goal of this research is to advance the fundamental knowledge in the
theoretical and computational methodologies used to estimate free energies in
biological systems. The education and training of highly qualified personnel is
an intrinsic component of this project. The innovative theoretical developments
will be implemented and primarily implemented and tested by graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows. To further broaden the impact of this work, the PI has
developed collaboration with Themis Lazaridis and Marilyn Gunner from the
Chemistry Department at CCNY, to supervise research projects by undergraduate
students from CCNY (a university with a wide diversity of ethnic groups located
in Harlem). The PI's laboratory participates in the Tri-Institutional Weill
Cornell - Rockefeller - Sloan-Kettering Gateways to the Laboratory Program,
which trains underrepresented minority students to become successful MD-PhD
applicants.