* 0415437
* Designing Electrically Anisotropic Materials via Self-Assembly of Liquid Crystalline Components
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Lee Park, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 137,000.00

Professor Lee Park of Williams College Chemistry Department is supported by the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program for her materials
chemistry studies on strategies for preparing electrically anisotropic
materials. Electrically anisotropic materials will be prepared via the careful
design of discrete small molecules that can aggregate by means of non-covalent
interactions to give a one-dimensional structure. Materials to be explored
include a family of donor-acceptor stabilized liquid crystalline compounds, a
Pt2+ based metallomesogenic materials, metal-containing liquid crystal systems,
and alignment strategies for columnar materials using chemically modified
alumina templates. Metallomesogens and the individual component molecules to be
developed may serve as building blocks for supramolecular syntheses. Also, these
materials have potential for NLO applications as novel octupolar materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the development of new
materials through the synthesis of small molecules that aggregate in a specified
manner, via a liquid crystalline phase, to give rise to supramolecular
structures with anisotropic properties. The metallomesogenic materials, metal-
containing liquid crystal systems, studied under this award are attractive
candidates for a wide range of materials science applications, with potential
uses in molecular scale electronics, including sensors, or as nonlinear optical
materials. Undergraduate students will receive multifaceted training in
materials synthesis and characterization.