* 0415283
* SGER: Novel Nitrogenase-like Proteins and the Evolution of the Nitrogen Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2004,11/30/2005
* Robert Blankenship, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 11/30/2005
* USD 95,680.00

This SGER project is concerned with the characterization of a putative new class
of enzymes evolutionarily related to nitrogenase. These proteins have been
discovered using genomic methods in a number of organisms, including several
that are not diazotrophic. The proteins are evolutionarily related to
nitrogenase but almost certainly catalyze other, as yet unknown, chemical
reactions. These proteins may be the direct descendents of the primitive
ancestors of nitrogenase, because of their basal position in the phylogenetic
tree and the single type of subunit in the reductase portion of the complex. In
this project, genes for these nitrogenase-like proteins (NflH and NflD) will be
cloned from Methanococcus jannaschii and will be expressed in E. coli. Using
antibodies obtained from these recombinant proteins, native forms of these same
proteins from M. jannaschii will be purified and characterized. It is possible
that a unique activity will be determined for these proteins, which could imply
a role for a pre-nitrogenase homolog on the early Earth. A further understanding
of the mechanism of nitrogenase might also be realized, if a similar substrate
or activity is found in these homologs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project will enhance our understanding of the origin and evolution of the
nitrogen cycle, which will give important insights into the early evolution of
life and the origin of metabolism. This project will involve training of a
postdoctoral fellow and will contribute to the development of a scientifically
trained workforce.