* 0415847
* IMR: Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art X-Ray Diffraction System for Magneto-Thermo-Mechanical Materials Characterization Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Peter McIntyre, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 252,000.00

This proposal seeks the acquisition of a state-of-the-art X-Ray Diffractometry
(XRD) system that is, on the one hand, unique in its configuration in the U.S.,
and on the other hand, a robust multi-user machine consisting of well-proven
components. The system will enable over 20 faculty and their students from five
institutions to study temperature-dependent structural properties including
crystallographic texture, and in-situ magnetic field and mechanical loading-
induced structural changes of many inorganic materials at temperatures from 10K
to 900 K. The exact configuration of the magneto-thermo-mechanical (MTM)
characterization tools was chosen to effectively&lt;br/&gt;underpin
interdisciplinary research and training needs at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU)
as well as within the region (Angelo State, Lamar, Prairie View A&amp;M
Universities and the University of Texas at Arlington). The unique features of
the proposed instrument are: powder diffractometry with heating/cooling
capability between 10 K and 900 K in an environmental chamber; Eulerian cradle
providing simultaneous phase identification and crystallographic texture
evaluation capability (from 90 K to 900 K); attachment of an existing miniature
in-situ loading stage capable of applying tensile and compressive loads up to
4500 N and of heating and cooling the sample&lt;br/&gt;from 90 K up to 900 K;
and application of magnetic field up to 1 Tesla to track field induced
structural changes with heating cooling capability from 90 K to 900 K. Specific
research activities supported by the proposed XRD system include: 1)
development, characterization and modeling of magnetic shape memory alloys, 2)
molecular nanomagnets, thin films, novel magnetic nanostructures and
nanostructured materials, exchange-coupled nanocomposite magnets, 3) fabrication
and characterization of bulk amorphous metals, 4) Deformation and texture of
rocks and minerals at elevated temperatures and pressures, 5) magnetism in
silicon clathrates:, 6) twinning induced grain boundary engineering in ultrafine
grained materials, 7) texture and structure control in conventional (NiTi), high
temperature (NiTiHf) and iron based shape memory alloys, and 8) texture control
and grain refinement in niobium, Nb3Sn and tantalum for superconducting and
defense application, and in bismuth telluride for thermoelectric
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art X-Ray Diffractometry (XRD) system that is, on the one hand,
unique in its configuration in the U.S., and on the other hand, a robust multi-
user machine consisting of well-proven components. The system will enable over
20 faculty and their students from five institutions to study temperature-
dependent structural properties including crystallographic texture, and in-situ
magnetic field and mechanical loading-induced structural changes of many
inorganic materials at temperatures from 10K to 900 K. Specific research
activities supported by the proposed XRD system include: 1) development,
characterization and modeling of magnetic shape memory alloys, 2) molecular
nanomagnets, thin films, novel magnetic nanostructures and nanostructured
materials, exchange-coupled nanocomposite magnets, 3) fabrication and
characterization of bulk amorphous metals, 4) Deformation and texture of rocks
and minerals at elevated temperatures and pressures, 5) magnetism in silicon
clathrates:, 6) twinning induced grain boundary engineering in ultrafine grained
materials, 7) texture and structure control in conventional (NiTi), high
temperature (NiTiHf) and iron based shape memory alloys, and 8) texture control
and grain refinement in niobium, Nb3Sn and tantalum for superconducting and
defense application, and in bismuth telluride for thermoelectric
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;