* 0415851
* Evolutionary Genetics of Pathogen Recognition Genes and the Spectrum of Bacteria Associated with Wild D. melanogaster
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Brian Lazzaro, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2009
* USD 540,003.00

Although over 200 genes have been identified in immune responses of the fruit
fly, Drosophila melanogaster, little is known about how genetic variation leads
to differences in immune capability. Even less is known about interactions
between genetic variants and pathogens of Drosophila. Brian Lazzaro's project is
at the intersection of those two questions. Drosophila will be collected from
five locations around the globe for at least three consecutive years. The
diversity of bacteria pathogenizing these wild flies will be determined to
discover whether a) there are differences among populations in bacterial
prevalence and b) bacterial composition changes over time. Simultaneously,
genotypes of at least 20 important immune response genes will be obtained from
each wild-caught fly a) to test for differences among fly populations and b) to
assess in the field whether fly genotypes correlate with the absence/presence of
specific bacteria (implying resistance/susceptibility to infection).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immune responses are highly conserved among insects and
the conclusions drawn from Drosophila experiments have direct application in
other systems. This study will contribute to an understanding of the ecology of
insects and bacterial pathogens, currently poorly understood from a genetic
perspective. Observed adaptation of Drosophila to local pathogens may suggest
the potential for evolution of resistance in pests to biological control
mechanisms in agricultural fields.&lt;br/&gt;