* 0415962
* Optimizing the Interdisciplinary Course: Introduction to Electrical Engineering (EE) for Non-EE Majors
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* William Bulleit, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2009
* USD 554,873.00

The intellectual merit of this project is its novel approach to optimize an
essential interdisciplinary course. It will create a prototype curriculum
available to electrical engineering departments that are charged with providing
an introduction to electrical engineering for non-EE majors. The new curriculum
will: (1) be attractive, motivational, and relevant to students; (2) provide the
optimal level of both range and depth of coverage of EE topics in a curriculum
package, and (3) be inexpensive to implement and cost effective for both
universities and students. And, although this is not a primary focus of the
project, the strategies used, the methodology of developing the new curriculum,
and the testing methods may help professionals in other fields who want to
examine the relevancy of their coursework.

The broader impacts of this project include development and dissemination of a
curriculum package and model that should be useful to all engineering education
programs nationally. With an EE background relevant to their particular
disciplines, students will be able to work more cooperatively with engineers
from other disciplines. This project opens the door to change the way
engineering is taught to non-EE engineering majors. The process and the
resulting model can serve as a catalyst that prompts engineering educators to
find the best ways to teach EE concepts to multidiscipline non-EE engineering
students.

The outcome of this project will be the full development and design of a novel
and innovative EE curriculum package that includes a course textbook, the
laboratory coursework, and the course web-based teaching modules for most non-EE
engineering fields. Both fundamental engineering knowledge and topics on
emerging technologies will be incorporated into the curriculum.

