* 0415608
* Polyamine and Arginine Metabolism in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Chung-Dar Lu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2010
* USD 710,275.00

Polyamines (putrescine, spermidine, and spermine) are the major organic
polycations found in all living organisms. They play an essential but poorly
understood biological role in cell growth, including the biosynthesis of DNA and
RNA and protection from DNA damage. The complexity of polyamine metabolism is
evidenced by its tight link to the metabolic network for arginine, as evidenced
by transcriptome analysis from previously funded projects. The significance of
arginine catabolism in the physiology of Pseudomonas aeruginosa is reflected in
the unusual presence of four catabolic pathways for arginine utilization as the
sole source of carbon, nitrogen, and energy. The goal of this research is to
characterize the metabolic pathways of polyamines and arginine and the
mechanisms controlling the metabolic processes of these compounds. P. aeruginosa
serves as an excellent model organism since it can utilize these compounds very
efficiently as the sole source of carbon and nitrogen. The specific aims of this
project are: (i) to elucidate the fundamental polyamine catabolic pathways and
their regulation; and (ii) to characterize two arginine catabolic pathways and
their linkages to polyamine metabolism. These will be accomplished through the
use of transcriptional profiling analyses, computer-aided data mining, genetics
manipulation, and enzyme purification and characterization. This research will
provide fundamental insights into the operation and regulation of polyamines and
arginine metabolic networks at the biochemical and genetics levels. The
assignments of biochemical and physiological functions to many currently unknown
genes will be applicable to other bacteria. The experimental approaches employed
in this project provide a perfect example for data mining/integration in future
studies in bacterial physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Findings
from this research will provide novel and significant information on polyamines
and arginine metabolism that could be beneficial to several fields of biology
and agriculture. Graduate students as well as undergraduate students, who
participate in this project, will receive cross-disciplinary training in
genetics, biochemistry, and bioinformatics, and thus developing an integrative
view of metabolic biochemistry and regulation in bacteria. The same type of
training has been integrated into a laboratory course for the senior
undergraduate and MS graduate students. Further, these trained graduate students
will have the opportunity to involve in the BioBus project supported by NSF to
Georgia State University for the outreach effort to the K12 education.