* 0415193
* Using Cryptography to Control Access in Published Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 07/31/2009
* USD 290,000.00

Information exchange via XML documents is a rapidly growing technology. However,
to date, complex constraints of trust and confidentiality often prohibit the
dissemination of data. Data that could safely be disseminated to others remains
hidden behind firewalls. This project aims at producing lightweight tools that
allows publication and dissemination of data while at the same time controlling
how data is accessed. New data management techniques are developed that use
cryptographic primitives in order to enforce access control policies in
published XML documents. In cryptographically enforced access control, the data
owner publishes a single data instance, which is partially encrypted, and which
enforces all access control policies. The project develops a declarative
language for access policies, based on XQuery, and a method for applying these
policies to an XML data instance to produce a single, multiply-encrypted XML
view. This view can then be published by the data owner on the Internet, and
everyone can freely download and disseminate it. The crucial aspect is that only
users having the right keys can access encrypted parts of the XML document.
Different users holding different set of keys will have access to different
parts of the document. The project also develops an XQuery interpreter to enable
authorized users, holding the right keys, to execute queries on the encrypted
view. The interpreter decrypts data on the fly, and only that data required to
answer the query. A novel kind of data model, called protection tree, is
developed which captures how various keys protect different parts of the XML
data. The protection tree is central to the proposed approach: once the security
policies are applied to the XML data instance, they produce a protection tree;
and the data model that forms the input to the user queries is also modeled as a
protection tree. The results of this research will be applicable to providing
secure access to XML documents. The project Web site
(http://www.cs.washington.edu/homes/pjallen/cryptography.html) will be used for
free dissemination of results; specifically, a policy query evaluator (which
produces the encrypted view), a decrypting XQuery interpreter (which is used to
query the encrypted view), and a consistency checker. This project will also
provide educational and research experience in the Cyber Trust area. &lt;br/&gt;