* 0416773
* Thellungiela halophila (Salt Cress), a Halophyte and Cryophyte Arabidopsis Relative as a Genetic Model to Identify Stress Adaptation Determinants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Ray Bressan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2008
* USD 511,000.00

Project Summary

Salinity, freezing and osmotic stresses are major limiting factors for plant
life and agriculture. Naturally-adapted plants are able to grow in environments
that eliminate all crops and most other plant species; hence, these are
potential models for determining critical mechanisms of tolerance. Thellungiella
halophila (salt cress) is an extremophile that can complete its life cycle in
seawater concentrations of NaCl and is capable of tolerating freezing
temperature extremes. Salt cress provides the ideal salt/osmotic and freezing
tolerant genetic model system because it is closely related to the Arabidopsis
thaliana and has other attributes of a genetic model, e.g. small plant size,
high seed yield, short life cycle and a small genome. Simple and efficient
transformation through floral dipping has been achieved. Salt and freezing
tolerance genes will be identified from salt cress through loss-of-function
genetic analyses by generating and screening T-DNA insertion lines. Mutants will
then be screened from the insertion lines and the corresponding tolerance genes
cloned via a TAIL PCR, or a plasmid rescue approach. The broader impact of the
project includes functional demonstration of how a halophyte and cryophyte
genetic model system that is a relative of Arabidopsis can be exploited as a
genetic resource to cope with the yield-reducing effects of osmotic, ionic and
freezing stresses. The molecular genetic resources will be made available to the
entire plant biology community through the ABRC at Ohio State University. There
will be continued emphasis on undergraduate student training through "hands on"
participation in research.