* 0416479
* 2004 High Pressure, Research at Gordon Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Anastasia Chopelas, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

The High Pressure Gordon Conference has been held biannually for 49 years:
it&lt;br/&gt;continues to be vital to new science developments in fields as
diverse as physics, chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;earth/planetary science, materials and
biology. It is one of the few that crosscuts a broad&lt;br/&gt;spectrum of
topics with a unifying theme of condensing matter with pressure.
Spectacular&lt;br/&gt;advances are now being made in high-pressure methods for
creating new materials, and for&lt;br/&gt;studying physical, chemical and
biological processes under high-pressure conditions:
recent&lt;br/&gt;breakthroughs include diffraction of light elements using
neutron scattering at extreme&lt;br/&gt;conditions, direct measurement of
thermal conductivity, acoustic velocities, and even the full&lt;br/&gt;density
of states at extreme conditions, polymerisation of molecules into new solids,
creation&lt;br/&gt;of super-hard materials, increasing superconducting Tc to
record values, formation of&lt;br/&gt;unexpected incommensurate structures in
metals; and advances in fundamental theoretical&lt;br/&gt;descriptions of simple
molecular systems. Emerging areas include high-
pressure&lt;br/&gt;crystallography of hydrogen containing materials, new
techniques for synchrotron/neutron&lt;br/&gt;studies and ongoing development of
inelastic x-ray scattering on small volumes, and&lt;br/&gt;understanding mineral
physics of outer planets and stars. The 2004 GRC will feature
invited&lt;br/&gt;talks in exciting new areas at the forefront of science,
including shock wave techniques of&lt;br/&gt;double shock, laser shock, and
shock-spectroscopy experiments; high pressure melting and&lt;br/&gt;liquid
structure;, super high pressure acoustic velocity measurement on metals and
minerals;&lt;br/&gt;sampling the deep Earth with single crystal x-ray studies at
record pressures; new synchrotron&lt;br/&gt;and neutron experiments; high-
pressure superconductivity, and new metallic behaviour at&lt;br/&gt;high
pressure. For a vibrant and successful conference, it is essential to represent
all sectors&lt;br/&gt;of the field, including graduate students, post-docs and
junior faculty, as well as newcomers&lt;br/&gt;to the high-pressure field.
Diversity is also stressed, including representatives from
many&lt;br/&gt;countries as well as more female scientists than in past
conferences. Financing participation&lt;br/&gt;in such a conference is an
impediment to attendance by many attendees, that can not be&lt;br/&gt;covered by
the existing GRC fund. Here we request supplementary funds to subsidize
travel&lt;br/&gt;and conference fees, to enable participation by students and
junior scientists, as well as&lt;br/&gt;"newcomers" to the high-pressure field,
with great benefits for US and international science.&lt;br/&gt;Funds are being
requested from two different NSF programs in approximately equal
amounts&lt;br/&gt;since these two areas are heavily represented in the
program.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This conference has traditionally
had few women and minorities, often less than 3%.&lt;br/&gt;This conference
there are 3 women speakers, greater than 10% as well as a woman
discussion&lt;br/&gt;leader and woman chair (this conference's first). There are
two Hispanic speakers, but not&lt;br/&gt;American Hispanic. It is expected that
this conference will have a larger than average&lt;br/&gt;number of women
scientists, a very underrepresented group in physics, and physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally Gordon Conferences are platforms where one may
bring in speculative&lt;br/&gt;ideas to generate discussion, hence no
photographs or publishable results. However, it is here&lt;br/&gt;where
inspiration to new directions and collaborations lead to new publications. The
Gordon&lt;br/&gt;Conference on Research at High Pressure is only one of two
conferences where these&lt;br/&gt;scientists meet, the other being the biannual
AIRAPT, held only in odd numbered years.&lt;br/&gt;This conference is extremely
important for students and postdocs to attend (6 of the&lt;br/&gt;speakers are
students or postdoctoral scholars, an even larger number are invited posters) as
it&lt;br/&gt;is an integral part of their education to meet the key people in
the field of high pressure,&lt;br/&gt;discuss their work and putting their own
ideas under the scrutiny of experts, and to be&lt;br/&gt;inspired in new
directions. This is what will help generate effective new scientists.