* 0416708
* Theoretical Studies of Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Barry Honig, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2009
* USD 789,307.00

The objective of this project is to develop and test methods for the homology
modeling of membrane proteins. The homology modeling of soluble proteins and
membrane proteins are areas that have developed quite independently, in part
because of the vast difference in the quantity of structural information that
has been available for both. In the case of soluble proteins the development and
validation of computational tools have benefited from the availability of a
large number of three-dimensional structures. For example, it has been possible
to build models and then test them either in blind prediction as in the CASP
experiment (Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction) or by comparing
"predictions" of known structures to experimental structures in an unbiased
fashion. The increasing number of membrane protein structures that are becoming
available suggests that a similar kind of validation is now possible for this
class of proteins. The central goal of this research is the development of a new
battery of software tools that will allow researchers to build models and to
evaluate them in an unbiased fashion. A key element of the research is the
construction of models for membrane proteins of known structure based on the
coordinates of related proteins. The ability of different energy functions to
distinguish the decoy from the native conformation will be tested. The ability
to predict the correct orientation of the protein with respect to the lipid
bilayer will also be tested. The modeling approach to be taken is based on
methods that have been developed in the PI's lab in studies of soluble proteins.
These include novel tools to predict the conformation of amino acid side chains
on a&lt;br/&gt;fixed backbone, novel loop prediction methods and a new model
building program. A key element of the research is the use of physical chemical-
based energy criteria to evaluate the relative conformational energies of
different models for a given protein. Refined energetic methods suitable for
membrane proteins will be developed as the research progresses and will be
combined with criteria for helix packing derived from the growing database of
membrane protein structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
research includes the development of software tools that are likely to be widely
used in basic research and in a variety of technological applications. The
research will also provide a platform for the training of women and minority
scientists, a tradition in the lab for some time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;