* 0416085
* The Evolution of Placentas in the Poeciliid Fishes:  An Empirical Study of the Evolution of Complexity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* David Reznick, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2010
* USD 844,004.00

David Reznick + Michael Ghedotti DEB-0416085 + 0415633
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Evolution of Placentas in the Poeciliid
Fishes: An Empirical Study of the Evolution of
Complexity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The placenta is a complex organ that is a
composite of many adaptations that must be well integrated for proper function.
David Reznick and Michael Ghedotti will study the evolution of the placenta in
the fish family Poeciliidae. They will develop a "family tree", based on DNA
sequence and morphology, to determine if the placenta evolved independently on
different branches and to define groups of species that do or do not have the
placenta. Experiments on 30 species of those fish that are closely related and
have different forms of maternal provisioning will test the predictions of a
recent theory for the evolution of the placenta. Working together, the
biologists will provide insights to refine the theory, while theoreticians will
provide insights to suggest new lines of experimental
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Origin of Species, Darwin included a
chapter entitled "Difficulties on Theory", considering the most serious
challenges to the theory of evolution by natural selection. One was the origin
of complex organs: it seemed improbable that evolution could integrate many
traits at once. He proposed that complexity could evolve by small steps if each
represented an adaptation. These fish provide an opportunity to test Darwin's
proposition. The research will also offer multidisciplinary training for
students, be relevant to several fields of biology, and present a case study in
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;