* 0416812
* Control of CNS Midline Cell Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Patricia Estes, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 07/31/2008
* USD 382,216.00

PROJECT SUMMARY
___________________________________________________________________________

The overall goal of this work is to elucidate developmental and molecular
mechanisms that lead to the production of a functional central nervous system
(CNS). For many animals the CNS is the most intricate and complex organ in the
body. As the CNS forms, not only must the various types of neurons and glia take
on their identities, but once generated, these cells must send out a large
number of processes and establish very precise connections on a diverse array of
target tissues. For all of these steps to occur normally to produce a
functioning nervous system, the appropriate genes must be regulated in a precise
temporal and spatial fashion within CNS cells. Our research uses Drosophila
melanogaster as a model system, and it focuses on a unique set of cells within
the Drosophila CNS, the midline cells. These cells separate the two symmetrical
halves of the CNS and provide many signals that guide axon growth of developing
neurons. Our objectives and experiments are designed to understand the functions
of genes required for specific midline cells to differentiate into glia and not
neurons. These experiments focus on the role of three genes (single-minded,
Dichaete and Sox Neuro) found in the midline at different stages of development.
Our approach is to examine the role of these three genes during midline glial
formation, using mutational and overexpression analyses. This research will
impact our knowledge of critical developmental events of neurons and glia, which
is necessary to fully understand the prerequisites of their ultimate behavior
and function. For example, a current challenge in medicine is to regenerate
neurons in damaged tissue. Presently, even in cases in which neurons can be
introduced or regenerated, it is difficult to predict their precise behavior.
The identification and understanding of neural and glial specification molecules
in this model system, as well as axonal pathfinding molecules and their
functions, will lead to the ability to control the behavior of neurons. This
research will contribute to our knowledge of basic processes of gene expression,
cell signaling, cell connectivity and signal transduction, and it will
ultimately lead to new ideas and techniques for treating neuronal birth defects
and lesions. This work will provide research and mentoring opportunities to both
traditional and underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students. It will
offer students scientific training in genetics and molecular, cellular, and
developmental biology that will enhance their education and prepare them for
careers in the life sciences. In addition, talented high school students have
been involved in several components of this project, and this training will
continue. The Drosophila CNS is an excellent model for training students in
nervous system development and function, and we exploit our experimental system
in a course in Developmental Genetics for upper level undergraduate students.

