* 0416762
* The role of ELF4 in the Arabidopsis circadian system.
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Thomas Schultz, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 09/30/2007
* USD 438,578.00

Rhythmic processes exhibiting 24 hour periodicity under constant conditions are
observed in organisms spanning all major kingdoms of life. These circadian
rhythms control a diverse array of physiological processes and are responsive to
environmental stimuli such as light and temperature. Understanding the molecular
mechanisms operating during circadian time keeping in diverse organisms is
important for identifying common themes and characterizing unique features. The
goal of this proposal is to determine the role of a unique protein, ELF4, in the
progression of the circadian clock in Arabidopsis. Given the myriad of processes
under clock control, ranging from development to biochemistry, physiology, and
reproduction, developing a mechanistic understanding of how the clock regulates
such a diversity of plant biology will certainly have implications in both
general biology and in agriculture. Research on the circadian clock also
provides a unique opportunity to integrate molecular research with whole plant
physiology. In addition to its Broader Impacts on basic and applied science, the
research will have an important training function and will serve as the vehicle
for training graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Underrepresented
minority involvement will also be sought.