* 0416300
* Collaborative Research: Integration of Geographic Complexity and Dynamics into Geographic Information Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Thomas Cova, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2007
* USD 72,125.00

While the infinite complexity and dynamics of geographic worlds have long been
recognized in the geographic information science (GIScience) literature, current
geographic information systems (GIS) technology has not yet incorporated data
models, query functions, or analytic tools that can adequately handle geographic
complexity and dynamics. This research project aims to integrate these features
into GIS data models, query, and analysis. Such integration will lay a
foundation for the next generations of GIS technology to further empower GIS
support for scientific understanding and discovery of geographic worlds. To
achieve this integration, the investigators will examine geographic complexity
and dynamics. The basic premise is that geographic conceptualizations need to go
beyond separate field- and object-based views of geographic worlds. The
investigators will focus on geographic complexity that arises from the
interwoven properties of fields and objects embedded in phenomena and
relationships at different spatial and temporal scales. They will consider
geographic dynamics that reflect on propagation and evolution in space and time
as analyzed by Lagrangian (focusing on the stationary action of flows) or
Hamiltonian (focusing on the motion of a particle of mass) dynamics. Field- or
object-based conceptualization alone cannot capture complexity and dynamics
critical to an accurate representation of geography. The investigators will
incorporate two additional views of geographic worlds: fields of objects
(o-fields) and objects of fields (f-objects) to incorporate geographic
complexity and dynamics. They therefore expect to extend the dual geographic
conceptualization to a spectrum of objects, f-objects, o-fields, and fields,
with scale and resolution are as functions that allow a shift in perspective
along the spectrum. With the spectrum of geographic conceptualizations, they
will develop a data model that incorporates geographic complexity and dynamics
with uncertainty, formulates queries and analytical functions, and builds a
prototype system for proof of concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative
project brings together researchers from the University of Oklahoma, University
of California-Santa Barbara, and University of Utah to expand on their work on
geospatial data modeling. In separate ventures, they have examined the use of
combined fields and objects on geographic representation and demonstrated that
such combination effectively extends geographic representation to incorporate
much richer, more complex geographic semantics. Central to the research project
is the idea of modeling GIS data based on geographic complexity and dynamics, as
an alternative to the conventional data models that are built upon how data are
captured. The research project promises a broader, more comprehensive inspection
of issues related to the integration of fields and objects and the development
of a holistic theory of the representation of geographic complexity and
dynamics. This new approach to GIS data modeling extends static representation
to a complex and dynamic view of the world and thus enhances GIS technology to
be better suited for scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;