* 0416854
* Trade Protection and the U.S. Steel Industry
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Bruce Blonigen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2009
* USD 275,747.00

The majority of worldwide trade protection efforts are connected with a few
prominent sectors, such as steel, automobiles, agriculture, textiles, apparel
and lumber. Future trade liberalization efforts will have to confront the
various issues that make trade protection in these sectors not only relatively
high, but persistent. There has been relatively little work to examine the
effectiveness of this long history of trade protection in these unique sectors,
much less to seriously examine the industries' own claims for why continual
trade protection is necessary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops
methodologies to examine the effectiveness of various trade protection programs,
as well as the merits of a common claim by industries that trade protection is
necessary to counteract government subsidized excess capacity in world markets.
This research will design and estimate econometric models to formally examine
these claims using data on the steel industry, while simultaneously controlling
for other factors that previous economic literature has proposed as alternative
reasons for the decline of the US steel industry. Work will proceed along three
connected research questions. First, to what extent has the various forms of
trade protection afforded the steel industry affected industry performance?
Second, to what extent has excess capacity in foreign markets led to increased
import penetration and decreased industry performance? Third, to what extent has
subsidization by governments distorted investment decisions in the steel
industry across the major markets? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the research
examines these issues using data on the steel industry, the methodologies
developed to the address these issues in the steel industry have immediate
applications to other sectors that have sought trade relief. The proposed
research will also lead to the construction of a number of detailed databases on
trade protection measures and the world steel industry that will be useful for a
wide variety of other researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;