* 0416861
* Genetic Control of Male Moth Behavior and Olfaction.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Neil Vickers, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 06/30/2008
* USD 340,595.00

In many moth species communication between adult males and females is conducted
in a language of airborne chemical signals (pheromones). Males are not only
exquisitely sensitive to the complex odor mixture released by females of their
own species but must also discriminate amongst similar signals released by other
species. Because precise communication relies upon a close correspondence
between the emitted signal and the sensitivity/specificity of the receiver, it
is unclear how novel chemical signals might evolve. New female pheromone blends
might arise through mutations in the biosynthetic pathway but little is known
about how the male olfactory system evolves in response to such changes. This
project seeks to understand this phenomenon by examining the genetic
underpinnings of male behavioral preferences and olfactory neurobiology. Males
created by interbreeding two closely related species of heliothine moth will be
flown in a wind tunnel to determine their preference for specific odor blends.
By recording from individual neurons on the antenna and in the brains of these
males, behavioral preferences will be related to underlying olfactory
neurobiology. Finally, in collaboration with another group at North Carolina
State University, DNA analysis of individual males will be performed to
determine the genetic basis for these characters, ultimately leading to
identification of the genes involved. The results from these studies will
provide insights into both the evolution of chemical communication and, because
widely divergent animals are thought to process olfactory information in similar
ways, the neural mechanisms employed by the brain to code and discriminate
different smells. In addition, one of the moth species to be used in the
proposed research is a notorious agricultural pest and some findings might lead
to novel strategies for pest control. The integrative nature of the proposed
research will enhance the intellectual horizons of the personnel involved and
will provide excellent opportunities for undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral trainees to be involved in a broad-based, collaborative research
project