* 0416787
* MRI:  Apparatus for High Resolution Real-Time Acoustic Imaging of Rayleigh-Benard Convection in Liquid Mercury
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Kerry Kuehn, Wisconsin Lutheran College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 81,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program provides
partial support to Wisconsin Lutheran College in the development of an
ultrasonic imaging system for investigating Rayleigh-Benard convection in
opaque, low Prandtl number liquids. The MRI program supports the acquisition of
the major equipment the Basic Energy Sciences at the Department of Energy
supports the manpower. Successful operation of the ultrasonic imaging apparatus
has the potential to develop into a much broader research program addressing
problems in pattern formation in alloys, Ferro fluids, opaque gels, and liquid
metals under thermal or magnetic stresses; such problems are of practical
interest to both earth scientists and materials scientists. Aside from advancing
fundamental knowledge and understanding, the project will serve as a vehicle for
teaching scientific reasoning and technical skills to up to five undergraduate
students over the course of four years. Finally, the project will strengthen the
research and teaching infrastructure at a small liberal arts college by
supporting the development of a major piece of scientific apparatus and the
acquisition of auxiliary scientific hardware that can be used in undergraduate
experimental physics courses.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program provides
partial support to Wisconsin Lutheran College in the development of an
ultrasonic imaging system for investigating Rayleigh-Benard convection in
opaque, low Prandtl number liquids. The MRI program supports the acquisition of
the major equipment the Basic Energy Sciences at the Department of Energy
supports the manpower. Successful operation of the ultrasonic imaging apparatus
has the potential to develop into a much broader research program addressing
problems in pattern formation in alloys, Ferro fluids, opaque gels, and liquid
metals under thermal or magnetic stresses; such problems are of practical
interest to both earth scientists and materials scientists. Aside from advancing
fundamental knowledge and understanding, the project will serve as a vehicle for
teaching scientific reasoning and technical skills to up to five undergraduate
students over the course of four years. Finally, the project will strengthen the
research and teaching infrastructure at a small liberal arts college by
supporting the development of a major piece of scientific apparatus and the
acquisition of auxiliary scientific hardware that can be used in undergraduate
experimental physics courses.