* 0416626
* Role of Wnt Signaling in Vertebrate Embryonic Patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Arne Lekven, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2008
* USD 401,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Vertebrate mesodermal patterning in the dorsoventral (D/V)
axis depends on interactions between the dorsal region known as the organizer
and non-axial mesoderm adjacent to it. Wnt8, which signals through the
transcriptional coactivator b-catenin, is required to establish the normal
balance between organizer and non-axial tissue: zebrafish wnt8 mutants have
expanded organizers and reduced non-axial mesoderm. Since interactions between
the organizer and non-axial mesoderm generate a ventral to dorsal gradient of
Bone Morphogenetic Protein (Bmp) activity that determines different D/V fates,
Wnt8 likely impacts Bmp activity and its regulation of mesodermal fates. Whether
regulation of Bmp activity explains the wnt8 mutant phenotype is unclear.
Preliminary studies in zebrafish show that Wnt8 and Bmp coregulate multiple non-
axial mesodermal genes but Wnt8 is also essential for the expression of bmp2b in
the embryonic margin, the site of mesendoderm involution. Further, Wnt8 activity
is required to mediate the effects of overexpressing some Bmp ligands but not
others. Clearly, understanding how Wnt8 impacts, controls and cooperates with
Bmp signaling is essential for understanding how Wnt8 controls mesodermal
development and patterning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives: The first objective
of this project is to determine whether bmp2b is a primary transcriptional
target of Wnt8/b-catenin. bmp2b expression disappears in the embryonic margin of
zebrafish wnt8 mutants. The regulation of bmp2b in the margin could be a direct
effect of Wnt8/b-catenin activity, or it could be secondarily affected by Bmp
regulators that are under Wnt8 control. Which of these possibilities is correct
will be distinguished using a combination of genetic, conditional overexpression
and in vitro approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second objective is to
determine whether Wnt8 induces mesodermal fates independently of Bmp. Current
literature suggests that Wnt8 plays a role in D/V fate determination. The
proposed experiments will test with genetic and conditional overexpression
methods the hypothesis that Wnt8 plays a direct role in only one mesodermal fate
decision: the establishment of non-axial vs. axial mesoderm domains. According
to this hypothesis, mesodermal fate changes in wnt8 mutants during mid-late
gastrulation are due to secondary changes in Bmp activity
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third objective is to determine the reason
different Bmp ligands behave differently in wnt8 mutants. That is, Radar (Rdr)
and XBmp4 are inactive but Bmp2b is active in a wnt8 mutant background. This
represents an unexpected and novel activity of Wnt8. What underlies their
differential relationships? The proposed experiments will test the hypothesis
that Rdr and XBmp4 stimulate a specific Wnt8-dependent Bmp signaling
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed work will elucidate
interactions between Wnt and Bmp signaling that orchestrate vertebrate embryonic
patterning. The importance of this process to all vertebrates is underscored by
the finding that misregulation of Wnt activity in mice, zebrafish and amphibians
can lead to anencephaly and other birth defects and can lead to multiple cancer
types in humans and model organisms. Additionally, this project will provide
valuable undergraduate instructional material complementary to textbook material
currently in use at Texas A&amp;M University to illustrate embryogenesis,
evolution and molecular biology. This project involves research training for two
graduate and up to 8 undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;