* 0416454
* MCAA: Development of Laboratory Skills in Molecular Biology to Examine Patterns of Calcitonin and Calcitonin Receptor Gene Expression in Cartilaginous Fishes.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2005
* James Gelsleichter, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 12/31/2005
* USD 58,388.00

MCAA: Development of laboratory skills in molecular biology to examine patterns
of calcitonin and calcitonin receptor gene expression in cartilaginous fishes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: James
Gelsleichter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hormone calcitonin is best known for its
ability to reduce bone demineralization in mammals and, as a result of this
action, it is regularly administered to patients experiencing osteoporosis,
Paget's disease, or similar skeletal maladies. However, despite its therapeutic
value for skeletal diseases, a growing body of evidence has suggested that the
true physiological function of calcitonin may be to regulate certain aspects of
vertebrate reproduction. Recently, the PI has demonstrated similar evidence of a
role for calcitonin in regulating events during pregnancy in live-bearing sharks
and rays, the oldest living vertebrate group known to possess the
ultimobranchial gland, the site of calcitonin production. In this project, the
PI will receive new training in molecular biology, which will clarify the roles
of calcitonin in elasmobranch reproduction by examining patterns of calcitonin
and calcitonin receptor gene expression in gravid female rays and their
offspring. Following completion of an intensive, 3-week training course in
molecular biology, protein chemistry, and bioinformatics at the University of
Florida's Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, the PI and two
student interns will utilize RT-PCR, Northern blot analysis, and in situ
hybridization to determine: 1) if increases in ultimobranchial gland activity
previously shown to occur during pregnancy in this species reflect changes in
calcitonin production; 2) if tissues other than the ultimobranchial gland
synthesize calcitonin; and 3) where calcitonin receptors are expressed and if
these expression patterns change during reproduction. By obtaining this
information, this project will significantly advance knowledge regarding both
reproductive physiology and endocrine function in the cartilaginous fishes and
the role of calcitonin in vertebrates. Furthermore, both the training and
laboratory instrumentation supported by this grant will enhance the
infrastructure for research and student training opportunities in the PI's
laboratory. The PI is a Native Pacific Islander researcher who makes significant
contributions to both his field of study and undergraduate science education,
especially that for underserved minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;