* 0416537
* Structure and Function of IscA, a Potential  Iron Delivery  Protein  for Iron-Sulfur Cluster Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Marcia Newcomer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2008
* USD 489,831.00

Iron-sulfur clusters are one of the most ubiquitous redox co-factors in biology.
Throughout evolution, iron-sulfur clusters have become integral part of diverse
physiological processes such as energy conversion, sugar metabolism, nitrogen
fixation, heme and biotin biosynthesis, DNA synthesis and DNA repair, and
regulation of gene expression. At least six proteins (IscS, IscU, IscA, HscB,
HscA and Ferredoxin) encoded by a gene cluster iscSUA-hscBA-fdx have been
identified as essential for the general biogenesis of iron-sulfur clusters in
bacteria. The homologs of the six proteins have also been found in eukaryotic
organisms, indicating that the iron-sulfur cluster assembly mechanism is highly
conserved. It has been shown that IscS, a cysteine desulfurase, provides sulfur
for iron-sulfur clusters, and that IscU is a scaffold for the IscS-mediated
assembly of iron-sulfur clusters and eventually transfers iron-sulfur clusters
to target proteins. However, the iron donor for iron-sulfur clusters largely
remains elusive. This project aims to test a hypothesis that the primary
function of IscA is to recruit intracellular iron and deliver iron for the
assembly of iron-sulfur clusters in IscU, and that the IscA-mediated iron
transfer to IscU is coordinated through the protein-protein interactions. The
research has two specific aims: 1) To define the iron binding properties of IscA
by combining the biochemical, biophysical and X-ray crystallographic approaches
to identify the amino acid residues that are important for the iron binding and
to determine the redox properties of the iron center. 2) To investigate the
mechanism of iron transfer from IscA to the iron-sulfur clusters in IscU by
exploring the protein-protein interactions of IscA with IscU and IscS. The
results will provide fundamental knowledge on the general biogenesis of iron-
sulfur clusters, a process that is conserved from bacteria to humans. In
addition, understanding iron delivery for the biogenesis of iron-sulfur clusters
will offer the molecular details on how intracellular iron may be utilized in
other biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project is
expected to attract and retain high quality graduate and undergraduate students.
The students will not only learn the multidisciplinary methodology to conduct
the proposed research, but also develop the attitude crucial to their future
career in academia or industries through vigorous research activities. Special
efforts will be taken to recruit highly motivated minority and woman graduate
students to the research group. The research projects will further be integrated
into the biochemistry courses that the PI and Co-PI have been teaching at their
institution, and should greatly benefit the institutional biochemistry
curricula.