* 0416409
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Do Constitutions Matter? Assessing the Impacts of the Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal Rights in Canada
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Donald Herzog, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Susan Brodie Haire
* 10/31/2007
* USD 15,000.00

Significant disagreement exists among scholars and practitioners as to the
political, legal and social implications of constitutional rights. New
constitutional recognitions of collective rights in the form of Aboriginal
rights challenge historical notions of a political community based on
nationalism and introduce the idea of multinationalism within a single
constitutional state. Proponents reason that these constitutional recognitions
will increase protections of the Aboriginal claims to land and other resources,
while others doubt that the political incentives for the enforcement of such
rights exist and that &lt;br/&gt;constitutionalization will make any difference
at all. This project evaluates the claim that constitutions matter.
Specifically, it explores two major impacts of the constitutional recognition of
Aboriginal rights in Canada. First, the project examines the assertion that the
constitutional recognition of Aboriginal rights increases the legal recognition
and protection of Aboriginal rights, by exploring the effect these
constitutional recognitions have on interactions between Aboriginal peoples and
the Canadian government. Through a comparative historical analysis of litigation
and legislation before and after constitutional incorporation, it will evaluate
the use of constitutional arguments to reassert Aboriginal rights not previously
recognized to determine the extent to which the text of the Constitution
matters. Second, the project investigates the assertion that the constitutional
recognition of Aboriginal rights increases inclusiveness within the national
political community. It explores the larger social impacts of the constitutional
recognition of Aboriginal rights by comparing the attitudes of Canadians towards
the treatment of Aboriginal peoples and recognitions of Aboriginal rights by
surveying a sample of newspaper articles, cartoons, and editorials dealing with
Aboriginal issues from 1965 to 2003 and comparing attitudes expressed in
individual opinion data collected by the Canadian Election Studies in 1974,
1979, 1993, and 1997.&lt;br/&gt;