* 0416328
* Geomagnetic Sensing System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* A.O. Willows, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 08/31/2008
* USD 276,295.00

Many animals are apparently capable of detecting and orienting to the earth's
magnetic field. This is particularly true in environments where visual clues are
not reliable, such as underwater, underground, or in the air out of visual
contact with land. Despite the widespread existence of an ability to sense the
earth's magnetic field in animals we do not yet understand what such a sensor
might look like, or how it works. Researchers have found that the seaslug
Tritonia detects, and orients to the earth's magnetic field. It's brain is
accessible in a living, nearly freely behaving state, and permits monitoring
responses to magnetic field changes in single identified brain cells, through
electrodes placed inside neurons. This project will attempt to find the magnetic
receptors, observe their detailed structure in the transmission electron
microscope, and determine how they may work in Tritonia. It is hypothesized that
there may be tiny, membrane bound magnetic particles in these cells that are
connected to the internal skeleton of the cells. Magnetic fields tugging on the
magnet particles may thereby signal the cell membrane, and in this way create an
electrical wave that informs the brain. This project will provide new insights
into how magnetic fields alter the responses and behavior of any animals having
such particles in their cells. It will also provide a training experience for
undergraduate students with an interest in research through an apprenticeship
training program associated with the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;