* 0416213
* The Role of NF-Protocadherin in Vertebrate Neurulation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Roger Bradley, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2009
* USD 360,000.00

The formation of the embryonic nervous system is a crucial early event in
vertebrate development. The process by which the nervous system forms is
complex, beginning with the induction of the neural epithelium to form the
neural plate, to the subsequent curling and fusion of the neural folds into the
neural tube. Key to the process of neurulation are the coordinated cell shape
changes and cell movements that occur in the neural plate and neural folds.
Amongst the molecules thought to be involved in regulating these cell-cell
interactions are members of the cadherin family of cell adhesion molecules.
Recently, a new family of cadherin-like genes, the protocadherins, has been
isolated, but whose functions during development are generally unknown. At least
some protocadherins can function as cell adhesion molecules, and many are
expressed in the early nervous system. Thus an important question is whether
protocadherins function to mediate cell adhesion during vertebrate
neurulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study proposes an in depth analysis of
one such protocadherin, NF-protocadherin (NFPC), isolated from Xenopus. NFPC
exhibits a striking expression pattern in the early embryonic nervous system,
where it is initially restricted to the tips of the neural folds. Furthermore,
the cellular protein TAF1, previously shown to interact with NFPC, is also
expressed in the neural folds and neural plate, albeit in a broader domain than
NFPC. This suggests a role for NFPC and TAF1 in mediating the adhesive events
that lead to the formation and/or closing of the neural tube. Accordingly, to
dissect the roles of NFPC and TAF1 in neurulation, we propose to disrupt NFPC
and TAF1 expression in early embryos, using an antisense morpholino approach,
and&lt;br/&gt;assess the consequences to neural tube formation. Furthermore, as
it is not known how protocadherins function as cell adhesion molecules, and
whether they may have additional roles in cell signaling, the mechanism by which
NFPC acts will be investigated by isolating and analyzing other cytoplasmic
factors with which it interacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from these
studies will provide broader insights into the molecular mechanisms by which the
vertebrate nervous system forms, as well as an understanding of how
protocadherins contribute to this process. These studies will also lead to
elucidation of the intracellular proteins that interact with protocadherins,
providing valuable information into how the adhesion between neighboring cells
is translated into cellular differentiation and tissue histogenesis. These
studies will impact the education and training of students at Montana State
University, as both undergraduate and graduate students will be integrally
involved in the described projects. Furthermore, many of the techniques utilized
in this proposal, such as the injection of RNA and antisense morpholinos into
frog embryos, and the analysis of their effect on development, are currently
being adapted for use by undergraduates in the Vertebrate Embryology Lab at
Montana State University. This in turn will help to train future scientists in
the processes, methods and technologies of modern cell and developmental
biology.&lt;br/&gt;