* 0416945
* Regulation and Function of Plant Cold Shock Domain Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Dale Karlson, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2008
* USD 449,616.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposed Research:&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, advancements have been
made to understand how plants adapt to low temperature stress on a molecular
level. Unlike the responses to heat shock, very few similarities are known for
the adaptation of prokaryotes and eukaryotes to low temperature stress.
Prokaryotic response to low temperature stress has been extensively studied in
the model bacterium Escherichia coli, and is characterized by the predominant
accumulation of small molecular weight nucleic acid binding proteins (cold shock
proteins). It was recently learned that both wheat and Arabidopsis contain cold-
responsive cold shock domain proteins. Due to the wide availability of genetic
and molecular resources for the model plant Arabidopsis, this project is
designed to determine the function of its four individual cold shock domain
proteins. Despite the fact that the cold shock domain is the most highly
conserved nucleic acid binding domain known, the characterization of cold shock
domain proteins in the Plant Kingdom is surprisingly sparse. Collectively,
results from this project will allow the investigators to propose functional
roles for the cold shock domain protein family in plants and will furthermore
allow them to determine how plant cold shock domain proteins contribute to low
temperature stress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed
Research:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is designed to educate undergraduate
and graduate students and a post-doctoral fellow. Involvement in the project
will provide training in molecular biology, plant physiology, microscopy and
protein structural determination. In addition, the international collaborative
project with Japanese scientists will offer the students opportunities to
interact with scientists from a unique cultural and scientific atmosphere. Since
there are very limited experimental data for this protein family in plants, a
tremendous opportunity exists to advance this area. All scientific findings will
be broadly disseminated to the scientific and public communities. It is hoped
that results from this project may lead to a more comprehensive study of how
plants adapt to low temperature. Cumulatively, abiotic stress such as
temperature extremes, drought, and salinity account for a substantial reduction
in the potential for crop productivity. Any advancement in one of these areas
has the potential to have wide implications for society; such as the extension
of growing seasons and expansion of growing regions into more fertile lands. It
is hoped that knowledge gained from this study may lead us closer towards
understanding the complexities of plant adaptation to low
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;