* 0416662
* Model-based Properties of Replication Variance Estimators for Sample Surveys
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Richard Valliant, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2008
* USD 85,000.00

Replication variance estimation in surveys of finite populations is a standard
tool of survey statisticians and researchers. Two of the most common methods
used are the jackknife and balanced repeated replication (BRR). There is a
substantial amount of theory available for the replication methods when they are
implemented in standard ways described in textbooks and journal articles. In
practice, however, these methods are operationalized in ways that often do not
fit the standard theoretical requirements. In the jackknife, for example, the
basic approach is to delete one first-stage sample unit, compute an estimate
based on the remaining sample units, cycle through all first-stage sample units,
and compute a variance among the resulting set of estimates. In practice, groups
of units are formed by combining units within or across strata. Entire groups
are then dropped-out in order to compute a jackknife variance estimate. This
project will evaluate methods used in practice and investigate potential
improvements to current methods using the model-based approach to finite
population sampling. In particular, this work will study weight adjustments in
the grouped jackknife and, to a lesser extent, partially balanced BRR and model-
based properties of these two methods of variance estimation. The general
regression estimator of population totals and other nonlinear estimators will be
emphasized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory for these grouped methods is limited,
and it is unclear that the methods used in practice always have good theoretical
properties. The ramifications of poor implementation of replicate variance
estimation can be important because of the way that data bases are constructed.
Weights for the full sample and for subsamples (or replicates) are created by
the database constructor who appends the weights to each record in the database.
Users are then instructed to use those weights to compute variances for all
statistics, regardless of how complex. If a poor set of replicate weights is
created, this affects all analysts. The research is intended to provide guidance
on how to implement these grouped methods in surveys, particularly ones
concerning the economy, health status of the population, and other applications
in the social sciences. This research is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program, the Statistics and Probability Program, and
a consortium of federal statistical agencies as part of a joint activity to
support research on survey and statistical methodology.