* 0416511
* Characterization of Tryptophan Radical and Flavin Excited State Intermediates in DNA Photolyase Electron Transfer Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Johannes Schelvis, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2007
* USD 399,900.00

DNA-specific damage results from exposure of DNA to ultraviolet light. The major
photoproduct is due to dimerization of adjacent nucleic acid bases, the
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPD). Many organisms use a very efficient DNA
repair enzyme, DNA photolyase, to reverse this DNA-specific damage. DNA
photolyase belongs to the class of blue-light photoreceptors and reverses the
mutagenic CPD damage via a light-driven, electron transfer mechanism. When the
enzyme is one electron oxidized from its active form, it can undergo a
photoreduction reaction back to the active form which presumably involves
electron transfer through a chain of tryptophan amino acids which are highly
conserved within the class of blue-light photoreceptors. In this project, state-
of-the-art ultrafast laser spectroscopy will be used to determine the structural
changes in the photolyase active site after absorption of light to understand
the primary processes of DNA photorepair and how the presence of damaged DNA
modifies these processes on a molecular level. The same methodology will be
applied to characterize the individual reaction intermediates that are involved
in the tryptophan electron transfer process. The approach uses time-resolved
resonance Raman spectroscopy with picosecond time-resolution (one millionth of a
millionth of a second), biosynthetic isotopic labeling of the flavin molecule
and tryptophan residues, and high-level calculations to interpret the results.
The project also involves the training of graduate students and postdoctoral
research associates in the application of ultrafast laser spectroscopy, along
with training of undergraduate students in the basic biophysics, biochemistry
and spectroscopy methods used.