* 0416965
* Microscopic Dielectric Relaxation as a Tool for Studying Protein Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Dmitri Toptygin, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2008
* USD 420,000.00

Collective motion of protein domains usually takes place on the nanosecond or
picosecond time scales and is important for protein function. Time- and
spectrally-resolved fluorescence emission of tryptophan residues contains
information about protein relaxation dynamics on these time scales. This type of
dynamic information is complementary to the structural and dynamic information
available from X-ray diffraction and NMR data. Exciting a Trp residue with a
short laser pulse alters the electrostatic forces acting between it and charged
residues and throws the system out of equilibrium. As the system relaxes to a
new equilibrium, the Trp emission spectrum shifts to lower energies, and this
shift can be recorded with picosecond time resolution. Preliminary studies
revealed that the relaxation curves for a few tested proteins contain three or
more exponential terms with different relaxation times in the range from 60ps to
8ns. The faster exponentials represent the motion of small chemical groups,
while the slower exponentials represent the relative motions of bulky domains or
secondary-structure elements. The goal of this research is to establish
quantitative correspondence between the experimental relaxation curves obtained
from fluorescence data and theory. By changing the location of the Trp residue
and of charged residues, the dynamics of different kinds of vibrations will be
studied. This technique will be used to separate intradomain motions from the
relative motions of different domains. The second part of the work will focus on
changes in the relaxation curves associated with the addition and removal of a
single charge.

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is in the new information about
picosecond and nanosecond dynamics of collective motions in proteins. In
addition to training graduate students, the PI will train undergraduate and high
school students in his laboratory. The aim with these students is to impart the
excitement of scientific research to them and to show them what career options
are available to them in Biophysics.

