* 0416206
* The Global Lacewing Digital Library: Delivering the Core Taxonomic Resources of the Neuropterida of the World (Insecta: Neuroptera, Megaloptera, Raphidioptera) via the WWW.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* John Oswald, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 235,111.00

Intellectual Merit: The Global Lacewing Digital Library (GLDL) constitutes a
never-before-attempted digital synthesis of fundamental information on the
insect superorder Neuropterida (lacewings, antlions and their allies). The GLDL
will bring together in an integrated manner a unique global synthesis of five
core components: (1) a world catalogue of the Neuropterida; (2) a comprehensive
bibliography of neuropterid literature; (3) a digital library of neuropterid
taxonomic literature; (4) digital keys to the adults of the world's living
neuropterid genera; and (5) delivery of neuropterid name and taxonomic status
data through the international Species 2000 Dynamic Checklist initiative. As a
top-priority project of the world's neuropterological community, the GLDL will
do more to advance, organize and prioritize worldwide systematics research on
this group than any other project in recent
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The correct identification of
biological organisms is fundamental to all biological sciences and all
biologically-related economic activities. The GLDL will provide a fundamental
new contribution to the global biodiversity information infrastructure for a
large group (6850 species) of environmentally and economically significant
predatory insects. The project will provide opportunities for the involvement of
graduate and undergraduate students in the science of biological systematics.
Additionally, it will provide a new suite of digital tools that will empower
researchers in biodiversity-rich, yet biodiversity-information-poor, regions of
the world to more effectively and efficiently explore their local neuropterid
faunas and increase the rate at which the discovery and scientific description
of new species can occur - before the biodiversity of such regions is further
diminished.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;