* 0416309
* Organometallic Chemistry of Electropositive Metals Supported by Macrocyclic Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,06/30/2008
* John Arnold, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 06/30/2008
* USD 405,000.00

Dr. John Arnold, Chemistry Department, University of California - Berkeley, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division for the development of new monoanionic ligands. The
chemistry of early transition metal and lanthanide complexes of the ligands will
be explored. The major thrust is a new series of monoanion ligands that will be
capable of supporting chemistry related to that presently dominated by Cp based
systems. Specifically new functionalized 14-membered tetraazamacrocycles will be
developed, their complexes with di and trivalent metals prepared, and their
stoichiometric and catalytic reactivity investigated.

Reactions mediated by transition metal and lanthanide element compounds are
important on an industrial scale and provide ever increasing fundamental
knowledge regarding the nature of the chemical bond. In recent years, there has
been considerable effort in developing ligands that will tailor the chemical
reactivity and properties of the metal. In this study new ligands will be
designed to facilitate reactions at metal ions with a 2+ and 3+ charge. This is
an important goal since many important processes that are known to take place at
4+ ions have not yet been efficiently developed for 2+ and 3+ counterparts. An
important goal of the project is the education of young scientists at the
graduate and postdoctoral level.