* 0416797
* Biochemical and Genetic Analysis of Light Regulated Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* David Kehoe, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 120,000.00

This research investigates signaling mechanisms controlling bacterial light
responses. Using molecular, biochemical, and genetic approaches, it analyzes how
the cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon uses chromatic adaptation to respond to
changes in ambient light color. During chromatic adaptation, this photosynthetic
organism's light harvesting antennae are restructured. This acclimation process
is reversible and allows cells to efficiently use the predominant light
wavelength(s) in the environment for photosynthesis. Chromatic adaptation
controls transcription of red and green light responsive genes. Recently, a 28
basepair region of DNA called the "R Box" was found near both red and green
light responsive genes, suggesting that this sequence is required for
coordination of red and green light expression. This research will test the role
of the R Box in the regulation of light-responsive genes. Chromatic adaptation
is known to be controlled by two photosensory systems. The Rca (regulator for
chromatic adaptation) system appears to be a complex phosphorelay that controls
the expression of red and green light responsive genes and includes a large
response regulator called RcaC. RcaC abundance differs in cells grown in red and
green light.&lt;br/&gt;This research will determine if RcaC abundance is
regulated transcriptionally, translationally, or proteolytically. The second
regulatory system, the Cgi (control of green light induction) system, regulates
green light induced genes and is uncharacterized. This project will use
transposon mutagenesis to generate potential Cgi system mutants and identify
genes encoding components of this pathway. These findings will contribute
broadly to understanding of bacterial signal transduction systems and plant
signaling pathways.&lt;br/&gt;