* 0416443
* Molecular Physiology of Phosphate Transport in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Wayne Versaw, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2008
* USD 520,849.00

IBN: 0416443&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphate is essential for
plant growth and development. It is needed to make nucleic acids and
phospholipids, and also functions in energy transfer reactions and a host of
cell-signaling events. To fulfill these fundamental roles, plants not only must
acquire phosphate from the soil, but also must tightly control its subsequent
distribution to all cells and subcellular compartments of the plant. The
transport of phosphate across membranes is a pivotal step in regulating its
distribution, yet only a few phosphate transport systems have been described at
the molecular level. The objectives of this project are to determine the tissue
and subcellular distribution, and the biochemical properties and biological
roles of each member of a phosphate transporter gene family in Arabidopsis
designated PHT4. The PHT4 family is composed of six genes that encode proteins
with similarity to phosphate transporters of animal origin, but not to any
previously identified phosphate transporters in plants. Protein-sorting
predictions suggest that the transporters may be located within organellar
membranes. Consequently, these transporters are likely to have unique
physiological roles, which may provide new insights into the mechanisms
governing the subcellular distribution of phosphate in plants. Because phosphate
is often the limiting factor for plant growth, an understanding of how plants
utilize phosphate has broad agricultural and ecological implications. Graduate
and undergraduate students supported by this grant will receive
multidisciplinary training and will participate in conferences and teaching
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;