* 0416113
* A Model for Predicting and Assessing the Programmatic Impact of Student Success in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Susan Maller, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2007
* USD 389,297.00

This grant to Purdue University seeks two years of NSF funding to develop a
novel and systematic approach to better understand the direct and indirect
relationships among freshman engineering student attributes and outcomes. With
this knowledge, the college will implement processes that: a) enable faculty and
advisors to give more informed guidance to incoming freshmen about their course
selections; b) foster the continuous improvement of first-year engineering
experiences; c) provide a means to operationalize the definition of student
success to include additional features (i.e., something more than simply looking
at GPA and persistence in engineering); and d) facilitate our ability to
investigate differences in a model of predictors and outcomes for
underrepresented student groups (e.g., gender, and ethnicity), leading to more
meaningful advising for these students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a comprehensive evaluation process that will enable engineering faculty
and advisors to better assess: the cognitive and noncognitive characteristics of
incoming freshman to more accurately place students into the most appropriate
introductory chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and physics courses. In
addition, the project to use survey items (self-concepts and expectations),
prior academic performance (high school academic record), and student assessment
of their achievement to understand the direct and indirect relationships among
freshman student attributes and outcomes in order to provide the foundation for
continuous improvement in our first-year engineering program, as well as provide
a bases by which we can measure whether a student has had a successful first-
year experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current model for engineering
accreditation calls for the development and implementation of a system of
ongoing evaluation that demonstrates achievement of programs educational
objectives, in part, through the assessment of program outcomes. However, to
date, no effort has been made to relate these outcomes back to a student's
starting point in the higher education system. We believe the model proposed
herein will serve in that capacity both at Purdue University and engineering
institutions across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;