* 0416244
* Molecular Beam Studies of State-Resolved Photodissociation Dynamics of Free Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Jingsong Zhang, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2009
* USD 378,038.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jingsong Zhang of the University of
California at Riverside will investigate the properties of free radicals in
molecular beams. Laser spectroscopy, as well as time-resolved and state-to-state
photodissociation dynamics will be applied to prototypical reactive
intermediates of relevance to combustion, atmospheric chemistry, chemical vapor
deposition, and to organic and polymer chemistry. The systems to be studied
include diatomic hydride-, small alkyl-, and unsaturated aliphatic radicals.
Specific attention will be given to: a) detailed mechanisms involving
dissociation and complex nuclear rearrangements; b) open-shell electronic
states, structures and multiple potential energy surfaces and their influences
on photodissociation/unimolecular reactions; c) competitive dissociation
pathways and decomposition mechanisms, and product energy disposal; and d) free-
radical electronic states, thermodynamics, and energetics. This research aims to
achieve an understanding of free-radical photochemistry at the same level as
that for closed-shell molecules. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in this research. They will acquire knowledge and skills in
preparation for advanced studies or employment in industry, academia, or
government laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;