* 0416779
* Biophysical Mechanisms of Protein Recruitment to Raft Domains
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Christoph Naumann, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2008
* USD 326,056.00

One of the most fascinating research problems currently discussed in cell
biology and membrane biophysics is that which relates to understanding the
relationship between nanoscale membrane heterogeneity (domain formation) and
membrane function. In particular, sphingolipid (SL)-cholesterol (CHOL)-rich
domains, also known as lipid rafts, have been identified to play a key role in
the functionality of biomembranes. Though the important functional role of raft
domains has been established, the biophysics of raft assembly remains poorly
understood. This research project seeks to address an important question related
to this still open topic: What are the biophysical mechanisms that are involved
in the recruitment of membrane proteins to raft domains? The goal will be to
explore the three most likely mechanisms of recruitment: (1) via binding
ligands; (2) via SL-CHOL-rich lipid shells around membrane proteins; and (3) via
other raft-associated proteins and lipids. To address the question of protein
recruitment to raft domains, the experimental strategy will be to study the
recruitment processes in planar model membranes using epifluorescence
microscopy, wide-field single molecule fluorescence microscopy, and fluorescence
correlation spectroscopy (FCS). The model membrane approach enables membrane
protein recruitment studies to be conducted under controlled membrane conditions
without the great complexity found in cells. Imaging experiments will be
performed on membrane proteins, which are considered to be permanently raft-
excluded (transferrin receptor), permanently raft-associated [urokinase
plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR)], and temporarily raft-associated (avb3
and a5b1 integrins). The complementary imaging approach will allow the PI to
study the protein-raft co-localization (epifluorescence microscopy), the
membrane composition-dependent protein lateral mobility (wide-field single
molecule fluorescence microscopy), and the formation of small protein-lipid and
protein-protein aggregates (FCS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be an
important part of the PI's goal to develop innovative, interdisciplinary
research and teaching programs at the interface between classical sciences and
engineering disciplines. To reach this goal, research results will be
implemented into courses taught by the PI. Furthermore, this project will
provide scientific training for one undergraduate and two graduate students.
Because interdisciplinary teamwork and communication are key elements of the
training program, students of the PI's research group will have the opportunity
to participate in collaborative research with students from excellent research
groups in Germany. Finally, as co-director of the newly established IUPUI
Nanoscale Imaging Center, the PI seeks also to outreach into the local community
to promote interdisciplinary research by providing cutting-edge facilities for
biomolecular imaging.&lt;br/&gt;