* 0416623
* Mechanism and Macromolecular Organization in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2010
* USD 930,791.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;MCB 0416623&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to understand the mechanisms of charge separation and recombination
in photosynthetic reaction centers (RCs) and the higher-order organization of
photosynthetic membranes. Towards understanding electron transfer mechanism,
several areas are described: (i) application of newly developed instrumentation
for measuring Stark effects in the IR and theory for analyzing intervalence band
Stark effects associated with the oxidized special pair; (ii) determination of
the parameters that control alternative electron transfer pathways using a
newly-developed experimental method, resonance Stark spectroscopy; (iii)
application of the resonance Stark method to other pathways created by
engineering the RC; (iv) measurement of electric field effects on the
populations of charge-separated species in photosystem II RCs, in particular the
role of carotenoid cations; and (v) development and application of RC strains in
which all native cysteine residues are deleted and new cysteines are inserted as
site-specific targets for different types of labels. Towards understanding
photosynthetic membrane organization and assembly several areas are described:
(i) characterization of the lateral mobility and assembly of antenna protein
complexes in supported membranes; and (ii) imaging of components of the
photosynthetic membrane in supported lipid bilayers by atomic force microscopy
and a novel type of secondary ion mass spectrometry with high lateral
resolution. This research uses photosynthetic proteins in supported membranes
both as a tool to advance imaging and structural methods and to determine the
long-range organization of this important membrane-associated
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating this range of approaches, the
basic understanding of the mechanism of the initial electron transfer and the
related phenomenon of unidirectional electron transfer can be advanced and
brought into the larger context of structure-function relationships in complex
biological assemblies. Research in the photosynthesis area addresses the general
problem of the mechanisms by which the organized environment in proteins
modulates the properties of bound prosthetic groups and particular amino acid
functional groups with extraordinary functional consequences. An important part
of this work involves the development of new experimental and theoretical
methods that can have a broad impact in other areas of science and technology.
Nearly every spectroscopic, structural, and theoretical method has been applied
to some aspect of RC and photosynthetic membrane function. In many cases this
was the first example of new physical approaches applied to a biological
problem, often leading to significant improvements in the physical and
theoretical methods, and these concepts and methods are now used in many other
fields. This general area of research has also been a tremendous source of
training for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, often
serving as a bridge between the physical sciences and biology. Viewed in
broadest terms, concepts and results from photosynthesis research have impacted
solar energy research and the emerging area of molecular
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;