* 0416425
* Analysis of a dominant epigenetic modifier of pericarp color1 (p1) gene of maize
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Surinder Chopra, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2006
* USD 46,000.00

Chopra Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has previously
characterized the expression pattern and gene structure of alleles of the maize
p1 (pericarp color1) gene. P1 is a myb type of transcription factor and controls
the biosynthesis of red flavonoid pigments called phlobaphenes. Previous
findings suggest that allelic expression at the p1 locus is a function of the
gene structure and gene organization, which is further regulated by epigenetic
mechanisms. The investigator has now characterized a dominant modifier called
Ufo1 (Unstable factor for orange1). In the absence of Ufo1, plants of P1-wr
(white pericarp &amp; red cob glumes) allele produce ears with colorless kernel
pericarp and red cobs and this phenotype is highly stable. In the presence of
Ufo1, the P1-wr confers variably enhanced kernel pericarp, cob and plant
pigmentation. Preliminary expression studies demonstrate that the gain of
pigmentation is associated with increased steady state levels of p1 transcript
that is correlated with decrease in DNA methylation of promoter and coding
sequence of the P1-wr. Further experiments will investigate Ufo1 induced de-
regulation of a well-programmed expression profile via transient DNA methylation
changes of p1 alleles. Specifically, 1) using bisulfite sequencing methods, this
project will identify specific type(s) and position(s) of DNA methylation
modifications in the p1 sequence in the presence of Ufo1, 2) genes identified
from the microarray analysis of Ufo1 versus ufo1 genotype RNA will be further
tested for their expression and functionality and 3) to clone the Ufo1 gene, the
research project will begin to develop plant populations to fine map the Ufo1
factor within the known crude position on the short arm of chromosome 10. In the
longer run, this study will lead to the identification of molecular marks and
mechanisms that may regulate stability of transgenes and natural alleles.
Graduate students and undergraduates students will perform the majority of the
research on this project. This project will provide training opportunities in
epigenetics, as well as in functional genomics.