* 0416268
* Evolutionary Impact of Cytoplasmic Sex Ratio Distorters on Host Reproductive Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* George Roderick, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2008
* USD 374,600.00

Many animals house bacteria that live inside their cells; some are harmless but
others, termed reproductive parasites, selfishly manipulate the host's
reproductive system. This project investigates the extent to which a widespread
reproductive parasite named Wolbachia has shaped the reproductive biology of a
common tropical butterfly Hypolimnas bolina. In some South Pacific islands,
Wolbachia selectively kills male butterflies and consequently male H. bolina are
rarer on islands with high levels of Wolbachia infection. The study addresses
whether new sexual traits have evolved as a result of Wolbachia infection by
comparing butterfly populations on islands with different sex ratios. The work
will (i) determine the population history of the butterfly using genetic
markers; (ii) characterize butterfly sexual characteristics on different
islands; and (iii) test whether Wolbachia infection explains the evolution of
sexual characters in H. bolina. Recent evidence indicates that reproductive
parasites are widespread in insects and that they can reach extremely high
frequencies in natural populations. Given the important impact of infection on
the host (male-killing being a dramatic example), reproductive parasites could
play a major role in the design of reproductive systems. The Wolbachia-
Hypolimnas case study provides a powerful test for this hypothesis.