* 0416750
* Novel Roles of Urea in Amphibian Hibernation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Marina Marjanovic, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 07/31/2008
* USD 296,416.00

This project, a collaborative effort between a physiological ecologist and a
cell physiologist, is a continuation of an investigation into physiological
mechanisms contributing to extreme tolerance of cold in northern amphibians and
reptiles. The thesis of this proposal is that urea, an important osmolyte in
amphibians, may have important, previously undocumented functions in hibernation
physiology and cold hardiness. This investigation focuses on the wood frog (Rana
sylvatica), the most extensively studied of all freeze-tolerant vertebrates. One
set of studies will confirm and extend a preliminary finding that wood frogs
accumulate and retain urea during hibernation. The work will determine whether
these frogs facilitate urea accumulation by accelerating ureogenesis, and
whether their tissues contain certain osmolytes (methylamines) known to function
as urea counteractants. Other studies will test the hypothesis that urea
accumulated during terrestrial hibernation contributes to freezing survival,
perhaps bolstering current views on the evolutionary significance of overlapping
adaptations for cryoprotection and dehydration tolerance. Finally, the work will
determine whether urea accumulation contributes to metabolic depression in
hibernating wood frogs, as has been postulated for estivating organisms. The
metabolic effects of urea will be examined at the whole-animal level, in
isolated organs, and in the activity of the erythrocyte Na+-K+ pump. The project
will foster a nascent research collaboration between investigators at Miami
University, an institution that excels in undergraduate education and select
graduate programs, and Eastern Illinois University, an RUI institution with a
distinguished record of undergraduate research and scholarship. The
investigators' strongly overlapping research and educational interests, as well
as their complementary backgrounds and expertise, will enhance the research
productivity of all persons involved in the project. Further, the project will
contribute to the professional development of students at Miami University and
Eastern Illinois University by engaging them in all phases of the research
process, and by encouraging student researchers to seek funding from internal
and external sources; to publish their work in peer-reviewed journals; and to
communicate their findings at regional and national meetings. The investigators
will promote greater diversity in their undergraduate research programs by
actively recruiting students from underrepresented groups. The work will impact
science infrastructure by disseminating research applications of modern
instrumentation, for example, by training students to use NMR spectroscopy, a
powerful and versatile tool in science and industry.