* 0416377
* Phylogeny, Systematics and Biogeography of the Northern Hemisphere genus Iris
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Carol Wilson, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 02/28/2006
* USD 173,139.00

Iris is a Northern Hemisphere genus of perennial herbs with more than 260
species. In spite of its economical importance as a plant of high horticultural
value, little is known of its origin, evolution and dispersal. Dr. Wilson will
research 90 species that represent the morphological and geographical diversity
present in Iris. She will use molecular sequence data to develop a
classification that explains the evolutionary diversification leading to major
subgroups within Iris. The probable area of origin will be determined and
significant morphological innovations will be identified. The study will provide
a framework of evolution within Iris that should stimulate further
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this research, graduate and undergraduate
students will use the scientific method to test hypotheses of evolution and will
learn basic laboratory techniques. Students will also benefit indirectly as
examples from this research are incorporated into Dr. Wilson's courses. The
inclusion of a recent Ph.D. from Turkey will promote international collaboration
and diffusion of knowledge. The public will benefit through presentations to
community organizations and development of a webpage on the classification and
evolution of these valued wildflower and garden plants. This research is
relevant to studies on plant responses and modifications to aridity. Most Iris
species inhabit dry, semi-desert or rocky, high-altitude environments today and
probably diversified across the Mediterranean and Asia during times of
increasing seasonality, aridity and temperature extremes. The presence of a
multiplicity of modified organs (roots, stems and leaves) for storage and
renewal growth in Iris indicates that adaptation to aridity involved several
independent strategies.&lt;br/&gt;