* 0416297
* Structure-Function Trade-Offs in Xylem
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* John Sperry, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2008
* USD 429,114.00

Plants must move on the order of 200-300 kilograms of water through their xylem
for every kilogram of dry mass they assimilate from atmospheric CO2. Xylem
transport has to be economic or plants could not turn a profit with such a poor
carbon-for-water exchange rate. The driving force is free: capillary suction at
cell wall pores coupled to a negative pressure gradient in xylem conduits. But
negative xylem pressure exacts a toll on conducting efficiency, because the
conduit network must be safe from dysfunction from cavitation and from collapse
by implosion. The evolution of efficiency is limited by safety concerns. The
proposed research will quantify the efficiency vs. safety trade-off across major
xylem types, testing hypotheses for the functional significance of major xylem
traits.&lt;br/&gt; The first objective is to quantify the flow resistance
through inter-conduit pits and its importance for limiting total xylem
resistance. Pits are crucial structures that protect against cavitation by air-
seeding but constrict water flow and weaken walls. The hypothesis is that a high
air-seeding pressure comes at the expense of a high pit resistance. The second
objective is to determine how air-seeding of cavitation occurs in different pit
types, and how the strength of the membrane constrains pit dimensions. The
hypothesis is that pit dimensions are maximized to the point where membrane
strength is limiting and air-seeding occurs at the verge of membrane rupture.
The third objective is to determine the extent of mechanical stress in wood cell
walls from negative xylem pressure. The prediction is that hydraulic stresses
are significant and require compensating reinforcement that reduces conducting
efficiency. The objectives will be accomplished by a combination of
experimentation and biomechanical modeling across major xylem types and
phylogenetic groups including ferns, gymnosperms, and angiosperms.
&lt;br/&gt;The research tests many long-standing hypotheses of wood structure
and function. The results are necessary for interpreting xylem evolution,
evaluating the cost of water transport and exposing mechanisms that enhance
competitive ability, and fulfilling the promise of genomics for linking genes to
wood function. The research will create research opportunities for students at
all levels. &lt;br/&gt;