* 0416897
* Photoperiodic Effects on Immune Function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Randy Nelson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 627,021.00

Intellectual Merit. The combined challenge of low food availability and low
temperatures can make winter a particularly difficult time for survival and
reproduction. In order to be successful, individuals must survive and reproduce.
Traditionally, behavioral biologists interested in seasonal phenomena have
focused on reproductive adaptations, and have largely ignored adaptations
associated with survival. Different life history strategies have evolved in
different species to optimize the timing of investment in important life
functions, such as growth, reproduction, or survival. The proposed research will
assess immune function as a 'proxy' for survival costs in several different
conditions. Life history strategies are based on the conflicting roles of
survival versus reproductive functions in fitness. Reproductive activities
generally compromise survival, whereas energy devoted to survival compromises
generally reproductive success; however, these demands vary seasonally. Outside
of the breeding season, individuals often invest more resources into mechanisms
that promote survival until the next breeding opportunity. The working
hypothesis of the proposed research is that photoperiod (day length) modulates
the trade-offs between reproductive and survival mechanisms.

During the next five years, five specific aims will be addressed. In Aim 1, the
trade-offs between immune activation and fitness will be examined in rodents by
studying the effects of real or mock antigens on the number of offspring and
grand-offspring produced. In Aim 2, the interaction among several environmental
factors that vary across the seasons will be assessed on immune function and
torpor. Aim 3 will examine the mechanisms underlying photoperiodic modulation of
immune function by determining whether the pattern of clock genes expression in
the spleen or other lymphatic tissues provides calendar information. Aim 4 will
examine whether photoperiod mediates social avoidance of infected individuals.
Aim 5 will examine how the relationship among winter stressors, immune function,
and photoperiod affects morphological symmetry. Taken together, the primary
intellectual merit of this proposal is the novel and important information
gained about the trade-offs between immune function and reproduction from the
perspective of molecular mechanisms, physiology, and behavior.

Broader Impact. The project will provide interdisciplinary research
opportunities for training undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral trainees,
including women and students from historically-underrepresented groups.