* 0416647
* Molecular Genetic Analysis of Drosophila Proteasomes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* John Belote, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/2008
* USD 465,000.00

Regulated protein degradation is important for normal cell function, playing key
roles in such diverse processes as growth control, metabolic regulation,
embryonic development, neurotransmission, long-term memory, programmed cell
death, and cell cycle progression. Targeted protein breakdown is also important
for protecting cells against the potentially harmful effect of accumulated
damaged or malformed polypeptides. Thus, an understanding of how cells
selectively identify unwanted proteins and target them for destruction has
fundamental importance for the study of eukaryotic development, cellular
metabolism, and cell fate determination. An essential component of this pathway
is the proteasome, a large, multi-subunit complex that acts as the proteolytic
"machine" that removes abnormal polypeptides and short-lived regulatory proteins
from cells. Previous work, using the tools of biochemistry and cell biology, has
revealed much about the physical and biochemical properties of proteasomes, but
many aspects of their biological function remain unclear. As an approach toward
learning more about their role during development, a genetic and molecular study
of Drosophila proteasomes is being pursued. This project is focused on pursuing
the recent identification of a number of proteasome subunit genes that are
expressed exclusively in the testis during the mid- to late stages of
spermatogenesis. This observation represents the most striking example of
developmentally regulated proteasome gene expression in any system described to
date. Of prime interest is determining the role of these testis-specific
proteasomes during sperm differentiation and/or function. To address this
question a mutational approach is being used. Mutations that disrupt a number of
the testis-specific proteasome genes will be created using targeted gene
replacement methods. In addition, P-element insertional mutations in some of the
male-specific proteasome genes will be characterized. The mutant phenotypes will
be analyzed to determine how the mutations affect spermatogenesis and/or sperm
function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; All features of an animal cell's structure and
function are determined by the collection of proteins that it contains, and the
composition of that collection is a consequence of the balance between protein
synthesis and degradation. While much is known about the regulation of protein
synthesis, knowledge about the mechanisms controlling protein destruction is
much more limited. It is now clear that a remarkable molecular machine known as
the proteasome is responsible for most regulated protein degradation that occurs
during the life of a cell. This project uses the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanogaster, as the model system to address questions about the proteasome's
role during the development of a specialized cell-type, the sperm cell. The
existence of a structurally distinct proteasome in developing sperm cells
suggests that proteasome-mediated protein degradation plays an important role in
these cells, and this research is aimed at using genetic mutations to
investigate what that role is.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;