* 0416948
* CYP701A: A Family of Multifunctional Plant Cytochromes P450 in Terpenoid Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Reuben Peters, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2010
* USD 821,217.00

Terpenoids, which form the largest family of natural products, have extensive
biological and industrial functions. The majority of terpenoids, indeed of all
natural products, are exclusively produced by plants. As a consequence of such
metabolic prowess, plants encode more cytochromes P450 (P450s) than other
organisms. These monooxygenases catalyze key steps in the biosynthesis and
detoxification of many metabolites. Despite their importance in the production
of valuable natural products, little mechanistic work has been carried out with
plant derived P450s. This project targets the CYP701A family of P450s, which is
largely composed of kaurene oxidase from various species. Kaurene oxidase is a
universal plant P450 catalyzing three consecutive reactions in diterpenoid
gibberellin plant growth hormone biosynthesis. In addition, related functions
have been ascribed to the group of CYP701A P450s found in rice. Thus, functional
characterization of the individual enzymes within this group of homologous P450s
will create a model system for investigating the enzymatic basis for
differential function, leading to clarification of the structure/function basis
for the substrate selectivity and catalytic activity of these plant cytochromes
P450. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In the course of investigating these
microsomal P450s, the undergraduate and graduate students involved in this
research project will receive broad training in the critical area of membrane
biochemistry. The students also will be trained in functional genomics
approaches, as extensive sequence information is now becoming available for
plant species. Further, the techniques, strategies, and knowledge generated by
this project will enhance teaching, not only at the university level, but also
efforts targeted at primary and secondary school teachers. Thus, the knowledge
generated by this project will be widely disseminated, both through the
scientific literature, as well as broad educational efforts. Finally, these
studies may have some commercial impact due to the importance of plant P450s in
the biosynthesis of valuable natural product metabolites and their potential
uses in industrial processes.&lt;br/&gt;