* 0416392
* Calcium Current Development and the Control of Spontaneous Activity in the Neonatal Mouse Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* William Moody, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 06/30/2008
* USD 356,000.00

Spontaneous electrical activity plays central roles in nervous system
development, helping to control how neurons migrate, make synaptic connections
with one another, and develop their ability to generate electrical signals
appropriate for their mature functions. How spontaneous activity is generated
during nervous system development is only poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;The
present project results from the discovery in the last year of a striking form
of spontaneous electrical activity in the mouse cerebral cortex near the time of
birth. Brain slice calcium imaging methods revealed that on the day of birth
(P0) neurons of the cortex generate spontaneous transient increases in
intracellular calcium concentration ([Ca2+]i transients) that are highly
synchronized across very large populations of nerve cells. These [Ca2+]i
transients result from electrical activity, and occur synchronously in 60-80% of
all cortical neurons in all cortical layers and regions. This activity is seen
almost exclusively on the day of birth. The onset of this activity just before
birth seems to be regulated by a large increase in Na+ current density, and the
cessation of activity by a large increase in resting conductance just after
P0.&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the role of voltage-gated Ca2+ currents
in admitting Ca2+ ions into the neurons during this spontaneous activity. Ca2+
is first step in the mechanism by which spontaneous activity carries out its
developmental functions, and both the frequency of [Ca2+]i transients and the
exact ion channels through which Ca2+ enters the cell are crucial parameters.
The recent experiments have shown that there is a dramatic increase in total
Ca2+ current density in cortical neurons near P0, suggesting that Ca2+ current
development is coordinated with the activity. Patch clamp and Ca2+ imaging
methods will be used to determine what Ca2+ channel subtypes are present in
cortical neurons at P0, what the patterns of their development in the perinatal
period are, and whether and to what extent they participate in Ca2+ entry
leading to [Ca2+]i transients during spontaneous
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. These experiments will
elucidate how the intrinsic ion channel properties of cortical neurons, and the
patterns of development of those channels, help shape developmentally critical
spontaneous activity in the brain. The laboratory is one of the first to
discover such activity in cortex, and to map the ion channel development leading
up to it. The laboratory has also carried out extensive prior studies of ion
channel development and the roles of spontaneous activity in invertebrate and
amphibian preparations. The mechanism by which Ca2+ enters neurons during
spontaneous activity is a primary determinant of how electrical activity carries
out its important roles in nervous system
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. In addition to adding
fundamentally to our understanding of nervous system development, this project
will occur in an environment particularly suited to integrating research and
undergraduate education. As director of the undergraduate Neurobiology Major,
Dr. Moody regularly advises undergraduate researchers in his own laboratory. In
fact, the discovery of spnontaneous activity in mouse cortex was made by one
such undergraduate, who presented her findings at the most recent Society for
Neuroscience meeting. Experiments on Ca2+ current development in cortical
neurons are being carried out by another undergraduate who has just started in
the lab. In teaching the introductory course in the major, The Lab's research is
brought into the classroom as an example of integrating biophysical and
developmental studies of neurons. &lt;br/&gt;