* 0416875
* Role of the ULTRAPETALA Genes in Regulating Arabidopsis Meristem Function and Floral Patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jennifer Fletcher, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 07/31/2007
* USD 330,000.00

Like animals, plants have stem cells that are critical for their growth and
development. Plant stem cells are found at the growing shoot tips (called
meristems) and in developing flowers, and they provide cells for the formation
of new organs such as leaves and petals. The main research objective is to
understand the molecular mechanisms that control stem cell activity in shoots
and flowers, and thus specify overall plant architecture. This research project
continues studies of two genes from the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana that
help determine the number of stem cells that are made by shoots and flowers.
Genetic, molecular and biochemical techniques will be used to analyze the
biological functions of these two ULTRAPETALA (ULT) genes. The identity of other
genes that are controlled by the ULT genes, information about factors that work
together with the two genes, and a more thorough understanding of the roles
played by the ULT genes in maintaining shoot and flower stem cell activity are
the expected results of this research. Another important component of this
project is to integrate research and education in a laboratory environment.
Through this project postdoctoral scholars and UC Berkeley graduate students
will receive training in modern scientific theory and practice. Undergraduates
and local high school students will obtain their first exposure to research by
assisting with the project, and will be supervised by the postdoctoral scholars
and graduate students to provide valuable training and mentoring experience.
These studies of plant stem cell activity are important to understand how plants
are able to continuously grow for many years, and will provide a basis for
optimizing plant architecture in economically important crop species.