* 0416314
* Collaborative Proposal: Integrating Morphological and Molecular Systematics of Alternaria and Related Fungal Genera
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Tobin Peever, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 140,312.00

0416314 Peever Species of the fungus genus Alternaria are economically important
in plant disease, food toxicology, medical mycology, and ecology, yet this large
genus has not been comprehensively studied using modern tools of DNA analysis. A
workable taxonomic system is critically needed that will ensure consistent and
reliable identification of species and promote advanced studies in comparative
biology. Toward this end, the principal objectives of collaborative work by
Barry Pryor at University of Arizona and Tobin Peever at Washington State
University are to: 1) establish evolutionary relationships among Alternaria
species based upon comparison of DNA sequences from several genes, 2) re-examine
and establish new criteria for delimiting Alternaria species based upon
comparison of DNA among populations within species, and 3) evaluate
morphological characters that critically define species validated by DNA
analysis. Embedded within these objectives are additional goals of creating
taxonomic identification keys based upon morphological characters that can be
used by research, industry, and regulatory professionals, and developing an on-
line database for the dissemination of data generated from these and other
related studies. This database will serve as a world-wide resource for the
advancement of contemporary research on Alternaria and related fungi. The scope
of the proposed research is both timely and comprehensive in regard to the
evolution of asexually-reproducing fungi, of which Alternaria is a key
representative. In general, taxonomy for most organisms is based primarily on
the development and characteristics of sexual structures, which normally have
proven to be consistent with evolutionary relationships based upon DNA analyses.
Thus, one of the primary limitations in the study of asexual fungi is the lack
of sexual structures; only recently have studies begun to examine and contrast
the characteristics of asexual fungi with data derived from DNA analysis.
However, these studies seldom address intra-specific variation among
populations, which is critical for delimiting the boundaries between species.
Within Alternaria, a considerable range of inter- and intra specific diversity
exists in asexual characters. Moreover, the occurrence of many Alternaria
species over large geographic areas provides an ideal opportunity for
comprehensive studies on intra-specific variation. Thus, the diversity in
morphological traits encompassed within Alternaria provides a fertile ground for
testing hypotheses relating to the evolutionary significance of asexual
characters, and for comparing morphology-based taxonomy with DNA-based taxonomy
of asexual fungi. The effective integration of the asexual fungi into a common
evolutionary framework with the sexual fungi is a widely recognized goal of
mycological research worldwide. A comprehensive study of Alternaria will
contribute significantly to this objective. More importantly, the diversity and
evolution of species within the asexual lineage of Alternaria positions this
study as a foundation for future research into evolutionary processes that shape
asexual fungal lineages and asexual organisms in general.