* 0416169
* Genetic Analysis of Serpentine Adaptation and Endemism
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Alan Pepper, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2009
* USD 440,000.00

Little is known about the processes by which organisms evolve and adapt to a
broad range of environments, giving rise to the Earth's vast biological
diversity (including &gt;250,000 species of terrestrial plants). Occurrences of
the rare and unusual serpentine (or ultra-mafic) rocks on the Earth's surface
give rise to some of the most extreme terrestrial environments, characterized by
high levels of toxic heavy metals such as nickel and chromium, and by extremely
low levels of essential mineral nutrients such as calcium, nitrogen, phosphorus
and potassium. The serpentine environment is also characterized by poor soil
development and drought stress. Most plants are excluded from serpentine soils,
but a very few plants have evolved remarkable tolerance to serpentine, providing
a clear and compelling example of evolutionary adaptation to the environment. In
order to study the genetic basis of serpentine tolerance we have developed a
molecular-genetic experimental system based on the rare serpentine plant
Caulanthus amplexicaulis var. barbarae and the closely related non-serpentine
plant Caulanthus amplexicaulis var. amplexicaulis (both close relatives of the
well-studied model plant Arabidopsis thaliana). Using this system, the number
and chromosomal locations of genes that confer tolerance to serpentine will be
estimated by quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis. In the future, these genes
can be identified and characterized by a comparative-genomics approach using
information from Arabidopsis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will yield
insights into plant mineral nutrition and drought tolerance that may have
significant implications for sustainable agricultural productivity in a changing
global climate. In addition, greater understanding of the mechanisms of plant
tolerance to toxic heavy metals is key to several strategies for bioremediation
of metal-contaminated environments. Finally, this project will demonstrate how
researchers can apply the genomic information gained from substantial public
investments in a small number of model organisms toward understanding the
world's biological diversity and adaptation to extreme and complex environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;