* 0416616
* The Role of Barren Inflorescence2 (bif2) in Axillary Meristem Initiation in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Paula McSteen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 12/31/2007
* USD 379,270.00

Meristems are groups of cells that control the initiation of organs in plants.
Axillary meristems are so called because they arise at the junction or axil
between the leaf and the stem. Axillary meristems give rise to branches and
flowers and therefore play a key role in plant architecture and reproduction. In
maize, axillary meristems give rise to the ear shoots which produce the food
source that is harvested. Axillary meristems are critically important for plant
growth and development yet how they initiate and grow is poorly understood. The
aim of this proposal is to determine the mechanism by which axillary meristems
initiate in maize.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two key players in the initiation of
axillary meristems have been identified. The barren inflorescence2 (bif2) gene
is an important regulator of axillary meristem initiation in maize. The plant
growth hormone, auxin, also plays a critical role in axillary meristem
initiation. The aim of this proposal is to use biochemical, genetic, molecular
and physiological approaches to determine the mechanism by which bif2 controls
the initiation of axillary meristems in maize. The proposed research will
determine how bif2 interacts with auxin and will result in the identification of
additional genes and proteins that interact with bif2 in the control of axillary
meristem initiation in maize.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will provide
training for one postdoctoral researcher and additional undergraduate students.
The research is on a basic fundamental process, initiation of ear shoots and
flowers, in maize which is an important crop in the US. Besides advancing
understanding of an important mechanism in plant development, the research also
has potential practical applications for crop improvement.&lt;br/&gt;