* 0416808
* Speciation by Sexual Selection: Mating Trait Divergence and Ecology in Stickleback Speciation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Janette Boughman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* stephen vessey
* 08/31/2010
* USD 437,997.00

Speciation by sexual selection: Mating trait divergence and ecology in
stickleback speciation&lt;br/&gt;Janette W. Boughman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
question of how new species arise is an old and difficult one. Despite decades
of research, we still lack a clear understanding of what causes speciation. A
long standing but little tested hypothesis is that sexual selection (male
competition for mates and female mating preferences) can cause speciation as
male mating signals and female preferences diversify. Yet, the causes of
diversification in mating traits remain elusive. Without such diversification,
sexual selection cannot contribute to speciation. Therefore, we cannot
understand how sexual selection gives rise to new species without understanding
what causes mating traits to diverge. This project will test the hypothesis that
sexual selection differs when populations live in different habitats, and that
this can lead to diversification of mating traits. It ties together ecology and
behavior to understand how they interact to create new species. The project
studies the threespine stickleback species complex because both ecology and
behavior are implicated in their speciation. Using field and lab experiments,
the project focuses on two mating traits that have been shown to be involved in
both sexual selection and speciation. These traits are nuptial color and body
size. Major goals are to explore how habitat differences influence sexual
selection on these traits and to quantify differences between species in mating
preferences and male competition. The project will provide training for a
postdoctoral scientist, a graduate student, and several undergraduates. The work
is timely because the study species are endangered. This work will assist in
conservation efforts by helping to identify the critical ecological features
that are necessary for the species to persist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;