* 0416742
* Physiological Functions and Biochemical Properties of Plant Cytochromes b561
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Donald Weeks, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2007
* USD 386,084.00

Proposal:
0416742&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ascorbate
(vitamin C) has the ability to protect plants against the damaging affects of
stress situations, such as drought, wounding, exposure to pollutants, high salt
and pathogen attack. In addition, it is a cofactor to numerous metabolic enzymes
and is involved in the biosynthesis of plant hormones. Therefore, ascorbate
plays a key role in the control of plant growth and development, defense against
pathogens and oxidative stress and in the regulation of cellular redox
status.&lt;br/&gt;While knowledge of ascorbate biosynthesis and catabolism is
rapidly expanding, little is known about the mechanisms by which ascorbate
exerts its effects, and how it is regenerated. The objective of the current
proposal is to determine the physiological role of a newly-identified class of
membrane proteins, cytochromes (Cyts) b561, in ascorbate metabolism and
regeneration, using Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system. Based on previous
work, the central hypothesis is that Cyts b561 contributes to ascorbate-mediated
cellular processes by catalyzing trans-membrane electron transport with
ascorbate as the electron donor. Partially-oxidized ascorbate (mono-
dehydroascorbate) can be re-reduced to ascorbate in this reaction, thereby
replenishing cellular ascorbate pools. &lt;br/&gt; The objective of this
proposal will be attained by: 1) determining the spatial and temporal expression
patterns of A. thaliana Cyts b561; 2) determining the physiological role of Cyts
b561 by altering its expression levels, and 3) determining the biochemical
properties of A. thaliana Cyts b561. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed research is
significant in that it is aimed at a class of poorly-studied membrane proteins
involved in ascorbate-mediated reactions. Insight into the function of these
proteins should contribute to our understanding of ascorbate regulation and
metabolism in plants. &lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: The multidisciplinary
approaches in the laboratory of the PI provide an opportunity for training and
professional development of students and postdoctoral researchers. The PI will
take part in university outreach programs to underrepresented groups, and
results from this work will be broadly disseminated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;