* 0416766
* Studying the Origin of Conformational Preferences in Unfolded Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Rohit Pappu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2007
* USD 425,732.00

The objective of this project is to develop a predictive model for the
experimentally observed conformational preferences of unfolded proteins. Tiffany
and Krimm proposed that unfolded proteins are an ensemble of conformations, each
built of local segments that fluctuate in an uncorrelated manner about left-
handed polyproline II (PII) helices. Recent experimental results support this
hypothesis. PII-like conformations are preferred for a variety of model peptides
in water, although the PII-content itself varies with amino acid sequence,
solvent, and temperature. How are these preferences realized in the absence of
cooperative interactions that stabilize the folded state? For over four decades
the random-coil model has been the dominant paradigm for unfolded proteins. This
model does not help explain the origin of specific local conformational
preferences, nor does it offer insights into the role of such preferences for
protein folding and stability. It is imperative that an appropriate framework be
developed to account for the experimentally observed preferences of unfolded
proteins. Such an endeavor is of crucial importance in understanding the
physical principles that underlie the evolution of foldable and functional amino
acid sequences. Recent results suggest that there are two distinct determinants
of conformational preferences in unfolded proteins. The realization of distinct
conformational basins is mainly determined by excluded volume effects.
Conversely, the relative stabilities of these conformational basins encoded by
steric considerations can be noticeably modulated by solvation and other
thermodynamic parameters such as temperature and pressure. The goal of this
research is to study the PII content of short model peptides and small proteins
as a function of amino acid sequence, chain length, and milieu. To this end,
molecular simulations based on both simple and sophisticated all-atom potential
functions will be performed. The validity of all theoretical calculations will
be tested by comparisons with experimental data.

The PI is actively involved in recruiting and training undergraduate and
graduate students in areas of biophysics, bioengineering, and computational
biology. The course contents are cross-disciplinary and students who take the
courses come from a variety of disciplines ranging from the basic to applied
sciences. The PI is also actively working on the design of novel algorithms,
ideas, and tools for molecular simulation. Computational technologies developed
in the PI's group have been and will continue to be integrated with resources
that are made available to the scientific community by members of the Center for
Computational Biology at Washington University.