* 0416720
* Mechanisms of Rapid and Winter Cold-Hardening in Insects
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Richard Lee, Miami University
* Continuing grant
* Adam P. Summers
* 07/31/2009
* USD 533,780.00

Mechanisms of Rapid and Winter Cold-hardening in Insects (IBN #0416720)

Richard E. Lee, Jr. and David L. Denlinger, Principal Investigators

Ongoing collaborative research between investigators at Miami University and
Ohio State University will focus on molecular and physiological adaptations used
by insects for surviving low temperature. Specifically this work will compare
two distinct responses, termed rapid cold hardening and winter cold hardening.
The first is an extremely swift physiological response that occurs within
minutes to hours after mild chilling. This response protects against chilling
injury as occurs during daily cycles of cooling and warming in summer. This
rapid cold-hardening response is ecologically important because it allows
insects to continuously fine-tune their physiological function and organismal
performance to match even modest changes in environmental temperature that occur
commonly throughout much of the year. In contrast, winter cold-hardening allows
insects to survive extreme and extended periods of cold. Although rapid cold-
hardening occurs in a wide range of insects and related animals, little is known
about the physiological mechanisms underpinning this response. Recent, pilot
studies identified two potentially important mechanisms, membrane fluidity and
stress proteins (heat shock proteins), that contribute to this protective
response. This research program will use a model insect, the flesh fly
Sarcophaga crassipalpis, to clarify the roles of these mechanisms in rapid cold-
hardening and winter cold hardening. The results of these studies will provide a
more comprehensive understanding of the integrated physiological events that
both enhance cold tolerance and allow insects to adjust their physiological
performance to match changes in environmental temperature. This research may
also provide new strategies and tools for disruption of insect populations and
for the long-term storage of insects and other organisms at low temperature. In
addition, this project will impact significantly the infrastructure for
scientific research and education in multiple ways. Graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars as well as undergraduate students will have the
opportunity for extended research experiences that will include publication of
scientific papers and presentations at national meetings. As has been done
previously, minority high school students will also gain research experience
each summer through an internship program. In addition to these traditional
duties, the investigators anticipate continuing to integrate their research into
more nontraditional teaching opportunities such as: providing in-service
professional development programs for K-12 teachers, publishing articles in
teacher education journals, developing an insect cold tolerance laboratory for
university biology students (an introductory biology laboratory based on this
research is planned with a target audience of 8,500 students/yr), and by giving
presentations to professional societies, producer groups, and lay audiences.