* 0416205
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Tests of the Adaptive Significance of Ectotherm Thermoregulation
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Patrick Phillips, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Mary Chamberlin
* 05/31/2008
* USD 367,267.00

The body temperature of an animal has profound influence on all aspects of its
biology. Extreme temperatures can be damaging physiologically or even lethal,
but even intermediate body temperatures determine rates of physiological
activities and of reproductive output. Endothermal animals (mainly birds and
mammals) control their body temperatures by adjusting physiology (for example,
metabolic heat production, perspiration); but ectothermal animals (e.g.,
nematodes, insects, fishes, reptiles) are generally unable to do this.
Nevertheless, ectotherms can instead adjust their behavior (for example, amount
of time spent in sun versus shade) to gain remarkable control over body
temperature: many carefully regulate their body temperature at narrow levels
("thermal preferences") that vary from species to species. Such thermal
preferences of species often correlate with temperatures that maximize
physiological performance (sprint speed, digestive efficiency, sensory acuity),
and accordingly a classical hypothesis proposes that thermal preferences of
ectotherms will have evolved to match temperatures that maximize rates of
population growth ("fitness"). This adaptive hypothesis is widely accepted and
is fundamental to physiological ecology, but yet has never been tested directly.
This proposal provides a rigorous exploration of the biological consequences of
thermal preferences of ectotherms. Specifically, it develops an integrated set
of experimental, theoretical, and comparative studies focusing on two species
[fruitfly (Drosophila melanogaster), soil nematode (Caenorhabditis elegans)]
that serve as general models for economically and ecologically important animal
groups (insects and nematodes). The project exploits powerful new methods
(developed by neurobiologists) of experimentally manipulating thermal
preferences. Thermoregulatory precision of both animals will be manipulated both
surgically and via mutation, and thermal preferences themselves will be shifted
via artificial selection (selective breeding). Then the resultant impacts on
fitness will be measured. If the classical hypothesis holds, then (for example)
individuals with shifted thermoregulatory set-points will have reduced fitness
in a thermal gradient relative to their fitness at a fixed temperature, whereas
control individuals will show similar fitness in both environments. The project
also completes a novel theoretical model of thermal preferences. The preliminary
model shows that optimal set-points in fluctuating environments are actually
lower than the temperature maximizing fitness in a constant environment.
Comparative data on insects and lizards will be used to challenge the model's
predictions. These studies have considerable applied relevance. Establishing
whether and how thermal preferences actually maximize rates of population growth
will have crucial implications not only for those studying the effects of the
thermal environment on population growth of arthropod and nematode pests or
disease vectors, but also for applied entomologists needing to determine cost-
effective estimates of optimal temperature for mass rearing of bio-control
agents.