* 0416456
* C-Signal-Dependent Gene Expression in Myxococcus Xanthus
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Lee Kroos, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2007
* USD 400,000.00

In nature, bacteria often exist as members of complex communities called
biofilms. Cells interact within biofilms, sending signals to each other and
changing their behavior in response. Understanding how bacteria interact with
each other and with their hosts is a fundamental challenge in biology. Molecular
analysis of cell-cell interactions in mixed populations of bacteria is
difficult. In contrast, certain bacteria like Myxococcus xanthus readily form
biofilms in which cells interact extensively. When starved, M. xanthus cells
move to aggregation centers and construct a nascent fruiting body. Within the
fruiting body, rod-shaped cells differentiate into spherical, dormant spores.
Studies of C-signaling during M. xanthus development are establishing a new
paradigm for how bacterial cells can interact. C-signaling involves CsgA, a
protein produced in the developing cells that becomes associated with the cell
surface. It has been proposed that a proteolytic fragment of CsgA serves as a
signal upon end-to-end contact between cells. C-signaling induces several
responses in recipient cells. It regulates cell movements, gene expression, and
sporulation. Intriguingly, the different responses to C-signaling require
different levels of CsgA, and the level of CsgA rises during development.
Therefore, C-signaling appears to dictate the order of events during the middle
to late stages of development. The long-term goal of this project is to
determine the molecular mechanisms of developmental gene expression in response
to C-signaling. The broader impact of the research is that it will provide
paradigms for how bacteria might interact in biofilms. The insights gained will
find application in environmental cleanup, industrial processes, agricultural
practices, and animal health. Also, the research will contribute to the
development of human resources in science through the training of
undergraduates, graduate, and postdoctoral students.