* 0416500
* The Emergence of Social Movements - Renewal Request
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Kathleen Blee, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2007
* USD 100,323.00

SES-0416500&lt;br/&gt;Kathleen Blee&lt;br/&gt;University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues a NSF-funded pilot
project to examine the formation of groups that propose collective action for
social change, here termed emerging social movement groups. (ESMGs). It follows
the dictum of social movement scholar Alberto Melucci that [t]he empirical unity
of a social movement should be considered a result rather than a starting point,
a fact to be explained rather than something already evident. Using the
framework of time-geography and its applications in the study of place, this
project analyzes the processes that underlie the emergence of social movements
in the U.S. today. In most studies, a social movement group is selected for
study when it is fairly unified, at the stage when it is most visible to
researchers. At this point, a group generally has some coherence: a shared range
of ideas or ideologies, interpersonal routines, and a definable organization. In
contrast to the standard focus on established groups, this project examines
ESMGs, defined as the vast population of tiny or incipient movements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will collect comparative data on a purposive
sample of social movement groups in Pittsburgh. Data will be gathered through
ethnographic observation of group events and meetings along with structured and
unstructured interviews with movement participants, potential participants, and
defecting members. The goals of the project are: (1) to identify the social
processes within emerging social movement groups; and (2) to develop a set of
testable propositions for future comparative research on social movement
formation. Additionally, the study will explore the mechanisms that underlie
civic participation and civic disengagement by analyzing what happens in groups
that attempt to organize to challenge existing authorities. It also will address
gaps in research on social movements and provide longitudinal data on social
movements, multiple case studies within a single political field, the inclusion
of conservative and right wing social movements, and attention to the internal
dynamics and tensions of social movement
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The study will contribute
to methodology and scientific knowledge about the internal processes of emergent
social movements; (2) enhance student training and research through the
incorporation of undergraduate interns, including those from under-represented
groups in the research, the development of a graduate seminar and an
undergraduate course using data collected in this study, and the distribution of
data on local emergent social movements for student papers, theses, and
dissertations; and (3) disseminate findings to both academic and non-academic
audiences interested in understanding how to stimulate robust and diverse
involvement in movements for social change.&lt;br/&gt;