* 0416364
* GenderQuest
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Marianne De Laet, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2007
* USD 200,763.00

The success of the computer and video game software industry has spurred
interest in exploiting games in a range of applications for business and
consumer products as well as pedagogical agents. But building and playing
computer games is a male business; existing games don't appeal to women and
girls in the same way they do to men and boys. In this project, the PI aims to
teach women to build games that engage women and girls. The PI's approach is
interdisciplinary in nature, building on cultural analysis as a condition of
successful and responsible technology design, by means of a collaboration
between a computer scientist and an anthropologist. Thus, the project will
contribute to bridging the divide between the sciences and the social sciences.
The PI also expects that the project will contribute to gender theory, in that
for the first time a significant cultural medium allows interactive
experimentation with identity. The PI will explore how/whether women designers
build different games than men. The PI believes that the differences between
male and female design have something to do with women's experiences with the
cultural expectations and gender stereotypes that pervade existing games, that
by critiquing existing games they will articulate how they practice gender in
their day-to-day lives, where by building new games women will build new images
of gender. Thus, the PI envisions that this project will enable more subtle and
alternate gender roles and categories to emerge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The research will contribute to our understanding of the complications
of gender in technology. It will enhance our understanding of the simultaneous
shaping of culture and technology. And it will bring this integration into
practice by simultaneously building and analyzing games, which have the power to
increase computer literacy among girls and women, and thus in the end to attract
more women to technological careers. Female game developers can change the
repertoire of games that the industry produces; they will enrich the cast of
characters and the modes of behavior that games provide, yielding more
responsible re-creations of the cultural space that, whether they aim to or not,
games unmistakably represent.