* 0416810
* Dissertation: Alphabetic transfer in English and Spanish
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Cecile McKee, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2006
* USD 11,864.00

Under the direction of Dr. Cecile McKee, Mr. Patrick Bolger will conduct
psycholinguistic research for his dissertation concerning orthographic
knowledge. When writing systems share letters, as English and Spanish do, a
second language reader might think similar relations hold between graphemes and
phonemes in both languages. But these relations are not identical and so may
hinder literacy development. This research concerns the transfer of knowledge
from one writing system to another. Letter-detection experiments will address
these issues with adults and children in English and Spanish. Subjects will see
a letter and then decide if it appears in a word. Different primes precede the
target words. For example, the E in SPENT is primed by a single grapheme in
WRECK, by a digraph in FIELD, and not primed by BLOCK. The key comparison is a
vowel represented by one or two letters, a phenomenon that distinguishes Spanish
and English orthography. Adult and child subjects include English-speakers
learning Spanish and Spanish-speakers learning English, as well as monolingual
English-speakers and monolingual Spanish-speakers (in Arizona and Argentina). If
digraphs are reading units in English, English monolinguals should show priming
effects in the WRECK condition but not in the FIELD condition. Spanish-speakers
at lower English proficiency levels should show priming in both conditions in
English. As they become more proficient, priming effects in the FIELD condition
should disappear. In other words, Spanish-speakers should be insensitive to the
difference between a single grapheme and a digraph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project bears directly on the scientific questions noted above and indirectly on
education challenges. Understanding alphabetic transfer is crucial because ever
more children start school in this country as second language learners.
According to the US Census Bureau (2000), the number of people in Spanish-
speaking homes increased 62% from 1990 to 2000. The 2000 Census reports that
over 7 million Spanish-speakers speak no English or speak it poorly. Considering
all languages, that census found that 12 million people are "linguistically
isolated" (i.e., in households where no one over 14 speaks English "very well").
This number is significantly greater than in 1990. This research will inform
reading instruction for bilinguals and so benefit minority groups. Further, the
investigators will bring the research results to parent, educators, and
administrators associated with schools in both Arizona and Argentina.
&lt;br/&gt;