* 0416568
* DNA Binding Studies of Extremophilic DNA Polymerases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Vincent LiCata, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2008
* USD 420,000.00

This project will examine functional and structural characteristics of DNA
binding by extremophilic DNA polymerases, focusing on Taq polymerase from the
thermophilic bacterium Thermus aquaticus .Due to its use in the polymerase chain
reaction, Taq is one of the most important biotechnological reagents in use in
the world today, yet its biochemistry and functional biophysics have only just
begun to be characterized. The central hypothesis of this work is that Taq and
E. coli polymerases differ in a number of significant functional and
thermodynamic ways, and that the differences and similarities between Taq and E.
coli polymerases will provide insight into the overlaps and differences in their
physiological roles. This project will quantitatively characterize the DNA
structural binding preferences and thermodynamics of the different species of
polymerase. It will also characterize the structural topology of the bound DNA
using several solution structural techniques. The kinetics of DNA binding by the
different polymerases will also be characterized. The intellectual merits of
this work include the much needed functional and structural characterizations of
these important enzymes. Only as the knowledge base on these extremophilic
polymerases expands will it be possible to fully understand all the parameters
that comprise and control the process of DNA replication across the entire
spectrum of living organisms. In addition, data on Taq polymerase is often used
to answer questions about E. coli Pol 1,and vice versa, since they are both Type
1 polymerases. Preliminary data show that such extrapolation is risky. Further
understanding of Taq will have broad scientific impact on the biotechnological
field as well. The educational and broad impact goals of this work include: 1)
introducing more hands-on activities and current research into current courses
at Louisiana State University; 2) training new graduate students in the use of
synchrotron small angle X-ray scattering methods for addressing biological
questions; 3) writing a series of plays with scientific content for all-age
audiences, and pursuing eventual production of these plays.