* 0416627
* Collaborative Research: High Nighttime Stomatal Conductance and Transpiration in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Lisa Donovan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 09/30/2008
* USD 243,578.00

Water is a key limiting factor for plant productivity worldwide. Although many
mechanisms that reduce water loss have evolved in plants, water loss from leaves
is inevitable, since photosynthesis requires open stomata (i.e. pores) through
which carbon dioxide is absorbed and water vapor is lost. Accordingly, in the
dark when photosynthesis is inactive, most plants are expected to completely
close stomata thus reducing water loss and conserving water in the root zone.
However, contrary to this expectation, it has been repeatedly demonstrated that
many plant species have substantial nighttime stomatal opening (up to 90% of
daytime values) and have significant nighttime water loss under natural
conditions (up to 15% of daily water loss). Water spending by plants through
high nighttime water loss may benefit nutrient-limited plants at least partly
because of increased nutrient supply with flux of water to roots, as suggested
by preliminary data and computer simulations. The objective of this research is
to investigate the adaptive significance and regulation of nighttime stomatal
opening and water loss in plants. Using laboratory, growth chamber, greenhouse,
and field experiments three hypotheses will be tested. The experimental approach
for each is also listed below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Availability of nutrients
and water affect nighttime stomatal opening and water loss. Nutrient
availability, plant nutrient status, soil and plant water status, and
atmospheric evaporative demand (e.g. relative humidity and temperature) will be
manipulated and effects on nighttime stomatal opening will be
measured.&lt;br/&gt;2) Benefits of high nighttime water loss for plant growth
and seed yield will be found in conditions where nutrients are more limiting
than water. Nighttime water loss will be increased or decreased by manipulating
atmospheric evaporative demand at night and effects on plant nutrient
acquisition, growth, and seed yield will be measured.&lt;br/&gt;3) At the
evolutionary scale, selection for high nighttime stomatal opening and water loss
may have occurred in habitats with abundant water but low nutrient availability.
Closely related plant species native to habitats with differing nutrient and
water availability will be assessed for nighttime stomatal opening and water
loss under uniform conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypotheses 1 and 2 will be
tested with four focal species that differ in growth form and stress tolerance:
mouse-ear cress (small annual), sunflower (large annual), greasewood (salt-
tolerant desert shrub), and cottonwood (tree). These plant species all have high
nighttime stomatal opening and water loss, but they can further close stomata at
night under water stress. Leaf and whole-plant physiological responses and long-
term growth and seed yield effects will be measured. For Hypothesis 3, the four
focal species will be compared to many additional species within eight diverse
taxonomic groups allowing broader interpretation of
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding effects of nighttime water loss will
shed new light on how plants cope with water and nutrient deficiencies in
nature. Knowledge of the magnitude of nighttime water loss and its regulation is
important for crop breeding and management, because nighttime water loss
increases total crop water use. Additionally, knowledge of nighttime water loss
and its regulation will ultimately improve understanding of larger scale
processes such as competition, ecosystem water and nutrient fluxes, and uptake
of gaseous pollutants by plants. The project will train a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students, a technician, and a postdoctoral
researcher. The Donovan and Richards labs both have strong records of
proactively recruiting underrepresented groups and directing inquiry-based
undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;