* 0416502
* Functional Genomic Approach to Identify and Characterize MPK-1 ERK Phosphorylation Targets in Caenorhabditis Elegans Germline Development
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Tim Schedl, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 410,000.00

This project will identify gene products that function in the free-living
roundworm C. elegans germline development which are phosphorylation targets of
MPK-1 ERK MAP Kinase. ERK MAP kinases act at the end of numerous extracellular
signaling cascades, such as receptor tyrosine kinase pathways, which have
essential functions in animal development and homeostasis. In many cases, the
downstream target proteins that are activated or inactivated when phosphorylated
by extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) are unknown. In the model
experimental organism C. elegans, there is a single gene similar to ERK (ERK
ortholog) and is known as MPK-1. This functions in ten different germline
processes and the target proteins that are phosphorylated by MPK-1 ERK to
mediate these germline processes are unknown. In this project, a three-part
approach will be used to identify MPK-1 ERK phosphorylation targets that
function in germline development. In the first part, docking site sequences will
be used to computationally identify C. elegans proteins that are potential
targets of MPK-1 ERK phosphorylation. In the second part, in vivo validation of
the predicted target gene products will be performed by RNA mediated
interference of the corresponding genes in genetic backgrounds that are
sensitized for MPK-1 ERK signaling. In the third part, selected in vivo
validated targets will be confirmed as targets by in vitro phosphorylation using
purified mammalian ERK. The Broader Impact of this project is at three levels:
First, the project will provide research training in genetics, genomics and
developmental biology for a postdoctoral fellow and a number of undergraduate
students. Second, novel genes that mediate ten different aspects of germline
development that are directly regulated by ERK will be identified. Third, given
the conservation of both ERK signaling and germline development, it is very
likely that the ERK targets identified in C. elegans will also be ERK targets in
other animals.