* 0416243
* IMR:  Development of an Optimized Scanning X-Ray Microdiffraction System for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Ersan Ustundag, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 321,189.00

This project will further develop a very productive synchrotron-based X-ray
microdiffraction (mXRD) system at the Advanced Light Source (ALS), Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory. X-ray microdiffraction is a recent technique that
employs sub-um X-ray beams and yields unique information on material structure,
strain, texture and defects at the microstructural level. Since most material
properties are dictated by mechanisms that occur at this level, mXRD offers a
powerful tool to better understand materials. This project will further improve
and optimize the mXRD system at ALS by: (i) improving spatial resolution (below
100 nm); (ii) allowing real-time data analysis; (iii) introducing higher strain
resolution (down to 10-5) and deeper penetration by extending the X-ray energy
range; and (iv) permitting three-dimensional measurements. The new mXRD system
will allow the first time study of important problems in materials science and
engineering that include stress, structure and domain micromechanics studies in
ferroelectrics; investigation of metal deformation at the nanoscale and
deformation mechanisms in metallic glasses; study of phase and stress evolution
in oxide films; constitutive behavior investigation of shape memory alloys;
electromigration and stress studies in microelectronic devices. The upgrade is
also expected to raise the productivity of the mXRD beamline significantly due
to faster data acquisition and analysis. For education and outreach, this
project will offer unique training opportunities to students at all levels
between high school and graduate school. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will add new capabilities to a very productive synchrotron-based X-ray
microdiffraction (mXRD) system to allow a new range of challenging materials
science problems to be addressed. X-ray microdiffraction has been enabled at the
sub-um scale in the last 5 years and the Advanced Light Source (ALS) at Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory has made pioneering advances in this area. The mXRD
technique at ALS has been successfully applied to determine strain and defect
distributions at the microstructural level in numerous materials. This project
will further improve and optimize the mXRD system at ALS by: (i) improving
spatial resolution (below 100 nm); (ii) allowing real-time data analysis; (iii)
introducing higher strain resolution (down to 10-5) and deeper penetration by
extending the X-ray energy range; and (iv) permitting 3-D measurements. The new
mXRD system will allow the first time study of important problems in materials
science and engineering that include stress, structure and domain micromechanics
studies in ferroelectrics; investigation of metal deformation at the nanoscale
and deformation mechanisms in metallic glasses; study of phase and stress
evolution in oxide films; constitutive behavior investigation of shape memory
alloys; electromigration and stress studies in microelectronic devices. The
upgrade is also expected to raise the productivity of the mXRD beamline
significantly due to faster data acquisition and analysis. For education and
outreach, this project will offer unique training opportunities to students at
all levels between high school and graduate school.