* 0416126
* Interactive Effects of Disturbance Frequency and Species Composition on Ecosystem Functioning of Intermittent Streams: a Test of Future Climate Change Scenarios
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Matt Whiles, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 12/31/2007
* USD 326,000.00

Predictions of global climate change in the Great Plains region of the U.S.
include an increase in the duration of droughts and the severity of floods.
These climatic changes will be accompanied by shifts in the abundance and
distribution of aquatic organisms that are caused by human modifications to the
landscape. Aquatic research in the Great Plains has indicated a strong influence
of flooding and drought on the condition of prairie stream ecosystems. However,
changes in climatic events will be coupled with changes in aquatic biodiversity,
and how the combination of these changes will influence prairie stream
ecosystems is currently unknown. The proposed experiments will simulate both
changes in climatic events and the abundance of dominant aquatic organisms such
as fish and stream-dwelling insects. Using observations from field experiments
and from a controlled experimental stream facility, the effects of floods,
drought, and the diversity of aquatic life in prairie streams will be
characterized. The experiments will measure the amount of photosynthetic
production and the ability of streams to capture nutrients under different
climate change scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding dynamics of
prairie streams is essential for the conservation and management of these
ecologically important habitats. Moreover, when healthy, these streams filter
nutrients from the surrounding landscape and can have strong influences on water
quality. The proposed research is consistent with the general theme of the Konza
Prairie Long-term Ecological Research (LTER) site and will allow broad
assessment of the consequences of climate change on an entire prairie ecosystem.
Research associated with the experimental stream facility at the Konza Prairie
Biological Station also will facilitate public education by allowing visitors to
directly observe stream organisms. Recruitment of students from underrepresented
groups will be facilitated through cooperation with the Kansas State University
Student Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program and the currently funded NSF-
REU site activities.&lt;br/&gt;