* 0416310
* Flagellar Length Control in Chlamydomonas:  The Role of Intraflagellar Transport and Turnover
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Wallace Marshall, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 383,533.00

How cells regulate organelle size is a fundamental question in cell biology. In
this project the eukaryotic flagellum will be used as a model system for studies
of organelle size regulation, by reducing the problem of measuring size to a
single dimension: length. Flagella undergo continuous turnover, and the length
control mechanism must balance the rates of assembly and disassembly to maintain
a steady-state length. Several models have been proposed to explain this
balance. One model relies on the inherent length-dependence of intraflagellar
transport (IFT), an active transport process that occurs within flagella. Based
on prior studies of IFT, it is predicted that the efficiency of transport will
decrease as flagellar length increases, leading to a balance-point between
assembly and disassembly occurring at a unique length. An alternative model
proposes that length is regulated by a length-sensor coupled to a feedback
control system. This project will test these models by examining the mechanistic
basis of flagellar length mutants. The balance point model predicts that such
mutants must affect either transport or turnover. A combination of genetics and
microscopy will be used to test whether length-altering mutants can be entirely
explained by changes in the rates of turnover or transport. This project will
provide research training for undergraduate and graduate students.