* 0416607
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Eastern Khanty: A Grammatical Description
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Masayoshi Shibatani, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Masayoshi Shibatani, Mr. Andrei Filtchenko will
conduct fieldwork in northwestern Siberia on Eastern Khanty, an endangered Ugric
language which is spoken natively by fewer than 300 people. The project will
produce a detailed morpho-syntactic description of Eastern Khanty, whose
dialects exhibit typologically rare and archaic features at various levels of
language organization. Selected methodology will include contrastive morpho-
syntactic and contextual analysis based on the narrative corpus, attending to
the information structure, within the cognitive-functional framework. Special
attention will be assigned to the issues of voice, transitivity and case in
their functional-pragmatic motivation and as instrumental in text cohesion. Mr.
Filtchenko will produce in trilingual multimedia format a reference grammar,
text corpora and a Khanty-Russian-English dictionary, which will serve as
valuable tools for both educational and academic purposes.

Why is it important to document unwritten languages such as the language of the
north-western Siberian aboriginal nation of Eastern Khanty? Language is a
complex accumulation of information about a human community's evolution, a joint
social, cognitive, psychological experience, often a single artefact of social
history, migration, social organization, cross-community interaction. Mr.
Filtchenko will archive and disseminate the linguistic data in standardised
formats accessible and useful both to the academic community and to native
Eastern Khanty communities. The language data will be accompanied in accessible
cross-reference form with cultural context information, ethnographic comments,
audio, photo and video documents, to help better understand how the language is
used by the native speakers in everyday life, and ultimately, the place,
function, origin and evolution of language as an indivisible feature of human
society. The language and culture data will form the core database for the
reference and pedagogical materials, and offer a significant contribution to the
native language preservation efforts of local communities and minority education
initiatives.

