* 0416546
* Mechanisms of Plant Cell Morphogenesis: ARP2/3 Function and Trichome Distortion in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Daniel Szymanski, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith M. Venuti
* 07/31/2006
* USD 261,000.00

Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activities

The long-term goal of Dr. Szymanski's research program is to use Arabidopsis
morphology mutants and all available experimental tools to understand the basic
mechanisms of cell shape control. The primary objective of this proposal is to
determine if an actin filament-nucleating machine, termed the ARP2/3 complex,
exists in plants, and if so, its function during polarized growth. The central
hypothesis of this proposal is that an Arabidopsis ARP2/3 complex modulates
actin filament nucleation and vacuole biogenesis during epidermal development.
His group plans to test our central hypothesis by pursuing the following three
specific aims.

Specific Aim #1: To determine if the distorted trichome phenotype is caused
exclusively by mutation of ARP2/3 subunit genes.

Specific Aim #2: To test for the existence and essential function of a seven
protein Arabidopsis ARP2/3 complex.

Dr. Szymanski's use of forward molecular genetics, novel live cell imaging
assays, and biochemical tools is an innovative approach to study ARP2/3 function
in a multicellular organism. Upon completion of the proposed work his group
expects to determine if a plant ARP2/3 complex is essential. He expects to
establish functional relationships between ARP2/3 subunit localization, the
organization of the actin cytoskeleton, and specific organelle trafficking steps
in the cell. These data will provide new knowledge about how complex organisms
utilize ARP2/3 subunits to control cell shape and tissue function. Dr. Szymanski
is extremely well qualified to undertake the proposed research. He has the most
extensive set of ARP2/3 subunit mutants, and has generated an extensive
collection of DNA and protein-based reagents that will permit functional
analyses.

Broader impacts of the proposed research

The integration of research and learning activities in the Szymanski laboratory
ensures that his program has a broad impact on society. Dr. Szymanski published
two book chapters and two teaching-oriented reviews on plant morphogenesis. This
grant requests continued funding for undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral
fellow research opportunities. Part of the research experience for graduate and
post-graduate students will include lab and classroom teaching opportunities.
Some of the undergraduate student support will be used to teach engineering and
computer science students image processing and mutant phenotype quantitation.
Dr. Szymanski actively participates in the MARC-AIM and a departmental graduate
student recruiting program, both of which focus on increasing minority student
participation in science. Dr. Szymanski will make the materials developed in
this proposal available to the scientific community, and some of them will be
used in college and high school genetics laboratory exercises. Last, Dr.
Szymanski, as a Co.P.I. on instrumentation grants, has improved the
infrastructure and use of fluorescence microscopy for many biologists at Purdue
University. Collectively, the efforts described in this proposal are aimed at
translating basic research activities into broad-based educational experiences
that promote the excitement and relevance of the scientific process.