* 0416952
* Discovering the plant cellular targets of P. syringae virulence factor AvrPpiB
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Sarah Grant, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2010
* USD 826,371.00

The goal of the proposed research is to characterize proteins that interact with
type III effectors, using the Arabidopsis- P. syringae interaction as a model
pathosystem. One type III effector, the Pseudomonas syringae AvrPpiB protein,
has no known or predicated biochemical function. However, preliminary data have
shown that this factor increases bacterial growth by 10-fold under mild water
deficit conditions when introduced into a bacterial strain with reduced
virulence. AvrPpiB also causes systemic chlorosis when expressed in older leaves
of Arabidopsis. These observations suggest that AvrPpiB plays a physiological
role in microbes and plants.&lt;br/&gt;Several objectives are proposed to
understand the precise function of AvrPpiB. First, ecotype differences in
AvrPpiB-dependent host responses will be mapped as a prelude to positional
cloning of the responsible genes. Second, a mutant screen will be undertaken to
identify host (Arabidopsis) genes that are required for AvrPpiB-dependent host
responses. The mutants will be characterized using physiological, biochemical,
and "-omics" technologies, and potentially informative genes will be cloned.
Third, changes in transcription profiles will be assessed in Arabidopsis that
either respond or fail to respond to AvrPpiB. This should provide insight into
signaling pathways that give rise to the response. Fourth, proteins that
interact with AvrPpiB will be identified in vitro using yeast expression assays,
and in vivo by expressing TAP-tagged effector protein fusions in Arabidopsis and
purifying tagged protein complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will add to our understanding of host components that interact or
mediate plant response to bacterial pathogens. This has implications for the
design of resistant crop species. The proposed research will also involve
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, including
minorities. Outreach activities will be undertaken that relate to educating the
public on issues about genetically modified foods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;