* 0416223
* 15N Natural Abundance of Soil Microbial Biomass as a Tool for Assessing Controls on N-cycling Processes in Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Stephen Hart, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Russell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 460,000.00

Nitrogen limits plant growth in many soils around the world. Plants compete with
microorganisms in the soil for nitrogen. When carbon is abundant in the form of
organic matter or dead organisms, and nitrogen is relatively scarce, the
microorganisms will take up most of the available nitrogen. In contrast, when
microbial growth is limited by carbon, soil microorganisms will increase the
amount of nitrogen available to plants by breaking down organic matter that
contains nitrogen. At present it is difficult to measure if soil microorganisms
are competing with plants for nitrogen or if they are helping plants to grow by
supplying nitrogen. Nitrogen atoms occur in a least two forms in the
environment. Most of the atoms have 7 protons and 7 neutrons (14N) but a few
atoms will consist of 7 protons and 8 neutrons (15N). Schwartz, Hungate, Hart
and Dijkstra have found that soil organisms are enriched in 15N relative to
nitrogen in the soil solution. They propose that the ratio of 15N to 14N in the
microbial biomass indicates if microbial growth is limited by nitrogen or by
carbon. If correct, it will be possible to ascertain if plant growth is promoted
or restricted by soil organisms. This project will be the first to measure the
stable nitrogen isotope composition of the soil microbial biomass, and to test a
conceptual model for how microbial 15N enrichment is controlled.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study may provide a new tool to assay the impact of
soil microorganisms on plant productivity. In addition, the project will
contribute to education at undergraduate and graduate levels. The principal
investigators teach courses in environmental microbiology, general ecology,
microbial ecology, ecosystem ecology and forestry. The proposed research will be
incorporated into these courses. &lt;br/&gt;