* 0416586
* Pattern Formation in the Wing of Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Seth Blair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 06/30/2007
* USD 420,000.00

Project Summary- Pattern formation in the wing of Drosophila (S.S. Blair, PI)

1) Intellectual Merit- The normal development of embryos requires the precise
specification of specific tissue types, and failures in that specification
underlie many birth defects and congenital diseases. Signaling between tissues
and cells during development often plays a critical role in this process.
However, the details underlying many important signaling pathways and how those
signals are transmitted in developing tissues is still quite poorly understood.
This project examines the way in which important signals, mediated by the BMP
class of TGFbs, are transmitted over long distance, and how that signaling is
modified by extracellular proteins. The model system used for this work is the
wing of the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster. The advantages of this model
system are several: the genetic and molecular analyses possible in Drosophila
are perhaps unmatched by any other animal, and the mechanisms underlying
development of the Drosophila wing shows several striking parallels with the
mechanisms used in humans and other mammals. The work focuses specifically on
the development of the crossveins within the wing, and the role played by two
BMP-like signaling molecules (Decapentaplegic and Glass bottom boat), three
proteins that bind BMPs, (Short gastrulation, Twisted gastrulation-2,
Crossveinless 2), and the protease Tolkin, which can regulate the activity of
Short gastrulation by cleaving it.

The evidence outlined in the proposal indicates that the crossveins, unlike the
other veins, require BMP formation for their initial development. Moreover, the
crossveins are exquisitely sensitive to an unusual aspect of BMP signaling: the
stimulation of long-distance signaling by BMP-binding molecules. These molecules
are best known for their ability to act as inhibitors of signaling by
sequestering BMPs from their receptors. Nonetheless, preliminary data shows that
the BMP-binding molecules are required for signaling in the crossveins. Aim 1
examines the way in which these molecule act, examining in detail where they are
required, which ligand they act upon, and how they affect BMP diffusion. Aim 2
examines the Crossveinless 2 protein, testing theories that it acts on Short
gastrulation function in vivo and in vitro. Aim 3 characterizes novel genetic
loci that affect crossvein development.

2) Broader impact. The research funded will be of obvious relevance to those
working on developmental biology of vertebrates and invertebrates. This research
also helps train both graduate students and undergraduates. The PI's lab usually
supports 4-5 graduate students and 2-3 undergraduates per year, and these carry
out the brunt of the research. The latter are involved not only in independent
study classes, but also rotate through the PI's lab as part of the introductory
biology sequence at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. Many of these students
have gone on to productive careers in the biosciences, as graduate students,
postdocs or faculty. The PI is also heavily involved in undergraduate education,
and this teaching is heavily informed by the PI's research program. The PI has
also been very involved in writing reviews for the field and in turn as acting
as a referee for manuscripts and grants. The PI maintains a web site detailing
techniques for immunohistological and mosaic techniques in Drosophila as a guide
for those new to the field (http://bender.zoology.wisc.edu/antiweb.html).