* 0416164
* Paleoanthropological Research at the Fossil Primate Sites of the Fayum, Egypt
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Erik Seiffert, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean E. Turnquist
* 06/30/2008
* USD 289,018.00

This project seeks to recover fossil primates and other vertebrates from the
Fayum Depression in northern Egypt, an area that contains the only continuous
sequence of fossiliferous continental middle-to-late Eocene and early Oligocene
(approximately 38 to 32 million-year-old) deposits on the Afro-Arabian landmass.
Fossil primates from the Fayum region provide our most detailed documentation of
the early evolution of Anthropoidea (the group containing monkeys, apes, and
humans) during the time period when the Old World anthropoids (catarrhines) are
thought to have diverged from the New World anthropoids (platyrrhines). Recently
discovered later middle Eocene fossil localities in the Fayum region have led to
the recovery of an entirely new assemblage of basal anthropoids as well as the
earliest record of the primate group containing lorises, galagos, and lemurs
(the extant or "crown" Strepsirrhini). Recovery of additional, more complete,
anthropoid and strepsirrhine fossils from all of the Eocene and Oligocene
horizons exposed in the Fayum region will be critical for elucidating the
pattern and timing of early primate diversification in Africa and the anatomy
and adaptations of the primate group that gave rise to all later living and
extinct anthropoids. The field and laboratory work will continue to test
hypotheses related to the following issues in early anthropoid and strepsirrhine
evolution: 1) pattern and sequence of anatomical character evolution; 2)
anatomical diversity and phylogenetic relationships; 3) influence of climate
change on locomotor and dietary adaptations; 4) Paleogene primate biogeography,
and 5) timing of divergences within major primate lineages. In addition, the
team will continue to analyze and describe other mammalian groups that lived
alongside these early primates, and will synthesize this information with other
geological data to provide a complete picture of the ancient environments
represented in the Birket Qarun, Qasr el-Sagha, and Jebel Qatrani
Formations.&lt;br/&gt;The Fayum primate fossils provide rare glimpses into
important stages in primate evolutionary history, and should be of great
interest to humanity in general. The broadest impact of this work will come
through detailed analysis of these fossils and subsequent dissemination of this
information into the public realm. The publicity that will surround the
description of new primate fossils from the Fayum region will also help to
highlight the utility of paleontological inquiry as a means for demonstrating
the reality of the evolutionary processes that shaped our shared history with
other primates. Paleontological work in Egypt will allow for the continued field
training of young American and Egyptian students interested in paleoanthropology
and vertebrate paleontology, and will lead to important scientific
collaborations with Egyptian paleontologists working in the Egyptian Geological
Survey and Mining Authority and the Egyptian Geological Museum.&lt;br/&gt;