* 0416840
* The Effects of Institutional Transformation on Corruption in Indonesia
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2009
* J. Vernon Henderson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 10/31/2009
* USD 441,591.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0416840&lt;br/&gt;NSF Program:
ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;Institution: NBER/Brown University&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Henderson, Vernon J&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: The Effects of
Institutional Transformation on Corruption in
Indonesia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Corruption has been one of the major problems
hampering economic growth and development in a large part of the developing
world. To date, all research on the causes of corruption have relied on
aggregate data, mostly at the national level. This research will collect and
analyze original data and the nature and costs of corruption to businesses in
Indonesia and the role of public sector transformation in influencing
corruption. Corruption in Indonesia is widespread and costly. While the
"efficient grease hypothesis," argues that bribes facilitate business
operations, this research argues that, with corruption, public officials
increase the numbers of regulations, or "harassment," in order to generate more
opportunities to collect bribes. Indonesia represents an unusual opportunity to
study the impact of institutional reform on corruption for two reasons, the most
important being the recent wholesale transformation of the public
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most corruption involves interaction with local
officials, who administer regulations and taxation. Before 2001, these officials
operated in a unitary system, and were appointed by the center. In early 2001,
Indonesia effectively federalized, shifting responsibilities for local public
services to the local county, or kabupaten&lt;br/&gt;government.
Decentralization and local democratization were seen as ways to curb corruption
through the local political competition and of inter-jurisdictional competition
for firms. Secondly, there is a base line survey that documents the extent and
forms of corruption at the time of decentralization. This research will survey a
number of the original firms as well as new ones, to assess the impacts of the
institutional change on corruption and to gather more detailed information on
corruption and firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is very little known about the
nature of the interaction between firms and officials that leads to corruption.
What types of public regulations and taxation invite bribes and how important is
each type? In the bribing process, what are the&lt;br/&gt;trade-offs among
official required payments for taxes and licenses, bribes to reduce these
payments, and time spent wooing local officials? How heterogeneous are responses
across firms? Some corruption involves defraud of the state of revenues. But
expected bribes received by local officials are capitalized into
lower&lt;br/&gt;official salaries, and represent de facto "taxation". By
studying the relationship in a strategic sense, the PI brings very good
analytical framework to the issue of bribe taking in developing countries. The
data collected will be of enormous use to other
researchers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;