* 0416785
* Study of Membrane Domains with Coherent Raman Microscopy and Microspectroscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Ji-Xin Cheng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2008
* USD 478,987.00

The objective of this project is to develop coherent anti-Stokes Raman
scattering (CARS) microscopy to study membrane rafts. The PI will develop three-
color CARS microscopy in which two images, one tuned to the peak and the other
tuned to the dip of a CARS band, are acquired simultaneously. The difference of
the two images will permit high-sensitivity vibration imaging of single
membranes. The resonant CARS signal from the aliphatic C-D vibration will be
used to determine the partition ratio of a specific lipid between the liquid
ordered (rafts) and disordered domains. The PI will investigate whether rafts
are formed by an interaction between cholesterol and lipid hydrocarbon chains or
by hydrogen bonding between cholesterol and sphingomyelin. He will use the
polarization sensitivity of CARS to determine the orientation of the CH2 groups
of lipid hydrocarbon chains in a bilayer containing cholesterol. This method
will be able to measure the ordering degree of lipids in rafts. The PI will also
develop coherent Raman microspectroscopy for spectral characterization of lipid-
lipid characterization in single membrane domains. The PI will directly test the
hypothesis of lipid rafts in the plasma membrane of live cells. Aggregation of
fluorophore labeled rafts has been observed in different cellular processes. He
will examine if these macroscopic domains are rich in sphingomyelin and
cholesterol using CARS microscopy. The non-resonant background that arises from
water and other cellular organelles will be removed by using the three-color
excitation scheme. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an environment
for interdisciplinary scientific training. Students involved in this research
will need to combine the knowledge in chemistry, physics, and biology. The new
imaging methods developed in this project will be incorporated in the PI's
graduate level course of Biomedical Optics and undergraduate level course of
Senior Engineering Design. &lt;br/&gt;