* 0416783
* Collaborative Research: Development, Structure, and Function of the Bacterial Symbiont Colonization Site in Steinernematid Nematodes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Heidi Goodrich-Blair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 06/30/2007
* USD 201,594.00

Most children are taught that germs (microbes) will make them sick, and indeed,
some can. However, the more common natural relationship between animals and
microbes is mutually beneficial (mutualistic) since microbes are absolutely
necessary for normal animal development, nutrition, and immunity. In these
associations microbes typically colonize discrete locations on or within the
animal. Little is as yet understood regarding the distinct physical nature of
such colonization sites, or how beneficial animal-microbe associations are
formed and maintained. It is known that these processes rely on animal-microbe
communication that can involve chemical signals exchanged from a distance, as
well as signaling through direct physical contact. Still lacking is a
fundamental understanding of the identities of signals, how and where they are
produced, how they are recognized, and the effects they mediate in each partner.
To begin to address these questions, the proposed research focuses on an
emerging model of animal-microbe mutualism between a small, soil-dwelling
nematode (roundworm) and the beneficial bacterium (symbiont) with which it
associates. The bacterial symbiont lives in a specific vesicle (receptacle)
within the intestine of the nematode, and is the only microbe capable of
residing at this location and establishing a relationship with the nematode; in
other words, it is the only microbe that can correctly communicate with the
nematode to achieve a mutually beneficial relationship. In this study the
morphological and developmental features of the nematode intestinal vesicle will
be analyzed to better understand the colonization process. The proposed research
will also explore new hypotheses regarding the chemical signals and the physical
interactions that occur between the nematode and the symbiont and how these
interactions might affect the physiology of each organism. Furthermore, the
proposed research will address questions of how such intimate animal-microbe
associations evolve.

The specific goal of this proposal is to characterize, using microscopy,
biochemistry, and microbial genetics, the structure and development of the
interaction between the nematode and the symbiont and how each partner
contributes to this relationship. The model system being studied is easily
studied in the laboratory. The three labs involved in this collaborative
research are each contributing distinct expertise required for the proposed
studies. Together these labs will:

1) Analyze, using microscopy and biochemistry, the physical aspects of the
nematode intestinal region that interacts with the microbial symbiont; 2)
Compare the intestinal structures of different nematodes to understand how the
ability to specifically interact with the symbiont evolved; 3) Study how the
intestinal region that interacts with the symbiont develops, and how the
symbiont affects this development; and 4) Characterize, using biochemistry and
genetics, the chemical signals exchanged between the nematode and the symbiont.

This model system is well suited for education because of its broad relevance to
agricultural, medical, and basic research and multiple disciplinary
perspectives. An underrepresented minority undergraduate has contributed to
preliminary research, and each lab will continue to train and educate students
from diverse backgrounds. A workshop will be held that includes data and
techniques developed through this research. Finally, this study will enhance a
K-12 teaching tool developed as part of the NSF-funded K through Infinity
program at UW-Madison.