* 0416628
* Systematics of Arachnids Using Whole Mitochondrial Genomes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Susan Masta, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2009
* USD 317,548.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;DEB
0416628&lt;br/&gt;Masta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr.
Susan Masta of Portland State University and her colleague Dr. Jeffrey Boore
(DOE Joint Genome Institute) to examine phylogenetic relationships among the 11
orders of arachnids (spiders, mites, scorpions, and relatives). Arachnids are
one of the four major groups of arthropods, are of ancient origin (ca. 450-500
million years ago) and are highly diverse (over 97,000 described species).
However, little systematic work has focused on deciphering the relationships
among the orders of Class Arachnida, and their relationships remain enigmatic.
This project will sequence and analyze whole mitochondrial genomes of 42 species
sampled from across the 11 orders of Class Arachnida. To infer genealogical
relationships among the orders, the research will use sequence data as well as
novel genome-level characters ("rare genomic changes" such as changes in gene
order, gene content, and RNA secondary structure). Preliminary data suggests
these genome-level characters are capable of resolving the ancient divergences
among arachnids. An accompanying analysis of morphological characters by Dr.
Jeffrey Shultz (University of Maryland) will further extend the number of
characters that can be used to infer relationships among these
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By elucidating phylogenetic relationships, the
investigators expect to advance the systematic understanding of arachnids, and
thereby provide crucial context to numerous basic and applied biological
studies. Arachnids show unusual and highly derived traits that are of interest
as evolutionary innovations and that may hold promise for applications in
biotechnology. For instance, venom components from some scorpions have been
shown to have antibacterial properties and to inhibit development of malaria
parasites, while the silks of spiders include the strongest fibers known.
Understanding how such traits evolved requires a robust arachnid phylogeny. The
work will also reach beyond the scientific research community. Arachnids,
particularly spiders and scorpions, are of interest to the public, and our
results will be made available via a project webpage. The project will also
provide training in the techniques and concepts of systematics and genomics to
undergraduate and graduate students at Portland State University. Such training
addresses an urgent need, as systematists begin to utilize data from comparative
genomics. In addition to incorporating students into all aspects of the
research, results from this work are being integrated into new courses for
undergraduate and graduate students. These courses allow hands-on analyses of
newly generated sequences to teach gene annotation, alignment, and phylogenetic
analysis, skills crucial in making sense of today's burgeoning amount of genomic
data.&lt;br/&gt;