* 0416724
* Collaborative Research:  The Evolution of Pheromone Signals and Their Role in Behavioral Isolation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Stevan Arnold, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 07/31/2008
* USD 360,547.00

Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Pheromone Signals and their Role in
Behavioral Isolation

PI: Lynne D. Houck & Stevan Arnold and Richard C. Feldhoff & Pamela Feldhoff

For millions of years, male terrestrial salamanders have executed a bizarre
courtship that involves injecting females with pheromones. These courtship
pheromones are protein signals that enhance the sexual receptivity of females.
This example of reproductive communication has long been viewed as being shaped
by sexual selection (via female mate choice) on the male signal. More recent
evidence, however, implicates courtship pheromones as signals used by the female
-not for mate choice- but for species identification. Thus, the evolution of
this signaling system may be guided by mate recognition and behavioral
isolation. A well-developed study system will be used to investigate whether
male courtship pheromone signals affect behavioral isolation and hence
speciation. Two specific questions will be addressed: (1) Do male courtship
pheromone signals promote behavioral isolation? (2) What processes best explain
the observed evolution of behavioral isolation? In the proposed work, will focus
on six population pairs showing different levels of behavioral isolation.
Chemical signals will be experimentally manipulated to test the hypothesis that
male chemical signaling contributes to behavioral isolation. Secondly,
mathematical models will be used to simulate the joint evolution of the male
pheromone signal and female mating preferences across a group of related
species. Simulated data from each model will be compared with actual measures of
behavioral isolation to determine which model gives the best fit. Simulation
methods will apply generally to any communication systems for which there are
species of known relatedness and a survey of behavioral isolation between pairs
of these species. In combination, research will constitute a compelling case
study of behavioral isolating mechanisms and how they evolve.