* 0416877
* Green Light Sensing, Integration and Response During  Photomorphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Kevin Folta, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2007
* USD 339,627.00

ABSTRACT

In addition to its role in photosynthesis, light provides the plant with
important information about the environment. Specific qualities, quantities and
combinations of light control specific facets of plant development. For
instance, germination, plant stature and the transition to flowering all are
dependent upon information contained in various wavelengths of light. The
effects of blue and red/far-red light have been well described, and studies over
the last decade have defined a suite of photoreceptors and attendant signal
transduction pathways. The specific effects of green wavebands have been
documented for 50 years. Recent studies in the plant model system Arabidopsis
thaliana have shown that green signals frequently antagonize the effects of
known photosensory systems that forward developmental responses. These effects
include stem growth promotion, inhibition of light-induced stomatal opening and
repression of light-induced transcript levels. The goal of the present study is
to further characterize these novel responses to green light and study a series
of genes with similarity to those of the animal visual-cycle using a reverse-
genetic approach. The findings will further define the contribution of a yet
uncharacterized light sensor and possibly the role of retinoids in plant
systems. This will have broad impacts in understanding how various wavebands of
light are sensed, integrated, and in turn modulate plant processes. These
activities will provide an outstanding platform for education of postdoctoral
scholars, graduate students and undergraduates in photomorphogenesis and plant
development. These studies also have the potential to profoundly affect
agriculture, as green-light contributions to applied light-regulated processes
are realized.

