* 0416194
* Collaborative Research: CMG: Toward Understanding the Transfer of Genetic Information in Subsurface Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Timothy Ginn, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2005
* USD 65,510.00

Horizontal gene transfer among microorganisms is a critical process
&lt;br/&gt;that impacts bacterial evolution over long time horizons as well as
&lt;br/&gt;the spread of traits such as antibiotic resistance on short time
&lt;br/&gt;scales. Recently there has been heightened public concern about the
&lt;br/&gt;risk of gene transfer from genetically engineered organisms to
&lt;br/&gt;indigenous organisms and its consequences. Many environmental
&lt;br/&gt;microorganisms spend a large part of their viable life cycle in the
&lt;br/&gt;porous medium of the natural subsurface, such as soils and aquifer
&lt;br/&gt;materials. Because it is a natural filter for water the subsurface
&lt;br/&gt;also provides a mixing zone for different strains of bacteria, that
&lt;br/&gt;each partition between the aqueous and solid phases. Thus to
&lt;br/&gt;understand the ramifications of horizontal gene transfer in the
&lt;br/&gt;natural environment, it is important to study the interactions
&lt;br/&gt;between different species as they undergo fate and transport in
&lt;br/&gt;porous media. The primary goal of this project is to evaluate the
&lt;br/&gt;kinetics of microbial attachment-detachment to porous media solid
&lt;br/&gt;surfaces, and the coupled kinetics of horizontal gene transfer in
&lt;br/&gt;porous media via conjugation. The green fluorescent protein (GFP)
&lt;br/&gt;gene expression system will be used with known hosts and recipients
&lt;br/&gt;originally isolated from soils to quantify rates of conjugative gene
&lt;br/&gt;transfer in controlled micromodel experiments. The gene transfer is
&lt;br/&gt;expected to be limited by the paired residence time of host and
&lt;br/&gt;recipient cells together on solid surfaces, and so the distributions
&lt;br/&gt;of these paired residence times and the distribution of gene transfer
&lt;br/&gt;times will be compiled from the micromodel experiments. The model
&lt;br/&gt;for these data will be crafted by combining a biased Levy motion with
&lt;br/&gt;drift for the bacterial transport in the porous media, with an
&lt;br/&gt;alpha-stable random variable for residence time attached to surfaces,
&lt;br/&gt;with a non-Markovian reaction kinetic model for the gene transfer
&lt;br/&gt;from host to recipient. The intellectual merit of this project
&lt;br/&gt;arises from the coordinated collaboration of people with expertise in
&lt;br/&gt;hydrology, microbiology, molecular biology, applied mathematics, and
&lt;br/&gt;physics, to (1) adapt new tools in genetic analysis and microscopy to
&lt;br/&gt;study microbial activity and gene exchange at a molecular level in
&lt;br/&gt;micro flow chambers, and (2) use mathematics to extrapolate the
&lt;br/&gt;findings to understand processes at higher scales in the subsurface.
&lt;br/&gt;By combining experiment with theory we may be able to determine the
&lt;br/&gt;major requirements for successful gene transfer. The broader impacts
&lt;br/&gt;of this project arise from the wide applicability of the results to
&lt;br/&gt;many areas including human health, disease propagation, medicine,
&lt;br/&gt;contaminant remediation, and evolutionary biology. All of these
&lt;br/&gt;phenomena involve the processes studied here, many in porous media
&lt;br/&gt;(subsurface or biotic). Educationally the project provides the venue
&lt;br/&gt;by which results from the collaborative study can be incorporated
&lt;br/&gt;into the PI's undergraduate and graduate courses in microbiology,
&lt;br/&gt;engineering, and mathematics. The PI's also have a solid record in
&lt;br/&gt;involving minorities and women in research, via the MARC/AIM program
&lt;br/&gt;at Purdue, and the Women In Engineering (nee' Women Engineering Link)
&lt;br/&gt;program at UC Davis, and this habit will be continued in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;