* 0416834
* Collaborative Research:  The Evolution of Pheromone Signals and Their Role in Behavioral Isolation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Richard Feldhoff, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 08/31/2009
* USD 109,889.00

Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Pheromone Signals and their Role in
Behavioral Isolation

PI: Lynne D. Houck & Stevan Arnold and Richard C. Feldhoff & Pamela Feldhoff

For millions of years, male terrestrial salamanders have executed a bizarre
courtship that involves injecting females with pheromones. These courtship
pheromones are protein signals that enhance the sexual receptivity of females.
This example of reproductive communication has long been viewed as being shaped
by sexual selection (via female mate choice) on the male signal. More recent
evidence, however, implicates courtship pheromones as signals used by the female
-not for mate choice- but for species identification. Thus, the evolution of
this signaling system may be guided by mate recognition and behavioral
isolation. We will use a well-developed study system to investigate whether male
courtship pheromone signals affect behavioral isolation and hence speciation. We
address two specific questions: (1) Do male courtship pheromone signals promote
behavioral isolation? (2) What processes best explain the observed evolution of
behavioral isolation? In the proposed work, we will focus on six population
pairs showing different levels of behavioral isolation. We will experimentally
manipulate chemical signals to test the hypothesis that male chemical signaling
contributes to behavioral isolation. Secondly, we will use mathematical models
to simulate the joint evolution of the male pheromone signal and female mating
preferences across a group of related species. We will compare simulated data
from each model with actual measures of behavioral isolation to determine which
model gives the best fit. Our simulation methods will apply generally to any
communication systems for which there are species of known relatedness and a
survey of behavioral isolation between pairs of these species. In combination,
our research will constitute a compelling case study of behavioral isolating
mechanisms and how they evolve.