* 0416096
* Phylogeny of Malvatheca (Malvaceae) and the Pace and Place of Its Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* David Baum, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 307,500.00

0416096&lt;br/&gt;Baum&lt;br/&gt; Malvatheca is a group of about 2000 plant
species that includes several economically important species (cotton, okra,
kenaf, and balsa), united phylogenetically from the traditionally recognized
cotton (Malvaceae), cocoa (Sterculiaceae), balsa (Bombacaceae), and linden
(Tiliaceae) families on the basis of DNA sequence evidence. Most Malvatheca
(more than 1700 species) are members of a group called the Eumalvoideae, which
are primarily herbs and shrubs with a worldwide distribution. Prior work by Dr.
David Baum and his colleagues suggested that the ancestors of Eumalvoideae were
mangroves and coastal treelets that grew in Australasia; but only a handful of
living species, the "Australasian grade," have retained this habit and
distribution. The previous work also showed that the Australasian grade is
likely descended from a group of Central and South American trees, the
"Bombacaceous grade." The Eumalvoideae differs from the Australasian and
Bombacaceous grade in the number of species it contains and in its extremely
rapid molecular evolution (estimated at more than nine-fold that of the
Bombacaceous grade). The proposed research, with colleagues Randy Small and
Patrick Moss, aims (1) to use DNA sequences of plastid genes and the nuclear
gene GBSSI to estimate when the Australasian grade arose, when and where the
Eumalvoideae arose, and to shed light on the molecular mechanisms that may have
led to accelerated molecular evolution and enhanced species diversification of
Eumalvoideae; and (2) to use sequences of both plastid and nuclear DNA data to
estimate the phylogenetic relationships within three important groups. These are
(2a) Bombacoideae, a group that includes many large trees with spectacular
flowers that grow in South and Central America as well as some African and Asian
groups (e.g., the baobabs). The study will shed light on how the latter
dispersed to Africa/Asia and will also clarify patterns of floral evolution.
(2b) Matisieae, a group that includes ecologically significant understory trees
from Central and South America. The study will shed light on the group's flower
and fruit evolution. (2c) Malagasy Hibisceae, a group of putative relatives of
Hibiscus that occur only in Madagascar. The study will resolve their
phylogenetic relationships, which remain almost completely unknown, and will
clarify when and from whence they arrived in Madagascar.&lt;br/&gt;During the
funding period the PI will continue teaching a workshop for K-12 teachers on
phylogenies ("tree thinking") and will develop new curricular materials for this
purpose. He will recruit undergraduate researchers through the University of
Wisconsin Undergraduate Research Scholars program, which has a high proportion
of minority/financial aid students. Additionally, the researchers will teach a
course on modern methods in Madagascar and continue to maintain the Malvaceae
pages at the popular Tree of Life website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;