* 0416284
* Collaborative Research: Retargetable Images and Video
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2011
* Michael Gleicher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2011
* USD 405,543.00

The PI will develop a methodology for transforming imagery such that it is more
effective. This will enable practical systems for adapting imagery created for
one device such that it works effectively on others. By providing methods for
retargeting images and video to new devices, the PI will enable applications to
make use of the proliferating computing and communications infrastructure. For
example, it will become possible to provide effective informational images to
cellular phones, training videos to PDAs, and status information to "heads up"
displays. To these ends, the PI will establish an understanding and methodology
for transformations that improve the effectiveness of imagery across a range of
scenarios, and tools to create this imagery. This involves developing methods
for determining what is important in the source imagery, methods for altering
images to emphasize the important parts, and methods for evaluating the
effectiveness of imagery. The PI's prior work shows that effectiveness
transformations can be defined in specific domains and that these lead to
practical tools for specific retargeting problems. In this project, the PI will
build on and generalize these successes to a broader range of subject domains
and viewing scenarios. The outcomes of this project will include a better
understanding of what makes effective imagery, new methods for creating
effective imagery, new guidelines for assessing the effectiveness of imagery,
evaluations of the effectiveness of image alterations, as well as practical
systems for image and video retargeting problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Images can be a powerful mode for communication. Because of this, our
computing infrastructure is evolving to deliver imagery. Ubiquitous high-speed
networking provides imagery to home theater screens, cellular phone displays,
networked PDAs, and even displays embedded in refrigerators, elevators and
airplane seats. Unfortunately, imagery is little more than a novelty unless it
is effective, that is, it achieves a communicative goal. Yet what makes imagery
effective is elusive. It depends on subject matter and intended message. It also
depends on the target display device and viewing situation; images effective on
a wall-sized display may be ineffective on the display of a cellular phone. The
techniques to be developed by the PI in this project will help make effective
imagery a reality in a wide variety of situations and for a wide variety of
devices, so that increasingly ubiquitous displays can provide people with
information when and where they need it, more effective channels of inter-
personal communication, and enhanced educational media and entertainment
experiences.