* 0416292
* The Evolution of Developmental Mechanisms for Anteroposterior Pattening: Amphioxus as a Model for the Ancestral Vertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Linda Holland, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2009
* USD 542,500.00

Project Summary &lt;br/&gt;The long term goal of this research is to elucidate
the evolutionary origins of the patterning mechanisms that shape the vertebrate
body plan by using amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae) as a model for the
ancestral vertebrate. Amphioxus, the closest living invertebrate relative of the
vertebrates, has both a genome and a body plan that are vertebrate-like, but
less complex. This relative simplicity uniquely positions amphioxus for
comparisons, on the one hand, with animals more basal in the tree of life and,
on the other hand, with the vertebrates. The present proposal focuses on the
initial mechanisms establishing anterior/posterior (A/P) patterning and regional
identities within the amphioxus central nervous system (CNS). These mechanisms
include both an evolutionarily ancient mechanism and an evolutionarily more
recent one. The first, which was evidently present in the bilaterian ancestor,
is specification of posterior identity by Wnt/bets catenin signaling. The
second, limited to chordates, is retinoic acid (RA)-signaling that establishes
regional identities along the A/P axis. In vertebrates, these two pathways
interact. This raises the question of when interactions between the two pathways
evolved. The proposed study will test the hypothesis, based on preliminary data,
that substantial interaction between these pathways evolved only after the split
between amphioxus and the vertebrates. The specific aims are (1) to determine if
Wnt/beta-catenin signals from the amphioxus blastopore mediate
anterior/posterior patterning of the neuroectoderm (2) to test whether anterior
identity of the CNS is maintained by signals mediated, in part, by Wnt-
suppressing signals from Hex-expressing anterior endoderm and (3) to identify
interactions between Wnt/beta-catenin and RA-signaling pathways. Methods to
address the first aim include manipulating Wnt-signaling in amphioxus with
lithium, which blocks the downstream component GSK3beta, with the cell-permeable
GSK3beta inhibitor Myr-N-GKEAPPAPPQSP-NH2 and with antisense morpholino-
oligonucleotides against specific Wnts. For the second aim, Hex will be
upregulated by over-expression of Hex mRNA and function blocked with morpholino-
oligonucleotides. Amphioxus homologs of Wnt-antagonists will be cloned and,
depending on their expression, their function will be tested. For the third
specific aim, expression of genes implicated as mediating Wnt-signaling will be
determined in amphioxus embryos treated with either RA or an RA-antagonist.
Regulatory regions of putative targets of both Wnt- and RA-signaling will be
examined for retinoic acid receptor response elements (RAREs) and binding sites
for Tcf, which mediates Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. This will be facilitated by
the draft sequence of the amphioxus genome, which will be completed by the Joint
Genome Institute early in 2005. Selected sites will be mutated and expression of
reporter constructs containing them will show if they are essential for normal
gene expression. Intellectual merit: Understanding how mechanisms for anterior
suppression of Wnt/beta-catenin signals evolved and crosstalk between the Wnt/
beta catenin and RA-signaling pathways evolved will help reconstruct the
evolution of developmental mechanisms in early vertebrates. In addition, this
research will give insight into the molecular mechanisms for patterning the
chordate, including vertebrate embryos. Broader impact: The work is also
important in the broader concept of questions of the evolution of structures,
evolution of developmental mechanisms and gene duplication. This research will
provide training for two graduate students and undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;