* 0416883
* Structural and Functional Studies of Plant Natural Product Uridine Diphosphate Glycosyltransferases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Richard Dixon, Noble Research Institute, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2008
* USD 495,784.00

The enzymatic formation of glycosidic bonds is quantitatively the most
significant reaction on earth and is catalyzed by a superfamily of enzymes, the
glycosyltransferases (GTs), which have been classified into over 60 families.
This project focuses on the family 1 enzymes, the uridine diphosphate (UDP)
glycosyltransferases (UGTs). UGTs transfer UDP-activated sugar moieties to
specific acceptor molecules. In plants, there are large families of group 1 UGTs
that may be involved in the glycosylation of secondary metabolites. Several UGTs
have been postulated to be involved in the final stages of the synthesis of
highly bioactive triterpene saponins in the model legume Medicago truncatula.
One of these, GT029H, glycosylates the saponin aglycone medicagenic acid. The
major goal of this project is to understand the molecular mechanisms of
glycosylation reactions catalyzed by family 1 UGTs. The objectives are to
determine the crystal structures of two triterpene UGTs from Medicago truncatula
in complexes with the sugar donor UDP glucose, acceptor substrates or/and
inhibitors, in order to reveal the interactions between the enzymes and the
donor and acceptor, and to elucidate the enzyme catalytic mechanism. A study of
mutants of UGTs will fully explore the mechanism and roles of key residues for
the glycosylation reaction. By exploring structure-function relations among a
broader cross-section of the plant UGT superfamily, using x-ray crystallography,
homology modeling, and enzymatic/biochemical analysis, the project will develop
predictive models for UGT substrate specificity. Success in the above areas will
provide starting points for the rational manipulation of the substrate and
product specificities of individual UGTs, with implications for the metabolic
engineering of plants for increased production of valuable, bioactive secondary
metabolites. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: By combining approaches
involving basic plant biology, protein biochemistry, chemistry and biophysics,
this project will provide a vehicle for truly interdisciplinary postdoctoral
training. A program for training undergraduates in the application of structural
biology to plant biochemistry and biotechnology will be put in place, and
outreach activities to local high school students through hands-on and web-based
learning opportunities will be extended. &lt;br/&gt;