* 0416171
* Kinetics and Mechanisms of Surface Reactions by Laser-Induced Desorption with Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* John Hemminger, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2007
* USD 490,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0416171&lt;br/&gt;Hemminger/UC-
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Hemminger and his colleagues in the
Chemistry Department at the University of California-Irvine are using laser
desorption Fourier transform mass spectrometry to examine the fundamental
kinetics and mechanisms of reactions on transition metal surfaces. With the
support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, they are investigating
the effect of nano-structuring of transition metal surfaces and transition metal
particles on thin oxide films, and on the kinetics of hydrocarbon surface
reactions. STM, vibrational spectroscopy, and electron spectroscopy are combined
with the laser desorption method to provide a clear picture of the reaction
mechanism and kinetics, particularly concentrating on hydrogenation and
dehydrogenation chemistry. Fundamental information from these studies is useful
in developing an understanding of heterogeneous catalysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental mechanisms and kinetics of important
hydrocarbon hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions are being examined in
this research project. This work combines structural information from scanning
tunneling microscopy and vibrational spectroscopy with kinetic information
obtained from laser desorption methods. Fundamental insights gained from this
work provide an understanding of important catalytic processes. &lt;br/&gt;