* 0416730
* Functional Genomics of the Biotin Metabolic Network of Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Heike Hofmann, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert L. Burnap
* 08/31/2009
* USD 784,996.00

Intellectual merit: Biotin is an essential molecule, whose primary function has
been ascribed as a catalytic cofactor required by enzymes involved in diverse
metabolic processes. Recent studies indicate that biotin is also a regulatory
molecule that appears to play critical roles in controlling transcriptional and
post-transcriptional mechanisms in gene expression. This research will identify
and characterize the biochemical and physiological functions of genes associated
with the biotin metabolic network of eukaryotic organisms, using Arabidopsis as
a model. Plants are ideally suited for these studies as they, along with some
microbes, are the primary organisms that can synthesize this molecule de novo;
all other organisms must acquire this molecule from their diets or from the
environment. This project will characterize aspects of the biotin metabolic
network that are unique to the organism under study, namely Arabidopsis, as a
model plant. Specifically: 1) how do developmental and environmental cues
regulate biotin biosynthesis; these studies will take advantage of the two
biotin biosynthetic genes that have recently been identified by the
investigators, BIO1 and BIO2; and 2) what is the biochemical and physiological
function of plant-specific biotin-containing proteins. These are methylcrotonyl-
CoA carboxylase (encoded by genes At1g03090 and At4g34030), the seed-specific
biotin protein (encoded by gene At2g42560), and three biotin carrier-like
proteins (encoded by genes At1g52670, At3g15690, At3g56130); and 3) what are the
mechanisms by which biotin regulates gene expression at both the transcriptional
and post-transcriptional level.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The project will be a
vehicle for the education and training of a new cadre of scientists at the
undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate levels. In-lab research experiences
will be provided for exposing young scientists to multidisciplinary basic
research in functional genomics and biotechnology. The research will define the
organization of a complex metabolic network that is structured around the
catalytic and regulatory functions of biotin. This achievement will provide
novel insights into how such complex networks are regulated. The goal is to
develop an example of how to view metabolism as a complex integrated network
rather than the classical textbook model of a set of linear pathways. The
development of this view of metabolism is possible only in the context of an
organism whose genome is completely sequenced. Such an understanding of
metabolism is required in order to comprehensively understand how metabolic
processes are interactively regulated by developmental and environmental cues.
&lt;br/&gt;