* 0416484
* Temporal Regulation of Baculovirus Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Linda Guarino, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 12/31/2009
* USD 450,000.00

Viruses use a number of different strategies to take over host cells and force
them to synthesize viral proteins and nucleic acids instead of the host
molecules that are needed for cell survival. Baculoviruses do this, in part, by
synthesizing their own RNA polymerase that is needed to make proteins for new
virus particles. This is a simple four-subunit complex, yet it has the ability
to recognize viral promoters, transcribe linked genes, terminate transcription,
and process 5' and 3' ends of transcribed RNAs. The overall objective of this
project is to understand the molecular mechanisms of viral transcription,
focusing on the factors that regulate the activity of viral RNA polymerase.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project will be achieved through the
completion of four specific objectives. The first is to define the function of
the transcription factor LEF-5, which has similarity to cellular elongation
factors, yet appears to act during initiation. This project will test the
hypothesis that LEF-5 stimulates promoter escape, through the analyses of
abortive initiation products and the transition to elongation. The second
objective is to complete the identification of viral mRNA capping enzymes and
describe additional functions of MTase-1. Baculovirus RNA polymerase and the
protein MTase1 account for three of four activities required for the formation
of mRNA 5' caps. The host or viral protein that catalyzes the remaining step
will be identified through purification of this activity, which is induced upon
viral infection. The third objective is to understand the molecular mechanism of
the promoter specificity factor VLF-1 through biochemical analyses that separate
the different steps of transcription initiation. Finally the roles of LEF-6 and
LEF-10 in the regulation of late gene expression will be investigated. To this
end, the proteins will be expressed and purified, and their interactions with
viral RNA polymerase investigated. Further, the in vivo roles of these proteins
will be studied through analyses of mutant viruses. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to
the discovery aspects of this project, the work described here will provide an
excellent training opportunity for students in the Master of Biotechnology
program at Texas A&amp;M University. This is a new Professional Science Master's
program that emphasizes student experiential training in biotechnology, with
coursework in business and journalism. These types of programs are expected to
grow in importance, as the bioscience industry struggles to fill positions at
the M.S. level with highly skilled personnel. Support from the NSF will provide
the opportunity for training in basic techniques that will increase students'
competency in molecular biotechnology and enhance their ability to find jobs
that are challenging and rewarding. Thus, the broader merit of the project lies
in the advancement of discovery and understanding while promoting teaching,
training, and learning in traditional and non-traditional graduate programs.