* 0416051
* Collaborative Research: A Global Framework for the Phylogeny of Gelechioid Moths, a Megadiverse Radiation of Herbivores.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* John Wenzel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 182,689.00

John W. Wenzel and Richard L. Brown, Collaborative Research: A global framework
for the phylogeny of the gelechioid moths, a megadiverse radiation of
herbivores. $183,000&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Moths and butterflies (Lepidoptera)
represent one of the great explosions of insect diversity. Among major lineages
of Lepidoptera, Gelechioidea is one of the most successful radiations, both
numerically and ecologically. Larvae are important in most terrestrial habitats
and have a great diversity of feeding habits, but deep uncertainty regarding the
evolutionary relationships among branches of the Gelechioidea makes it
impossible to piece together supportable scenarios of ecological character
evolution and host-plant selection. To date, most specialists have necessarily
focused on a few taxa globally or many taxa locally, producing a patchwork of
knowledge rather than a comprehensive synthesis. Some authors place emphasis on
certain characters rather than alternatives, some on features of the adults
insects, others on immatures. We will use several approaches in order to sort
the 37 major lineages that compose the group and define their relationships to
each other. First, we will build upon existing morphological matrices, adding
new morphological characters not previously used in Lepidoptera to provide a
grand matrix for about 150 to 175 species representing all major gelechioid
lineages. The exemplars are chosen to represent variation in long-recognized
lineages. Second, we will provide DNA sequence data from several genes to
augment the morphological matrix for phylogenetic analysis. We will also
initiate an archival cryogenic collection including about 150 species, or as
many species as possible, including those with particularly interesting host
plants. Third, web-based identification keys and photo archives will be produced
to make available the primary knowledge regarding taxa and characters as well as
host information, and to cross reference DNA data with biological information.
Finally, adaptive radiation and evolution of host choice and feeding syndromes
will be interpreted in light of the phylogenetic framework, expanding on our
earlier success in this regard. The bulk of the expenses of the total project
are in student salaries, travel for personnel other than the PIs, and materials
and supplies for the DNA laboratory work, respectively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;