* 0416420
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Until our Voices are Heard: Legislative Representation of African American and Latino Interests in Agency Policy-Making
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Vincent Hutchings, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2007
* USD 17,025.00

Each year federal governmental bureaucracies are given broad authority by
Congress to implement public policies that range from welfare reform to civil
rights enforcement. Despite the importance of bureaucratic decisions on issues
that affect minorities, most race and representation scholars have neglected to
include this policy-making activity in their analysis of substantive
representation. Instead most have focused on roll call voting as the primary
measure of representation. This project demonstrates that scholars. inattention
to legislative intervention in agency policy-making systematically understates
minority members' responsiveness on issues that disproportionately affect racial
and ethnic minorities. As a result of racial or ethnic group identity, Black and
Latino legislators are more likely (relative to Whites) to intervene in agency
actions relating to civil rights enforcement. &lt;br/&gt;This project improves
upon the limitations of earlier studies by using a combination of quantitative
and qualitative methods to examine the effects of race or ethnicity in a less
visible activity such as committee oversight of agency policies. These methods
include a detailed content analysis of congressional oversight hearings and a
series of elite interviews with legislators and their staff from the 107th
Congress (2001-2002). These data gauge legislators. intensity by examining the
amount of time, energy and resources that individual legislators invest in
ensuring that bureaucracies are implementing civil rights laws, rules and
regulations. &lt;br/&gt; The study expands the conceptualization of substantive
representation from an exclusive focus on legislators. roll call voting behavior
to one that includes their actions in non-bill related activities such as
rulemaking and policy implementation. Additionally, the project shows that
racial or ethnic identities of legislators are significant in determining why
they pay high costs to intervene in agency policy-making. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research provides insight to policy-makers and scholars by
assessing whether racial redistricting measures, designed to get more minorities
elected to Congress, translate into enhanced substantive representation of
minority interests. &lt;br/&gt;