* 0416760
* Locus Control and Regulation of Drosophila Even Skipped
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* James Jaynes, Thomas Jefferson University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

Intellectual merit of the proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;Long-range regulation of
transcription occurs at several levels of organization, including entire
chromosomes, blocks of genes, boundaries, and enhancers.&lt;br/&gt;In the even-
skipped (eve) gene, recently identified elements, separate from enhancers,
provide:&lt;br/&gt;1. appropriate overall levels of enhancer
activity,&lt;br/&gt;2. proper maintenance of enhancer activity,&lt;br/&gt;3.
boundary activity, functionally isolating eve from nearby genes (enhancer
blocking).&lt;br/&gt;This proposal uses genetics, reverse genetics, and
biochemical approaches in Drosophila to investigate the phenomenology of these
elements, and to understand their mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;The larger scientific
goal of these studies is to understand how protein complexes interacting with
regulatory DNA mediate locus-wide regulation of gene expression, including the
mechanisms of transcriptional memory. This goal represents a major remaining
frontier in the quest to learn how the genome directs the development and
behavior of multicellular organisms, and their interactions with their
environment.&lt;br/&gt;eve is involved in genetic networks that direct cell
behaviors along specific developmental pathways. Its regulation has been well-
studied, but its genetic mechanisms are less well understood. This project will
identify downstream target genes, and study how Eve regulates its target genes
to generate the normal output of the pathways in which it is
involved.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;I.
Students are strongly encouraged to participate. Both graduate and undergraduate
students participate in the project. Further, undergraduates who work as
technical assistants are expected to actively participate in all aspects of the
scientific process, and as a result, they often share authorship on
publications. Post-doctoral associates receive training that prepares them to do
independent research in the future. In all of these categories, women are highly
represented. Because the work routinely involves collaborative efforts with
other laboratories here and abroad, it promotes the research network in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;II. In addition to involving graduate students and
undergraduates directly, the work provides exciting and current examples that
are incorporated into lectures for graduate students, as well as presentations
in a community Outreach Program. All of these things advance discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning.&lt;br/&gt;III.
The results of the work are disseminated broadly through presentations at
research conferences as well as in scientific publications. Aspects of the work
have been included in a number of college textbooks in recent years, including
Developmental Biology by Scott F. Gilbert, and Molecular Biology of the Cell, by
Bruce Alberts, et al.&lt;br/&gt;IV. This award also facilitates a recently
established Outreach Program:&lt;br/&gt;A. K-12 student participation generates
increased excitement in biological sciences, and encourages consideration of
scientific career options.&lt;br/&gt;B. Teacher training is
included.&lt;br/&gt;Under-represented groups with respect to economic status and
race are largely those served in the Philadelphia, PA and Camden, NJ school
districts, which are the target institutions of this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;