* 0416447
* Structural and Functional Analysis of a Quorum-Sensing Inhibition Mechanism
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* William Fuqua, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 03/31/2010
* USD 419,664.00

Bacteria can exhibit social behaviors, one of which is the process known as
quorum sensing. Quorum sensing regulates a range of functions, often those
involved with host interactions such as pathogenesis and symbiosis, in response
to bacterial population density via signal molecules. Once the signal molecule
(e.g. acylated homoserine lactones or AHLs for the Proteobacteria) reaches a
threshold concentration, it effectively binds and activates a transcription
factor(s), which regulates expression of genes responsible for collective
bacterial activities. Although the role of AHL quorum sensing in microbial
systems is relatively well accepted, mechanistic studies of the regulatory
circuitry, including production and diffusion of AHLs, activation and inhibition
of AHL-responsive transcription factors, and control of gene expression, are
still at an early stage. The aim of this project is to examine the structural
and biochemical basis of quorum sensing in Agrobacterium tumefaciens, a model
plant pathogen and a premier system for mechanistic studies of quorum sensing,
using a range of genetic, biochemical and structural methods particularly
protein X-ray crystallography. In A. tumefaciens quorum sensing requires the
AHL-responsive TraR transcription factor, and under non-inducing conditions this
protein is inhibited by the TraM anti-activator through formation of a highly
stable heterocomplex. The objectives of this research are as follows. First,
structural and functional studies of TraM, based on the PIs' recently solved
crystal structure of TraM, will be continued. These efforts will dissect the
biochemical and functional complexity of TraM activity. Second, the TraM
inhibitory mechanism will be studied by determining the structure of the anti-
activator heterocomplex (TraM-TraR-AHL) using X-ray crystallography,
complemented with biochemical analysis of this complex using biophysical and
kinetic techniques. Third, functional studies will be performed to test the
predictions revealed through the co-crystal structure on TraM inhibition of TraR
function. These studies will represent the first structural studies on
mechanistic aspects of transcription factor inhibition in a quorum sensing
pathway, and the first kinetic characterizations on the molecular events of TraM
antagonism on TraR. Results from this work will provide a comprehensive
structure-function understanding of TraM-TraR interaction. These findings could
lead to novel approaches for limiting the spread of infective A. tumefaciens in
agricultural situations by the deliberate intervention into their quorum
sensing. These studies will also have significant impact in the area of
microbial cell-to-cell communication, and may help develop novel approaches such
as the design of chemical compounds that interfere with bacterial communication,
to control and combat microbial invasion. This work will also provide abundant
opportunities for the involvement of undergraduates and the training of graduate
students, integrating with the rich educational environment at Indiana
University.