* 0416004
* Photoelectron Measures of Extended Electronic Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Nadine Gruhn, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Luigi G. Marzilli
* 07/31/2008
* USD 405,000.00

Dr. Dennis Lichtenberger, Chemistry Department, University of Arizona, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division to utilize photoelectron spectroscopy to probe
electronic structure features that determine electronic communication and
electron transfer. Compounds that contain two separate molecular functional
units that are in electronic communication will be examined. Molecular
functional units will include mixed-valence metal complexes, substituted
phthalocyanines and porphyrins, and species containing organic donor-acceptor
pairs. The Marcus energy parameters for electron transfer rates will be
obtained, the inner-sphere parameters without solvent contributions will be
measured, and methods for condensed-phase experiments to allow evaluation of the
contributions of the molecular environment and solvation will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic structure properties that extend
toward the nanoscale regime are central to many developing technologies and life
processes. Examples include molecular conductors, semiconductors, optoelectronic
applications, biological electron transfer, photocatalysis and more. The purpose
of this project is to investigate the fundamental electronic structure
properties of such systems. In addition, the research has a broad impact on
enhancing the infrastructure of science through developing the next-generation
instrumentation and methods for photoelectron spectroscopy, and providing access
to these capabilities to researchers in both graduate and undergraduate
institutions. This photoelectron facility is the only source in the United
States for photoelectron measurements on large neutral molecules. The
development of human resources in science is promoted by the sharing of students
across institutions and by the emphasis on integrating research with teaching,
training, and learning. Students from other institutions visit the facility to
collect data and learn about electronic structure and photoelectron
spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;