* 0416956
* Cell Progression Through Meiosis: A Signal From Recombination to the First Division
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Robert Malone, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Meiosis is the highly conserved, special cell division process in which gametes
are made. At the chromosome level, "premeiotic" DNA synthesis, recombination and
synapsis, the reductional division, the equational division, and packaging (into
sperm, spores, etc.) all must be coordinated and occur in the right order and
time. The long-range goal of this research is the understanding of chromosome
behavior in meiosis and the focus of this project is the understanding of the
communication between two steps unique to, and essential for, meiosis:
recombination and the first (MI) meiotic chromosome division. Using the yeast S.
cerevisiae, the investigator has defined a mode of communication in meiosis that
occurs in normal cells; he refers to this as the "recombination initiation
signal" (RIS) because it requires gene products that initiate recombination. The
normal outcome of the RIS in wild type (WT) cells is to delay the MI division to
allow time for recombination to proceed; mutants lacking the signal begin the MI
division at an earlier time. During the current NSF grant, the investigator has
shown that the meiotic RIS requires the recombination initiation genes REC102,
REC104, MER2/REC107, REC114, SPO11, and RAD50 (but not MEI4 or REC103/SKI8) and
the synaptonemal complex genes HOP1 and RED1. The RIS is not a traditional
checkpoint that arrests mutant/defective cells: it is WT cells that have the
delay. During the year of funding the laboratory will focus on two areas. First
they will examine the mechanism of how the RIS is transduced to delay the MI
division. They have discovered that the mitotic DNA damage checkpoint (although
important for a late recombination checkpoint) is not involved in transducing
the RIS. They will test two other well-studied checkpoints, the DNA synthesis
checkpoint and the spindle checkpoint, to determine if they have a role in the
RIS. The second aim of the research is to determine how the target of the RIS
(the meiotic transcriptional activator NDT80) is affected. They have
demonstrated that NDT80 transcription is increased and active protein is
produced at earlier times in the absence of the RIS. To understand the mechanism
of the normal RIS delay which occurs in WT cells, they will examine the upstream
regulators and posttranslational modifiers of this regulator to determine which
of them respond to the RIS. The combination of these two approaches will help to
define how recombination is coordinated with the reductional division during
meiosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is actively involved in teaching
undergraduate and graduate students both the critical thinking necessary to
design experiments to advance our understanding of natural biological processes
and the techniques to carry them out. Through this project the investigator
should produce valuable scientific insights and thoughtful, well-trained
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;