* 0416759
* Molecular Specification and Development of the Carpel Margin Meristem
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Robert Franks, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P.  Jack
* 08/31/2009
* USD 381,000.00

Project Summary

The survival of seed plants, and thus the security of humankind's food supply,
requires the development of ovules that when fertilized will develop into seeds.
In flowering plants the ovules develop within the gynoecium, the female
reproductive structure. In Arabidopsis thaliana the gynoecium is made up of two
carpels that are fused along their edges or margins to form a tube-like
structure. Ovules arise on the inner surface of the gynoecial tube from
specialized meristematic regions known as the Carpel Margin Meristems (CMMs).
Genetic mutations that disrupt the development of the CMM result in a reduction
of seed formation. Thus proper development of the CMMs is critical for female
fertility in Arabidopsis and agricultural productivity in many crop plants. The
main objective of the proposed research is to generate an understanding of the
molecular mechanisms of early CMM development.

Regional specification within the developing gynoecium refers to the assignment
of different positional identities to different parts of the structure. Regional
specification is critical for the development of the CMM. Specifically, adaxial
(or inner) identity and margin identity must be properly specified to ensure CMM
formation and thus ovule development. Experimental data indicates that three key
regulatory genes, SEUSS, LEUNIG and AINTEGUMENTA, play a crucial role in the
early development of the CMM. Dr Franks proposes a bipartite model in which 1)
the SEUSS, LEUNIG and AINTEGUMENTA genes are required for the expression of the
adaxial identity marker PHABULOSA within the developing gynoecium and 2)
PHABULOSA expression is critical for the early development of the CMM. He
proposes a variety of molecular genetic experiments to thoroughly test this
model: 1) specific molecular markers will be used to follow regional
specification during gynoecial development in mutant plants in which the
activity of one or more of above-mentioned key regulators (SEUSS, LEUNIG and
AINTEGUMENTA) is compromised; 2) the expression patterns of the SEUSS and LEUNIG
gene products within the developing gynoecium will be determined; 3) the
significance of adaxial identity specification during CMM development by the
PHABULOSA gene will be investigated; 4) and a unique genetic modifier screen
will be utilized to identify novel regulators of CMM development.

In many crop plants the development of the CMM is critical for agricultural
productivity. By generating an enhanced molecular understanding of the
regulation and control of CMM development, the proposed research may enable
methods to engineer agricultural varieties with enhanced yield and thus meet the
growing global demand for food. Additionally, the PI will enhance the societal
benefits of his research program by fully integrating his scientific research
efforts with his graduate and undergraduate teaching and training
responsibilities. Materials and research results will be widely dispersed
through publication in scientific journals and through web-based vehicles to
interested scientists and all levels of educators. Furthermore, Dr. Franks will
organize interested graduate students to prepare and present demonstrations at
local elementary schools that will help to encourage an interest in scientific
studies from this early age.