* 0416036
* Expansion and Enhancement of the Mississippi State University Information Assurance Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Rayford Vaughn, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2008
* USD 502,982.00

This project continues MSU's collaboration in information assurance education
with Jackson State University and initiates a similar collaboration with
Tuskegee University (TU and JSU are both HBCU's) though a collaborative and
cooperative effort. The project supports integration of an information assurance
instructional capability into the two institutions identified and strengthens
the CAE/IAE program at MSU. Additionally, a partnership is in place for
Forensics support with Mississippi's State Attorney General's Office, which
expands with support from this grant. This project continues work to develop an
IA curriculum at both JSU and TU with an expectation of JSU considering
application for CAE/IAE status during academic year 2004-2005 and TU during
2005-2006. Both TU and JSU have agreed to work with MSU in developing
information assurance offerings and their respective PI's have established
relationships with the faculty at MSU. The partnership efforts described in this
proposal are intended to be beneficial to all three parties in not only
developing an IA program at two universities that currently do not have one, but
also in strengthening the program at MSU by broadening its research effort,
increasing minority representation in its PhD program, and by enhancing its
instructional course content.