* 0416471
* RUI: Role of VirC1 and VirC2 in Regulation of Substrate Delivery by the VirB/D4 Secretion Apparatus of Agrobacterium Tumefaciens
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Lois Banta, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2008
* USD 338,180.00

The soil bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens transports both proteins and DNA
into a host plant cell, resulting in crown gall tumors ('plant cancer') at the
infection site. The transport machinery, comprised of multiple VirB proteins and
VirD4 working as a complex in the bacterial membrane to promote export of the
DNA and proteins, is the prototype for several similar systems required for
other medically significant bacteria to cause disease in their mammalian hosts.
The goal of the project is to characterize two proteins, VirC1 and VirC2, that
appear to enhance the efficiency of DNA delivery via this transport apparatus.
This research will test the hypothesis that VirC1 and VirC2 interact to tether
the source of the transferred DNA to specific sites on the bacterial cell
membrane, thereby promoting DNA interactions with the VirB/VirD4 secretion
machinery. Biochemical and microscopic approaches will be used to determine if
VirC1 associates with components of the transport complex. The influence of host
cell contact on these interactions will be investigated. Biochemical and genetic
approaches will be used to probe for interactions between VirC1 and VirC2. The
data obtained will also reveal where VirC2 is located within the cell, and
whether a specific region of the VirC1 protein is essential for VirC1's
functions. The results will provide novel information about two poorly
characterized virulence proteins and, more broadly, the regulation of
trafficking through an important model secretion system. Agrobacterium
tumefaciens is widely used to introduce new genes into plants, but its utility
is limited by the fact that some plants, including many agriculturally important
grains, are poor hosts. These investigations into the roles played by VirC may
well have significant implications for the genetic modification of hitherto non-
host species, and hence for global food productivity. The project will be used
to provide undergraduates in opportunities to do research.