* 0416922
* Mesoderm Specification in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Morris Maduro, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2008
* USD 375,000.00

A central problem in developmental biology is to account for how tissue and cell
type diversity arises during embryonic development in the generation of the
three fundamental germ layers in animals (endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm). The
nematode, C. elegans, has been an excellent model system in which to explore
mechanisms of cell fate specification and to elucidate the molecular players
involved. In early mbryogenesis, the C. elegans mesendodermal precursor EMS is
specified by the activation of the GATA-like transcription factors MED-1 and -2.
The MEDs function with the conserved Wnt signaling pathway to specify either
mesoderm (MS) or endoderm (E) fate in the EMS daughter cells. While much is
known about endoderm, very little is known about how the more complex mesoderm
lineage is specified. The laboratory of Dr. Maduro is interested in elucidating
the mesodermal regulatory gene network and understanding how the Wnt pathway
restricts activation of MED target genes to the MS cell. They have determined
the novel binding site of MED-1 and used this site to identify 19 new candidate
target genes, many of which have been confirmed to be expressed in mesoderm or
endoderm. This proposal aims to characterize these target genes and study their
regulation by MED-1 and the Wnt pathway. First, they will complete the
expression analysis of the candidate MED-1 targets, and with emphasis on the
predicted transcription factors, their developmental roles will be assessed
genetically. Second, they will analyze the structure-function properties of
MED-1 to learn more about how this novel regulator functions in mesoderm
specification. Third, they will characterize the basis for differential
mesodermal vs. endodermal activation of MED target genes that are regulated
through an apparently novel Wnt-based mechanism. As homologs of candidate MED
target genes function in mesoderm in other systems, and as the Wnt pathway
functions in developmentally important processes throughout metazoa (including
cancer in humans), this work promises to reveal new principles about early
embryonic development and gene regulation that are widely
applicable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This is the first grant for a
beginning investigator of Hispanic descent. The work proposed will be central to
the research training of two female PhD candidates at UC Riverside (UCR).
Undergraduates drawn from UCR's ethnically-diverse student body will participate
in the project. Dr. Maduro will integrate education and research by teaching
graduate and undergraduate courses in developmental
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;