* 0416326
* Long-Term Investigation of Evolution in a Community Context
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Sharon Strauss, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 07/31/2010
* USD 461,979.00

Understanding the diverse and simultaneous pressures experienced by species
within a community may provide insights not readily gathered from the study of
pair-wise interactions between species. All species are part of multi-species
communities and the traits they express are shaped by selective pressures
generated by the web of direct and indirect interactions among community
members, along with the effects of abiotic factors. Selective pressures from
multiple sources are often termed 'diffuse.' In the proposed work, several
criteria that have been proposed to identify diffuse selection exerted by whole
communities will be explored. These criteria are summarized briefly here as: the
genetic correlation between traits acted on by multiple community members, the
effects of one species that alter the likelihood or intensity of interactions
with other community members, and the presence of non-additive effects on the
relationship between trait values and fitness; this non-additivity should be
caused by the combination of selective effects imposed by multiple species.
Experimental field manipulations of putative selective agents are combined with
observational demographic data and with greenhouse crossing experiments in this
long-term study of the diverse agents acting on flower color in the wild radish
Raphanus sativus. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study is one of only a handful
that examines experimentally the response to selection over long time periods
and from multiple interactors in the field. As such it provides rare insights
into trait evolution and conflicting selection in field settings. This proposal
will train undergraduates and a graduate student. In the prior grant, students
and professionals at all stages - undergrad, graduate student and post-doc were
mentored and were authors on the published work. Many of these (6/9) were women,
and all of the women have continued in science or science education. Overall,
the lab has had a strong record of mentoring a range of under-represented groups
in science, as summarized in the proposal. &lt;br/&gt;