* 0416378
* Collaborative Research: Relationships Among Gene Lineages, Morphology, Geography and Fungal Associations in Corallorhizinae (Orchidaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Donald Taylor, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2008
* USD 145,215.00

0416378&lt;br/&gt;Taylor &lt;br/&gt;Orchids comprise the largest family of
flowering plants and are extremely diverse. All are parasitic on fungi at least
when seeds germinate, but little is known about this relationship. Some orchids
depend on fungi for all nutrition because they are non-photosynthetic. Orchids
of the genus Corallorhiza are prime examples, comprising 11 species of mainly
North American temperate-montane terrestrials. This group provides a special
opportunity to study the changes that happen when plants give up photosynthesis,
because at least one species is photosynthetic while others are not. Such
changes include partial loss of chloroplast DNA, structural modifications of the
plant, and shifts among the groups of their associated fungi. Reconstructing
phylogenetic relationships among populations of the species of Corallorhiza and
their fungi through analysis of DNA sequences will reveal to what extent the
orchid-fungal association is essentially random vs. targeted to certain fungal
groups; adding orchid morphology and locality data will show whether shifts in
fungal utilization are at all correlated with these factors. Because of the
intensive sampling, any repeated correlations of present-day distribution with
lineage histories will be shown, which might reflect post-glacial migration.
This will provide a better understanding of how current plant distributions in
North America came to be. The project incorporates carefully planned fieldwork
to obtain both orchid and fungal samples, and brings together the expertise of
orchid specialist John Freudenstein at Ohio State University and fungal
specialist Donald Taylor at University of Alaska to facilitate a comprehensive
analysis that would not otherwise be possible, yielding perhaps the most
detailed and multifaceted analysis of a plant-microbe interaction to
date.&lt;br/&gt;This project has broad impact for science and beyond in a number
of ways. It provides a synthesis of modern approaches to a detailed analysis of
flowering plant-fungal associations, plant morphology, gene lineages and
geography. As such, it may serve as a model for future work on similar systems.
It enhances the infrastructure of science by bringing new collections of these
taxa into museums where they have broad accessibility and the DNA sequences
generated into public databases where they will be available to all. The
interactions with scientists in China, Korea and Mexico will result in
strengthened networks of cooperation. The project brings together research and
education by integrating graduate and undergraduate students in the project. It
further enhances the integration of research and teaching by utilization of the
results of the project as a case study in the PIs' teaching in courses on
systematics, microbial diversity and symbiosis, and in their outreach to the
public at large. This includes ongoing consultation with forest service
botanists on land use planning, as well as presentations to various groups.
Increased understanding of orchid-fungus relationships has direct conservation
benefits, since fungal partners are required for orchid germination and growth.
Programs that attempt to maintain or reintroduce endangered species of orchids
must address the issue of fungal partner identity and availability. &lt;br/&gt;