* 0417704
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Near-Surface Drainage Within a Groundwater Basin in Southwest Egypt Using Radar Images
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Farouk El-Baz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

0417704&lt;br/&gt;El-Baz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research between Dr. Farouk El-Baz, Director, Center for
Remote Sensing, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts and Mr. Ali Werwer,
Chairman and Managing Director, the General Company for Research and Ground
Water, Cairo, Egypt. The PIs will use a new approach by utilizing space-borne
radar imagery and groundwater data to characterize the Nubia aquifer in the
Sharq Oweinat area of the Misaha graben in southwest Egypt. Satellite image
enhancement and interpretation will be conducted by the BU team, applicable
groundwater data will be supplied by the REGWA team and field investigations
will involve both teams. The Nubia aquifer system is considered to be unconfined
whereby groundwater resides in sandstone rocks that unconformably overlie
basement rocks and are covered by Quaternary deposits. The aquifer, however, is
not homogeneous as evidenced by the variation of drainage styles and densities,
and the degree of fracturing observed in satellite images, as well as data
obtained from 383 productive wells that have been drilled there and that range
from 300 to700 meters in depth. The goal of the proposed research is to
understand the fluvial and structural feature distributions in the Misaha graben
area and establish if anomalies in groundwater data can be explained in the
context of fluvial and structural controls. The implication is that the
unconfined Nubia aquifer has a variable nature in that the groundwater present
depends on: recharge in the geologic past; and fracturing, which introduced
secondary porosity into the rocks and increased their storage capacity.
Fluctuations observed in groundwater data (e.g., salinity, transmissivity,
piezometry, etc.) are so far unaccounted for. The spatial organization of near-
surface fluvial features and associated structural features will be derived from
space-borne radar images and Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) in a Geographical
Information System (GIS) database to identify areas that received recharge in
the past. These vector layers will be correlated with REGWA groundwater data in
the same database. The accessibility of new data, the process-flow routine
established for analyzing radar data (which so far has been an underutilized
tool for understanding the nature of the Nubia aquifer), and the correlation of
these datasets, ensures improved understanding of the Nubia aquifer system in
the Misaha graben area of southwest Egypt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and
broader impacts: Results from this research will establish whether variable
characteristics of the Nubia aquifer system can be explained in the context of
fluvial and structural recharge; thus, it can be determined if the methodology
devised in this pilot study to characterize the Nubia aquifer can be applied to
other areas in the Great Sahara. Research findings will be published in
international peer-reviewed scientific journals. The project will develop a new
infrastructure that can enhance current understandings of the nature of the
Nubia aquifer by the creation of the proposed database and the formation of the
research partnership. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;