* 0417607
* CRCD/EI:    Control and Optimization of Communication Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Steven Low, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 02/28/2007
* USD 212,500.00

An exciting paradigm is emerging over the last decade that applies pow-erful
control and optimization theories to the design and analysis of communi-cation
networks, resulting in intellectual and practical impacts much beyond the
established frameworks of the 1980s. This trend has been driven by both new
needs from the communications and networking fields and recent advances in
control and optimization theories. There is already a substantial body of re-
search results and applications that need to be transferred to university cur-
riculum and the industry. Moreover, new results are being created at a rapid
pace, intensifying the need for students and engineers to understand, and ap-
ply, these new insights and techniques. The current project develops a new
course on control and optimization of communication systems, and associated
courseware, that teach students the mentality of tackling engineering problems
as dynamic systems to be controlled and linear/nonlinear objectives to be opti-
mized, and equip them with the ability to do so. It covers major communica-tions
and networking advances in this area and provide students with hands-on
experience on practical problems through numerical and experimental projects.
This inter-disciplinary course has a flexible modular structure and the mathe-
matical background needed in each module is presented using a 'just-in-time'
approach. The project develops instructional materials that can be used in other
institutions and the industry. It vigorously pursues various paths of dis-
semination. It will transfer recent research advances into the mainstream cur-
riculum of CS and EE, and facilitate the spread of knowledge from academia to
the industry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;