* 0417250
* Investigating Ghrelin's Role in Regulating Energy Homeostasis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* E. Gordon Grau, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2007
* USD 133,191.00

Obesity is a major risk factor for many diseases, including, but not limited to,
diabetes, cancer, arthritis, high blood pressure and cardiovascular disease. In
the United States, roughly 300,000 deaths per year are associated with obesity
and overweight. The recent discovery of ghrelin, a peptide found primarily in
the stomach with potent stimulatory action on growth hormone release from the
pituitary gland, has brought a new understanding of the regulation of energy
balance. Ghrelin has been suggested to possess adipogenic, orexigenic and
cardiovascular actions that might be independent from its GH stimulatory
actions. The overall goal of the proposed research is to clarify the actions of
ghrelin on growth and energy homeostasis in vertebrates including humans. Past
work by the PIs have isolated ghrelin from the stomach of the tilapia, a
euryhaline fish, with a potent GH-releasing activity as in mammals, and has
provided preliminary evidence that ghrelin stimulates appetite and body weight
gain in the tilapia, which appears to be a result of increased fat deposition.
The PIs hypothesize that ghrelin will stimulate the production of fat
independent from its GH stimulatory actions. In this proposal the mode of
actions of ghrelin on energy homeostasis will be clarified, using CP-477335 (an
orally active GH stimulatory compound) and a fish (tilapia) as a model.
&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this proposal are: 1) To investigate whether
ghrelin and CP-477335 alter fat deposition, specifically polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFA), and production of growth factors and their binding proteins in the
tilapia. 2) To characterize the actions of ghrelin and CP-477335 on fat
deposition, PUFA metabolism and on growth factor production in the liver using
culture of primary hepatocytes. &lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of the
proposed studies in its novelty will provide invaluable groundwork for the
understanding of ghrelin's actions in directing metabolic investment in
vertebrates. To date, there are no reports on the effect of ghrelin on
regulating PUFA metabolism in any vertebrate. The proposed studies will provide
a comparative approach that will contribute greatly to the knowledge and
understanding of how vertebrates partition available metabolic energy, which in
turn could be used for the development of biotechnologies applicable to medicine
and drugs/treatment associated with pathophysiological conditions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;