* 0417660
* Collaborative Research:  Dynamics of Boolean Networks and Gene Expression
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Cristopher Moore, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Caldwell
* 08/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

This research project focuses on the generic properties of complex networks,
with the goal of elucidating the functional implications of different types of
network architecture. The working hypothesis is that certain classes of Boolean
networks illustrate principles of organization that underlie the structure of
biological organisms. Such networks are known to exhibit fundamentally distinct
regimes of behavior: ordered, chaotic, and critical. Do biological cells belong
to one of these classes? Modern gene array techniques now permit the gathering
of vast amounts of data on gene expression, providing a new experimental window
on questions of this type. The proposed research aims to develop a useful
theoretical framework for designing such experiments and interpreting their
results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific aims of the project include the
determination of scaling laws for cascades of activity following perturbations
in scale-free and modular Boolean networks, the characterization of sets of
dynamical attractors, and transitions between them, associated with different
network architectures, and the analysis of such networks when stochastic timing
rules are employed for updating rather than the traditional synchronous updating
rules. In all cases, attention will be focused on quantities that can be
measured in biological systems, and currently available experimental data will
be used to refine the classes of models to be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is highly cross-disciplinary, requiring a collaboration between experts
in dynamical systems theory and cell and developmental biology. Funds will be
used to provide interdisciplinary training for an undergraduate student, a
graduate student, and a postdoc in the burgeoning fields of functional genomics
and bioinformatics, where analytical skills traditionally taught in physics
contexts and principles of cell and molecular biology are equally important.
&lt;br/&gt;