* 0417592
* Community food systems and anti-racist practice
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Rachel Slocum, Slocum                  Rachel
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 58,658.00

Rachel Slocum Independent researcher

Developments in theory and social activism have opened questions of power in
society. An examination of how racialization, class structure and gender
relations interact can reveal the unevenness of power throughout society. While
many studies render visible oppressive circumstances, fewer catalog the
difficult politics of alliance across race, class and gender differences. Such
alliance and the challenges it entails might be expected among progressive
social movements. The research uses the insights of feminist and anti-racist
theory to examine the community food security movement that is gathering
momentum in parts of US society. This movement critiques modern food production,
processing and distribution and proposes an alternative: a community food
system. A community food system supports smaller scale farmers and promotes
accessible, affordable, nutritious and culturally appropriate food for all.
Those who are food insecure are those with fewer economic advantages and tend to
be disproportionately people of color and women. The movement combines ideals of
social justice and community, but is unclear how these ideals are put into
practice. The research will determine if and how groups that comprise the
movement engage in an analysis of the power dynamics of race, class and gender
to inform their practice and seek to ally across these differences. The research
uses qualitative methods (interviews, text analysis and focus groups) as well as
quantitative approaches (statistical analysis of a nation-wide survey) to gain
insight into this question. It anticipates establishing the types of
organizations that address racism, gender inequality and class structure, the
specific approaches used and the learning involved in the process.

The past decade has witnessed increasing concern in the US about the source,
nature and availability of food. The prevalence of hunger and/or obesity among
communities of color, low income youth, adults and the elderly, as well as
female single heads of households is an issue of social justice. A community
food security movement has formed to address these issues. The study will
determine whether this movement, in its work to promote affordable, accessible
and nutritious food for all, actively confronts racism, gender dynamics and
class, which play a role in food insecurity and continue to be significant
forces in US society. The research seeks to understand whether alliances around
food and justice that cross race, gender and class lines have been formed and
how they are being sustained. The study will provide important knowledge, more
generally, on how social divisions in society are successfully overcome.