* 0417616
* LTER: Nonlinear transitions in the California Current Coastal Pelagic Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Arthur Miller, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2011
* USD 5,794,471.00

This award will create a LTER-Long-Term Ecological Research site in the coastal
upwelling biome of the California Current System. The research will focus on
mechanisms leading to temporal transitions between different states of the
pelagic ecosystem. Observations from the CalCOFI (California Cooperative Oceanic
Fisheries Investigations) coastal ocean time series, currently in its 55th year,
demonstrate the importance of external forcing of the pelagic ecosystem on
multiple time scales, including: El Nino, the multi-decadal Pacific Decadal
Oscillation, and a multi-decadal secular warming trend. Interactions of such
forcing and biotic interactions can lead to nonlinear ecosystem responses that
may be expressed as relatively abrupt transitions. The work will evaluate four
hypothesized mechanisms for such ecosystem transitions:?&lt;br/&gt;-Sustained,
anomalous alongshore advection of different assemblages; &lt;br/&gt;-In situ
food web changes in response to altered stratification and nutrient supply;
&lt;br/&gt;-Changes in cross-shore transport and loss/retention of organisms;
and&lt;br/&gt;-Altered predation pressure.&lt;br/&gt; The California Current
Ecosystem (CCE) LTER site will address these hypotheses with an integrated
research program having three primary elements: (1) Experimental Process Studies
will initially focus on the hypothesis of in situ food web changes. (2) Time
Series Studies will evaluate alternative hypotheses using space-resolving time
series measurements, including high frequency temporal measurements at different
nearshore locations, satellite remote sensing, and an extensive quarterly
measurement program at sea that will capitalize on and significantly enhance the
CalCOFI time series. (3) Modeling and synthesis studies will help quantify the
dynamics underlying the observations; provide a platform for hypothesis testing
through numerical experiments and process models; provide a means for dynamic
interpolation between observations in space and time; and help optimize the
field program.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed study region is an ideal location for an
LTER site: it has 5 decades of climate context provided by CalCOFI; it is in a
biogeographic boundary region, making it an early sentinel of climate change; it
has pronounced spatial gradients in a relatively small geographic area; its
anoxic basins provide a unique connection to paleoceanographic studies; and the
extant 4-D physical ocean circulation model of the region will permit rapid
advances in the development of coupled bio-physical models of ecosystem
transitions. The site will allow the LTER network to compare coastal pelagic
upwelling ecosystems with other biomes with respect to: Pattern and control of
primary production, Spatial and temporal distribution of populations selected to
represent trophic structures, Patterns of inorganic inputs and movements of
nutrients, and Patterns and frequency of disturbances.&lt;br/&gt; Broader
Impacts: The project will have state of the art Information and Data Management
to serve data internally, to LTER partners, educators, the general public, and
policy makers. An active Education and Outreach program will team scientists
with CA-COSEE and external partners to engage the K-12 community in both the
process of and the understanding gained from this research. They will train
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars across disciplinary
boundaries. Through collaborations with informal science education
organizations, they will reach hundreds of K-12 schoolchildren each year,
including local low-income and minority students. Teachers and students will
participate in field studies and gain training in oceanographic science. They
will also assist in the development of new school curricula. &lt;br/&gt;