* 0417330
* First International Workshop in Ceramics:  Data Storage Technology; NSF; January 22-23, 2004
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,10/31/2004
* C Carter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/2004
* USD 42,000.00

A Workshop will be held at NSF January 22-23, 2004 on Ceramics Materials needed
in Data Storage Technology.The Workshop forum will provide for interaction
between academia, industry, and national labs in this topical area and seeks to
develop a framework and environment under which mutually beneficial
collaborative endeavors can be seeded. The focus will be on identifying key
areas of research within the broad field of ceramic materials, in which
significant progress can be accomplished through a carefully considered
collaborative program involving the three constituencies. Sessions including
Magnetic storage, Surface engineering and Advanced processing, Thin film
ferroelectric memories, and Microscopy, scanned probes &amp; spectroscopy will
run over two full days. Issues related to enhancing diversity and education and
training of scientists and engineers will also be addressed. A workshop report
will include the following: Overview of meeting-major highlights, ideas of
interest; Assessment of critical issues in the field, important areas to focus
on the near and far future; Recommendations on each of the sub-topics; A one-
page abstract from each person in attendance in an identical
format.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Discussions at the proposed workshop will
include a critical evaluation of the field and promote collaborations among
academia, industry and government labs. The combined input from industry,
government, and universities will allow a broad base of the research community
to promote research programs of mutual benefit that satisfy unmet needs and to
develop education and training approaches for future scientists and engineers in
this field.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;