* 0417869
* Collaborative Research:  CMG: Multi-scaling Random Fields and Pollution Migration
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Mark Meerschaert, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Rong Chen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 313,512.00

The properties of groundwater aquifers are uncertain at almost all physical
locations. Only a small fraction of an aquifer can be sampled and tested. Some
statistical model must be chosen and implemented that describes the distribution
and correlation structure of the parameters (primarily the hydraulic
conductivity) that control the motion of groundwater and dissolved pollutants.
Based on the statistical model, replicas of the aquifers are constructed to make
predictions of flow and transport. These replicas must contain the structures
that may be present across all scales of interest. The replicas should honor the
real data where measured (including a possibly non-Gaussian distribution), and
should represent correlation that might be restricted to very narrow directional
windows; for example, discrete fracture set orientations. The investigators are
working on one model that can honor the data from many well-studied aquifers
(granular and/or fractured). The model uses operator-fractional noise and
motions, since the scaling, or fractal, properties of aquifers vary with
direction. The operator fractional motions are based on the investigators'
recent definitions of 3-D fractional integro-differentiation. The operator-
fractional motions have what is known in the earth sciences as "generalized
scale invariance" in which the index of scaling depends on direction. The
investigators are rigorously defining the mathematical properties of these
motions and their numerical implementations. They are also studying the
correspondence between transport through the operator-fractional aquifer
replicas and simple analytic descriptions of transport embodied in fractional-
order transport equations and generalized continuous time random walks. The
spreading of pollution in an aquifer is controlled by sediment structures that
are present across a huge range of scales. Tiny bits of silt and clay may retain
pollutants for years, while buried (remnant) gravelly stream channels might move
some pollutants for miles in a short time. To make realistic predictions of
drinking water vulnerability or eventual cleanup, it is important to construct
models of aquifers that have this kind of multi-scale structure. In another
setting more germane to nuclear waste storage, the simultaneous presence of
small and large fractures will account for both the slow and fast pathways for
the spreading of radioactivity away from future repositories. Representative
models of these aquifers must be "buildable" and testable, so the investigators
are first pouring a concrete mathematical footing. While the work deals
primarily with mathematics and hydrology, the results also contribute to applied
studies in physics, fluid dynamics, electrical engineering, and finance. The
financial applications are revealed when looking at a graph of a stock price:
there are minute-to-minute fluctuations that are similar to year-to-year gains
and losses. Some stocks are tightly coupled; others are not. Not all markets
respond at the same rate, nor are the magnitudes of the changes easily
characterized. Finally, several graduate students and a post-doctoral researcher
are also supported by the grant. Each of them is receiving extensive training in
both physical sciences and mathematics. This cross-training engenders more
fruitful cooperation between the theoretical and applied sciences.