* 0417688
* ITWF:     Collaborative Research:    African Americans in IT:     Improving the Graduate Education and Workforce Piplelines
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Kermith Harrington, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 07/31/2007
* USD 74,424.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;ITWF Program - FY04&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0417688, PI
Vernard Harrington, Radford University&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITWF Collaborative
Research: Collaborative Research: African-Americans in IT: Improving the
Graduate Education and Workforce Pipelines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Projects:&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0418165, PI Wanda Smith, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0417688, PI Vernard Harrington, Radford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
Radford University have been awarded an ITWF grant to conduct a collaborative
research and implementation project whose primary goal is to promote and enhance
the retention of African-Americans in the information technology (IT) workplace
and professoriate. A model of Information Technology Career Resilience (ITCR)
has been developed that describes how students select, persist in, and graduate
from IT educational programs and then make the transition to the professoriate
or the IT workplace. A three-year longitudinal study will test the model and its
applicability to African-Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project lies in its potential contribution to research in attraction and
retention of minorities in science and engineering. The research team has
defined a model of Information Technology Career Resilience that describes how
students select, persist in, and graduate from IT educational programs and then
make the transition to the IT workplace or the professoriate. This model
integrates the strengths of three widely validated research perspectives:
student retention, student involvement and attraction-selection-attrition. A
three-year longitudinal study will collect data on social integration, academic
major integration, IT-related factors, student characteristics, social
integration, IT career resilience, job factors, organizational characteristics,
values, the recruitment process, and satisfaction and retention. A range of
sophisticated statistical techniques including hierarchical multiple regression,
multiple discriminate analysis, and structural equation modeling techniques,
will be used to test the ITCR model and its applicability to African-Americans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project lie with its potential
for developing improved mentoring and educational programs that will benefit not
only African-American students in IT but also non-minority students in IT. The
project will also benefit the scientific, educational and business communities
who are seeking to increase minority participation in IT.&lt;br/&gt;