* 0417651
* Multidisciplinary Investigations on Human Response to Abrupt Climate Change: Deciphering the Context of Shifts in Late Paleoindian Behavior, Clary Ranch Site, Western Nebraska
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Matthew Hill, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 76,404.00

Archaeological evidence from the period following the 8200 Yr Climate Event
indicate major social and economic shifts in settlement/subsistence
organization, including procurement of smaller prey species, greater reliance on
gathered plant foods, use of ground stone and oven technology, food storage, use
of side- and corner-notched weaponry, habitation in pit houses, decreased
residential mobility, and burial in cemeteries. Yet few studies focus explicitly
on the development of human adaptations during the 8200 Yr Event, which,
generally speaking, is characterized as a cool, dry, and windy "blip" in the
overall trend of early Holocene climatic drying and warming that ushered in the
Altithermal. Though researchers suspect these developments are responses to
abrupt climate changes and the resulting necessity for sophisticated social and
economic systems for managing resources, we have little evidence upon which to
base such theories. In order to better understand how and why these shifts
occurred, Dr. Matthew G. Hill and a team of specialists will conduct
multidisciplinary investigations at the Clary Ranch site in western Nebraska.
The research will document archaeological evidence and develop proxy records on
vegetation, temperature, and precipitation, thus providing a mechanism for
understanding human response to abrupt, climate-induced changes in resource
structure - in this instance, those occurring in the midcontinent during the
late early Holocene/early middle Holocene. This will allow researchers to model
human responses to abrupt climate change on regional and global scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Clary Ranch site offers a unique opportunity for
multidisciplinary investigations on abrupt climate change and concomitant human
response. This deeply stratified site contains multiple proxy indicators on past
environments and appears to capture a Late Paleoindian response to the 8200 Yr
Event, which disrupted the preceding adaptive strategy, and is manifest in
intensification of bison carcasses. Specific research objectives include: (1)
developing an alluvial geochronology for Ash Hollow Draw to determine how
geomorphological variables relate to the local and regional expressions of the
8200 Yr Event as well as the context and formational history of the Clary Ranch
site; (2) characterizing the expression of the 8200 Yr Event to serve as a
backdrop in reconstructing behavioral responses to severe fluctuations in food
security; (3) characterizing bison ecology to clarify how bison populations
responded to the 8200 Yr Event to help researchers define concomitant human
responses; and (4) deciphering the formational history and subsistence-related
activities to provide a reference for profiling Late Paleoindian responses to
the 8200 Yr Event and comparing the impacts of this event with previously
documented archaeological patterning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Research Council has designated multidisciplinary studies of abrupt climate
change and its impact on subsistence systems as critical to addressing current
issues relating to biodiversity, conservation, and resource sustainability.
Development of vegetation, temperature, and precipitation proxies will fill in
the gap of information relating to the regional expression of the 8200 Yr Event
for the midcontinent. This new knowledge will be applied to make major
contributions to anthropological archaeology by bringing into clear focus human
responses to abrupt climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides
opportunities to train future scientists in contemporary methods. Undergraduate
and graduate students will be directly involved in field and laboratory phases
of the project. Ten to twelve students will participate in the archaeology field
school, and will work closely with professionals and experienced graduate
students. Conference presentations and formal publications will report to the
scientists. Public education and stewardship will target various school groups,
clubs, and organizations, and highlight the contributions of interdisciplinary
research to advancing our knowledge on myriad complex problems facing the world
today.&lt;br/&gt;