* 0417579
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Technology, Society, and Change: Shell Artifact Production among the Manteno (A.D. 800-1535) of Coastal Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* David Browman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2006
* USD 9,983.00

Under the supervision of Dr. David L. Browman, Benjamin Carter will analyze
shell artifacts from a series of sites once occupied by the Manteno, who lived
on the north and central coasts of Ecuador from approximately A.D. 800 until
1535. These people were Phoenician-like merchants who managed a trade network
extending from Chile in the south and Mexico to the north. Although they traded
many different wares, among the most important goods were colorful shell beads
made from the marine bivalve, Spondylus. The natural habitat of Spondylus
extends from the Gulf of California to the Gulf of Guayaquil, which is also the
southern limit of the Manteno area. They had, therefore, a near monopoly on
Spondylus trade to the precocious empires of the Andes to the south where it was
religiously and politically essential. Although Spondylus has been studied in
these consumer societies, no study has been completed on the manufacture and use
of Spondylus in producing societies, of which the Manteno were of particular
importance. Without such a study we cannot adequately understand the role of
Spondylus in Pacific South America. This research will remedy this omission
through an analysis of shell production utilizing an approach known as the
chaine operatoire. This approach is both methodologically and theoretically
rigorous, requiring collection of significant numbers of relevant data on the
technology of production in order to reconnect it to society in general. Over
5000 artifacts will be measured, categorically quantified, and cataloged. The
context from which the object was recovered will serve to reconnect it to
prehistoric living and activity spaces and, therefore, to a lived existence.
Artifacts from six previously excavated archaeological sites, each representing
one of three different time phases of the Manteno period and one of two
geographic areas, will be investigated. This broad sample ensures that the
project will closely represent shell production among the Manteno through time
and space. Spondylus beads served an important role in trade, but other shell
artifacts were for local consumption. Therefore, all shell artifacts, as well as
associated tools, will be analyzed. The chaine operatoire approach has not been
used to study shell artifact production and will, therefore, contribute to both
the methodological and theoretical aspects of this approach as well as to
studies of craft production in general. The research will have evident
importance for fellow social scientists. In addition, it will contribute to the
cultural heritage of the Ecuador by scientifically analyzing one aspect of the
national patrimony. This is especially important for the people of the
Ecuadorian coast, who are descendants of the Manteno and have lost much of their
history through colonial rule. This is no small matter; Spondylus has been used
to symbolize a recent peace accord between Ecuador and Peru. One means this
information will be disseminated is through a public presentation coordinated
with the Ecuadorian national Institute of Cultural Patrimony. This project will
also include graduate student training, thereby contributing to the continuance
of scientific archaeology.

