* 0417338
* Evolution of Reproductive Isolation in Cyprinodon
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Astrid Kodric-Brown, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 06/30/2009
* USD 312,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY Evolution of reproductive isolation in Cyprinodon Astrid Kodric-
Brown

Understanding processes that create and maintain species is a fundamental goal
of modern biology. The proposed research will examine the roles of behavior,
ecology, and offspring fitness in limiting hybridization between a native,
endangered species, the Comanche Springs pupfish and an exotic species, the
sheepshead minnow. The two species were geographically isolated, but have
recently been brought into physical contact due to human activities. The
proposed research seeks to identify the reproductive barriers that limit matings
between individuals of the two species, and affect the viability and fertility
of hybrid offspring. The strength of reproductive barriers will be determined by
observing matings between Comanche Springs pupfish, sheepshead minnow, and their
hybrids in artificial ponds. Preferences of Comanche Springs pupfish, sheepshead
minnow and hybrid females will be tested by examining the responses of females
to simultaneous presentations of visual and olfactory cues from each type of
male. Male-male interactions will also be observed to determine species-specific
differences in male mating behavior or competitive ability. The viability of
hybrids will be determined by comparing the number of offspring produced by
intraspecific and interspecific matings, then rearing the offspring under
standardized conditions to compare growth rates, mortality, and sex ratio.

The results of the proposed study will elucidate mechanisms that promote the
divergence between lineages and contribute to understanding the resistance or
susceptibility to hybridization in North American freshwater fishes. The project
will contribute to training of graduate and undergraduate students and to
informing the general public through posters and exhibits. Students will receive
training in conceptual approaches as well as in experimental and field methods.
The findings will be presented in posters and talks at regional and national
meetings, and will be published both in professional journals and in lay
publications.

