* 0417757
* International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2012
* Marc Melitz, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2012
* USD 299,520.00

This research attempts to bridge the gap between modern models of international
macroeconomics and international trade. International macroeconomic models do
not typically study the decisions of firms to serve export markets while
international trade theory does not consider business cycles. This research
introduces firm-level features into an international macroeconomic model. Firms
in each country must make an irreversible investment when entering their
domestic market; they then produce with different productivity levels. Firms
also face both per-unit and fixed (independent of export volume) trade costs.
This explains why only a subset of relatively more productive firms export,
while less productive firms only serve their domestic market. The research then
studies how macroeconomic shocks affect the pattern of firm entry across
countries, and the firms' export decision. Improvements in a country's business
environment induce higher rates of firm entry. Similarly, when export conditions
improve, more firms start exporting; conversely, some firms exit the export
market when those conditions deteriorate. These firm-level decisions alter the
range of goods available for consumption in both countries. The model captures
the aggregate implications of this firm-level structure, as well as the feedback
loop from the induced changes in the macroeconomic environment back to the firm-
level decisions. &lt;br/&gt;Incorporating firm-level decisions provides very
important insights into the behavior of key macroeconomic variables. The model
explains why more productive countries (or less regulated economies) exhibit
higher relative prices than their trading partners (through the impact of entry
on labor costs). It also explains why productivity &lt;br/&gt;improvements can
be associated with improvements in a country's terms of trade. These
explanations critically rely on the new firm-level structure that is introduced
(which implies that firms will predominantly choose to enter the market that
provides the more attractive business environment). The firm-level dynamics also
imply that the responses to macroeconomic shocks are very persistent, much more
so than the shocks themselves. This provides some new explanations for the high
persistence levels that are commonly observed in empirical work. &lt;br/&gt;This
research also highlights some potential problems with the measurement of
international relative prices. These relative prices are used to adjust
important international statistics such as income per capita. However, the
methods used may not properly account for the effect of firm entry and product
variety, leading to biased cross-country comparisons. The policy implications of
this issue are apparent, as these comparisons are used to make decisions such as
the allocation of international aid. The researchers will explore this question
in future theoretical and empirical work. In addition, the PIs will extend their
model to incorporate nominal rigidity and a role for monetary policy. This
extension will improve the empirical performance of the model and allow for the
study of how changes in monetary policy regime affect the economy (and consumer
welfare) by altering firm entry and exit decisions. &lt;br/&gt;