* 0417066
* Effects of Volcanogenic SO2 on Leaf Stomata and Isotopic Composition of Vegetation on Hawaii
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* John Smarrelli, COMMONWEALTH UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 07/31/2005
* USD 14,320.00

It is the purpose of the proposed research to examine in detail the effects on
vegetation of SO2 released by the ongoing eruption of Kilauea volcano on Hawaii.
Specifically, this project will compare the stomatal index (a ratio derived from
the number of stomata compared to the number of epithelial cells) and the carbon
isotope composition of leaves on plants growing in the path of the volcanic
plume with plants growing in other areas of the island. This research will serve
as a test of the hypothesis that loading of the atmosphere by SO2 emitted during
basaltic volcanic eruptions constitutes a significant disturbance of the
atmosphere that causes changes in the number of leaf stomata and in the
fractionation of carbon by leaves during photosynthesis. This hypothesis
challenges the current paradigm that all variations in stomatal indices can be
explained by variations in atmospheric CO2 levels. Statistically significant
results of this one-year study will permit design of a rigorous multi-year
experimental study to quantify the effects of SO2 exposure.&lt;br/&gt;The
broader implications of this research relate to mechanisms of biotic extinction.
Large eruptions of flood basalts have been linked to several episodes of mass
extinction. This project will help to determine if volcanogenic SO2 leaves an
identifiable record on vegetation that may be identified from the fossil record.
Additionally, this proposal creates research experiences for undergraduate
students who will be involved directly in the collection and evaluation of the
data. &lt;br/&gt;