* 0417578
* Re-evaluation of the late Paleozoic ice age in eastern Australia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Tracy Frank, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2007
* USD 140,000.00

Through the proposed two-year project, the PIs will provide the first modern
evaluation of the&lt;br/&gt;late Paleozoic Gondwanan glaciation in eastern
Australia. Currently, the data and observations&lt;br/&gt;on which the
interpretations of the glacial record in eastern Australia are based predate
the&lt;br/&gt;scientific advances in the field of glacial geology of the past
thirty years and, as such, have made&lt;br/&gt;it difficult to incorporate
information from the region into global reviews of the issue.
The&lt;br/&gt;rationale for the proposed project is that until new
sedimentological and geochemical data are&lt;br/&gt;gathered and resolved into a
robust stratigraphic framework, understanding of the late
Paleozoic&lt;br/&gt;ice age in eastern Australia, and how it fits into the
global picture, cannot be advanced. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed project will build
upon the results of previous studies carried out by the PIs
in&lt;br/&gt;Queensland and New South Wales, Australia, and will benefit from
recently improved age&lt;br/&gt;constraints for the Carboniferous system of New
South Wales. This investigation will include:&lt;br/&gt;(1) collection of
sedimentological data from key areas in New South Wales, Australia;
(2)&lt;br/&gt;generation of stable isotopic proxy records of climate change
derived from climate-sensitive&lt;br/&gt;calcareous components; and (3)
correlation of interpreted glacial periods with other areas
in&lt;br/&gt;Australia and other Gondwanan continents. The applicants are
uniquely qualified to carry out&lt;br/&gt;this research, having the necessary
sedimentological and geochemical skills and experience, a&lt;br/&gt;combined
twenty years research experience in the field area, and a considerable inventory
of&lt;br/&gt;relevant, preliminary data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will contribute to a developing global re-
evaluation&lt;br/&gt;of the late Paleozoic iaicehouselo period, and as such will
have relevance and significance to a&lt;br/&gt;broad range of geoscientists. It
is anticipated that the results from this work will, among
other&lt;br/&gt;outcomes, contribute to increasingly sophisticated numerical
models of past climates which are&lt;br/&gt;now being used iteratively to
provide estimates of rates and magnitudes of climate change&lt;br/&gt;through
geologic time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Because
participation in scientific research plays a strong, positive role
in&lt;br/&gt;guiding student perceptions of career opportunities in science,
both undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students will be included in research
activities. Students will be involved in data gathering
and&lt;br/&gt;interpretation, and will be encouraged to publish outcomes and
participate in professional&lt;br/&gt;meetings. Students from groups
traditionally under-represented in the geosciences will be&lt;br/&gt;targeted
for participation. The PIs will work with the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Office of&lt;br/&gt;Trio Programs to identify students from these groups.
Results of the proposed research will be&lt;br/&gt;incorporated into education
activities, presented at professional meetings, and published in
peer-&lt;br/&gt;reviewed journals. The benefits to society, though indirect, are
certainly tangible in the&lt;br/&gt;contribution made to input parameters for
numerical models of climate change.