* 0417877
* Processes of Channel Bifurcation in Fluvial Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Rudy Slingerland, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2007
* USD 134,874.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;One of the most fundamental processes in the creation and
evolution of fluvial systems is the process of channel bifurcation wherein a
single channel splits into two (or more) smaller channels. Bifurcations
traditionally have been grouped into two types based on whether they arise
within a channel (confined), or within a standing body of water (unconfined).
The former case includes braid and alluvial fan bifurcations; the latter
includes deltas and crevasse splays building into bays and flooded alluvial
plains. Numerous questions remain concerning the origin of both types of
bifurcations: 1) What are the statistics of hydraulic geometries and water
discharges for bifurcating channels? 2) Are the bifurcate channels usually equal
in discharge or do they show the ratios predicted by stability theory for braid
bifurcates noted above? 3) What are the statistics of angles of bifurcation in
various geomorphologic settings and do they show statistically significant
correlations with such basic parameters as water discharge and sediment type? 4)
What factors set the angle of bifurcation in the unconfined case? 5) What
factors set the longitudinal spacing of unconfined bifurcations? 6) What
physical processes are responsible for the growth of the sub-aqueous levees that
form the outer walls of the emerging bifurcate channels? 7) Is secondary
circulation within the expanding jet a necessary condition for central bar
growth as it is in braided streams? 8) What conditions are necessary to keep
both arms of a bifurcation open in suspended load systems?&lt;br/&gt;To answer
these questions a physical- and model-based study of the bifurcation process
will be conducted with the purpose of understanding the roles that three-
dimensional flow velocity fields, secondary circulation, and sediment transport
play in causing unconfined channel bifurcations. Although the emphasis is on the
unconfined type, the ultimate fluid dynamical causes in both types may be
similar. To answer the above questions the research group will: 1) conduct
physical experiments in a basin with sediment feed capability suitable for
studying delta deposition from sediment-water flows; 2) collect data from the
literature and maps and photos on the geometries and hydraulics of both types of
bifurcating channels (while emphasizing the unconfined type); 3) construct a
three-dimensional, large eddy simulation (LES) model of turbulent flow and bed-
and suspended-load sediment transport based on the conceptual model outlined
below, and 4) use the model to conduct numerical experiments. LES results will
help understand the hydrodynamics that are giving rise to the flume and field
observations. Comparisons of LES results with observations will tell us whether
our conceptual model for unconfined bifurcation genesis is capable of predicting
the basic geometries and behaviors of unconfined channel
bifurcations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this Work: A better
understanding and predictive capability for channel bifurcations would improve
the planning and development of floodplain and channel structures, channel
designs, and the success of stream restoration efforts. The contributions of
this study include advancing our understanding of stream stability and channel
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from This Study: This
work constitutes the dissertation topic and financial support for one Ph. D.
candidate (already in residence). Two undergraduates will be trained in the
scientific methods of morphodynamic modeling of sedimentary systems. This
project will form the core of senior theses for the undergraduates. All students
will benefit from exposure to a problem requiring the integration of
geomorphology, sediment transport, and hydrodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;