* 0417163
* New Cretaceous Theropods and Microvertebrates from Africa
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Paul Sereno, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 07/31/2006
* USD 155,567.00

Intellectual Merit - Dr. Paul Sereno and his colleagues will study recently
discovered dinosaur fossils from Cretaceous rocks in northern Africa.
Paleontological expeditions to the Niger Republic in 1993, 1997 and 2000 and to
Morocco in 1995 resulted in the discovery of well preserved dinosaurian fossils
from three horizons spanning the Cretaceous period. In addition, approximately
five tons of sediment was collected from several sites where microvertebrate
remains were found on the surface. From a paleobiogeographic perspective, the
faunas to which the dinosaur and microvertebrate material belong are of
exceptional interest, because they range in age from late Early Cretaceous
(Aptian/Albian) to early Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian), when Africa was breaking
away from neighboring landmasses. Several hypotheses have been forwarded
regarding the pattern and timing of isolation of the southern (Gondwanan)
landmasses, and the results of this project thus will be of particular interest.
The goals of the project are (1) to clean and study new theropod dinosaur
skeletons, (2) to understand their taxonomic relationships and biogeographic
distributions, (3) to study microvertebrate remains that aid in the dating of
sampled horizons, and (4) to search for some of the first Cretaceous mammal
teeth from continental Africa. The newly discovered skeletons and fossil-rich
sediment at the center of this project will strongly impact the understanding of
the fossil record on Africa, which is very poorly established by comparison to
northern landmasses. The record of mammals of Cretaceous age from Africa is
almost nonexistent and represents an exciting frontier.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - The project integrates research and
training of undergraduate and graduate students in the biological and Earth
sciences through classes taught by the PI and by involving students as
volunteers in the PI's preparation lab at the University of Chicago. Students
will assist with fossil preparation, sediment cleaning and sorting and
molding/casting. Preparation of dinosaur discoveries will be showcased to the
public through laboratory tours (up to 1500 people per year) and through public
programs offered by the nonprofit science educational organization
(www.projectexploration.org) co-founded by the PI. Since its inception in 1999,
Project Exploration has brought 60 inner-city youth to Montana or Wyoming to
conduct paleontology field work, served 85 minority middle school girls through
our Sisters4Science program and trained 200 students to serve as docents for
public exhibits. Ninety-three percent of our students continue their
relationship with Project Exploration beyond their initial youth program
experience. The project will also serve as a research tool for Project
Exploration's school services programs that have provided in-depth professional
development workshops to 300 Chicago Public School teachers, and reached more
than 2,000 Chicago-area teachers and students through in-school programming and
lab tours. In addition, Project Exploration has connected with more than one
million people nationally and internationally through online initiatives and
traveling exhibitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;