* 0417436
* Enzymatic C-Methylation Reactions of  Phytosterol Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* William Nes, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2010
* USD 936,032.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(S)-adenosyl-L-methionine-D24-strerol
methyltransferase (SMT) controls carbon flux through the plant-specific sterol
pathway cycloartenol to sitosterol. Despite the fact that SMTs can differ in
physical properties, reaction complexity and substrate selectivity, a family of
three-dimensionally similar SMTs are proposed to exist in plants catalyzing the
successive C-methylations of a sterol acceptor molecule from a common active
site according to a similar mechanistic plan as envisaged in the steric-electric
plug model. Minor differences in the active site topography are considered to
determine the complement of C1/C2- activities and product diversity.
Additionally, bioengineering the sterol pathway in crops by managing SMT
catalysis is considered to lead to value-added traits.&lt;br/&gt;Based on recent
success from NSF supported research in purifying and characterizing the
properties of cloned SMT1 from soybean and SMT2 from Arabidopsis, the present
proposal will investigate the relevant topographies of the active center and
properties of a series of native and mutant SMTs from less-advanced and more-
advanced plant systems. The specific objectives are to (i) identify the sterol
and AdoMet-binding sites and catalytic residues in the active center of SMT1 and
SMT2 from soybean and Arabidopsis by chemical and photoaffinity labeling
techniques; (ii) determine amino acids involved with substrate acceptability and
product diversity through site-directed mutagenesis experiments; (iii) clone,
sequence, express in E. coli and characterize the properties of the Prototheca
wickerhamii SMT1, which generates a novel phytosterol side chain possessing the
D25(27) -sterol side chain; and (iv) define and compare the three-dimensional
structures of SMT1- and SMT2-type enzymes with the assistance of collaborators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge gained from
SMT enzyme characterization and redesign experiments will provide a framework
for understanding the mechanism of C-methylation catalysis and will generate
gain-in-enzyme-function (overexpression) plants engineered with novel SMT
enzymes tailored to generate insect resistance. The work plan will be integrated
into existing chemistry courses for research credit and will involve outreach to
students at a neighboring non Ph.D. degree granting university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;