* 0417176
* Ontogeny and Evolution of Avian Locomotion: Forelimb and Hindlimb Mechanics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Kenneth Dial, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Richard K. Zimmer
* 07/31/2010
* USD 392,000.00

Ontogeny and evolution of avian locomotion: Forelimb and hindlimb mechanics
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kenneth Paul Dial, University of
Montana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What use is half a wing? This question was posed to
Charles Darwin nearly 150 years ago and remains a potent challenge to those
striving to explain how transitional animal forms may have functioned and
behaved. Providing insight into the evolutionary history of birds as they
emerged from their dinosaur ancestors remains a challenge. And despite flight
being the most common form of animal locomotion, only recently have we begun to
understand how specific avian internal structures (e.g., skeletal, muscular,
neural) function during locomotion (e.g., flight, walking, flap-running). Wing-
assisted incline running (WAIR) represents locomotor strategy involving
morphological and behavioral traits that permit partially- and fully-developed
wings of ground birds to assist their powerful hindlimbs as they retreat to an
elevated refuge. Apparently common among living ground birds, WAIR is argued to
represent the most straight-forward explanation elucidating the origin and
evolution of avian flight. In this study, the developmental anatomy and
locomotor performance of various avian species is explored in order to better
understand how legs and wings work in concert to move the animal. It is
suggested that dinosaur ancestors may have used their proto-wings (half a wing)
and legs simultaneously to help them search for food, escape predators, and
traverse complex 3-D environments. Using high-speed video, force plates,
accelerometers, and laser imaging, the important biophysical parameters during
the locomotion of young and adult birds will be quantified. The project will
provide for interdisciplinary training of students and the PI will continue
public outreach activities, particularly those aspects featuring his work in the
mass media.