* 0417694
* Mechanism of Ferric Enterobactin Uptake by FepA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Phillip Klebba, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2008
* USD 295,000.00

Bacteria elaborate iron chelators that scavenge iron from the environment, and
one such iron chelate, the siderophore ferric enterobactin (FeEnt), enters Gram-
negative bacteria through the FepA protein of the outer membrane. This receptor
protein is a paradigm of bacterial metal transporters, and its uptake reaction
is a specific, high affinity process, accomplished by a multi-component, energy-
dependent process that is prototypical of ligand-gated transport: FeEnt binding
activates FepA to transport competence. On the basis of the FepA, FhuA, FecA and
BtuB crystal structures, and in light of potential mechanisms of metal
transport, the research will focus on a preeminent question about the uptake
reaction: what is the function of the N-terminal globular domain within the
transport protein's transmembrane channel? Although the molecular architecture
of many membrane proteins is known from crystallography, in most cases their
transport mechanisms are unresolved or controversial. The project will define
the mechanism of FepA-mediated transport, that involve site-directed mutagenesis
of potentially relevant target residues, genetic engineering to introduce
biophysical probes, and spectroscopic characterizations of reaction kinetics and
protein conformational motion. The studies will illuminate a currently obscure
membrane transport process that is essential to the physiology of prokaryotic
cells: the internalization of iron through the outer membrane, against a
concentration gradient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broad sense, the project
involves methodologies that permit observation of membrane transport reactions
in living cells, and it thereby generally advances membrane biochemistry. It
will accomplish this goal with novel biochemical and spectroscopic techniques,
while integrating the teaching and training of student researchers with the
overall scientific objectives. The participant students include male and female
individuals at the undergraduate, pre-doctoral and post-doctoral levels at the
University of Oklahoma, from a broad spectrum of ethnic and cultural
backgrounds.