* 0417644
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Computational Neuroscience:  Vision Course Conference;  Summer 2004, Cold Spring Harbor, NY
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Cole Gilbert
* 05/31/2005
* USD 52,000.00

Funding is requested for a Cold Spring Harbor course on Computational
Neuroscience: Vision from June 18 - July 1, 2004, and for the summer 2006
course. Computational approaches to neuroscience have produced important
advances in our understanding of neural processing. The course emphasizes that
an understanding of the computational problems in conjunction with perceptual
and biological data can help guide research in neuroscience. Through a
combination of lectures and hands-on computer laboratory experience, this course
will cover: neural representation and coding; the neural basis of color vision,
pattern vision, and visual motion perception; oculomotor function; and visual
attention/decisionmaking. This course has now been taught 6 times over the past
12 years as part of an integrated set of courses at Cold Spring Harbor in a
number of areas of neurobiology. This year, there will be a new emphasis on
theories and computational models of the neural basis of visually-guided
behavior and decision-making, a burgeoning area of sensory and computational
neuroscience. Lectures in the course will be given by the organizers and by
invited lecturers who are working on current research frontiers and are leaders
in their field. Invited lecturers include: E. H. Adelson (MIT), D. Brainard
(Penn), Matteo Carandini (Smith Kettlewell Eye Institute), E, J. Chichilniski
(Salk Insitute), , Kathleen Cullen (McGill University), Bruce Cummings (National
Eye Institute), James DiCarlo (MIT), D. J. Heeger (NYU), Daniel Kersten (Univ of
Minnesota), J. A. Movshon (NYU), Pamela Reinagel (UCSD), F. Rieke (U.
Washington), Ruth Rosenholtz (NASA), S. Treue (U. Gottingen), Preethi Verghese
(Smith Kettlewell Eye Institute).