* 0417736
* Survival on Death Row: Exploring Individual, Conflict, and Political Explanations for Executions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Zhenchao Qian, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 11/30/2006
* USD 151,333.00

Is there a connection between forms of social organization and the propensity to
use capital punishment? Probably no other current legal sanction in any advanced
society is as harsh, but there is little research on the conditions that
influence executions. In part because public officials decide the criminal
codes, sentences, and appeals, many theorists view punishment as an
intrinsically political phenomenon. The many studies of the individual
attributes that lead to death sentences have been extremely useful, but the
influence of political conditions and the social divisions that influence these
legal proceedings should be given more attention. For example, the state and
federal appeals process has been largely ignored, but these procedures clearly
are the most important explanation for execution rates. Almost entirely due to
successful appeals only less than 10% of all state offenders given a death
sentence ultimately are executed. Because so few capital offenders are punished
in this manner and because these offenders spend such diverse amounts of time on
death row, we propose to use survival analysis to assess the contextual and
individual determinants that shape execution probabilities. Those states in
which the death penalty is legal differ sharply in their willingness to use this
extreme sanction. In many states that are reluctant to execute, as death
sentences accumulate and the number of prisoners given this sentence grows, the
amount of time these prisoners spend on death row becomes longer and longer, but
other states execute far more quickly. This study proposes to analyze death row
inmate survival rates in the US from 1973 to 2000 to detect the social
conditions and the individual offender characteristics that jointly affect
differences in execution probabilities over time and across the U.S. states.
Such a research design is particularly appropriate for at least two reasons.
First, this process is best modeled with survival techniques due to the long
delay in the legal procedures that lead to an execution and due to the small
minority of death row offenders who ultimately are executed. Second, one can
combine aggregate time-varying covariates that measure the social and political
environment with the characteristics of individual offenders in survival models
to find out how these factors affect the timing and the probability of
executions. It follows that analyses conducted with event history procedures
that gauge both the individual and environmental determinants that should alter
execution probabilities ought to add to our theoretical knowledge about the use
of this lethal punishment. For example, this approach can be used to see if
minority death row offenders are more or less likely to be executed or if states
with larger minority populations are more likely to use this penalty. With these
procedures we can see if minority capital offenders have a worse hazard rate due
to the appeals process in comparatively conservative jurisdictions. The broader
impacts of this study include the following. The research will be of interest to
scholars and policymakers interested in understanding the factors that lead to
inequalities associated with executions of US prisoners. The research we propose
can throw light on some critical theoretical issues about the death penalty at a
time when this severe and irreversible punishment is again starting to be
questioned by the US public and policymakers.