* 0417340
* CRCD/EI: Curriculum and Course Modules for Bridging the Verification Gap
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Joseph Tront, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 07/31/2008
* USD 383,751.00

Curriculum and Course Modules for Bridging the Verification Gap&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Michael S. Hsiao (Principal Investigator)&lt;br/&gt;Sandeep K. Shukla
(Co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;Dong S. Ha (Co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;Joseph G. Tront (Co-
PI)&lt;br/&gt;Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech&lt;br/&gt;Blacksburg, VA 24061&lt;br/&gt;hsi
ao@vt.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is on integrating verification topics to the curricula, for both
undergraduate- and graduate-level curricula. At the undergraduate level,
verification concepts and strategies will be emphasized where students will
acquire the necessary skills to be an effective designer and verification
engineer. At the graduate level, the curriculum will emphasize on the theory and
implementation that will supply increasingly capable algorithms and
methodologies for verifying designs. In both levels, design for verifiability,
hierarchical verification (formal and semi-formal), and coverage-based analysis
will be stressed. Course modules and courseware will be developed and made
available via the Internet. The specific tasks for this proposal include the
following: (1) re-design the undergraduate design projects such that they become
verification-aware and verification-centric, starting from the initial phases of
the design; (2) embed verification fundamentals to design courses content and
syllabi; (3) introduce an entry-level foundations graduate course that covers
mathematical theories and formulations behind today's technology;&lt;br/&gt;(4)
continue cutting-edge verification research to advance the knowledge base; (5)
acquire open-source tools and other commercial verification engines through
University programs to integrate into the curricula; (6) integrate course
modules (lectures and projects) and provide them on the Internet. The impact of
this research project not only includes students with a deeper understanding of
the role of verification-centric design style, our research and courseware will
also reduce the need for other academic and industrial educators to develop
similar material across the many courses. Finally, with publications via
conferences and journals, the knowledge acquired will also be readily available
to the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;