* 0417679
* Photoproduction of Vector Mesons
* NONE,NONE
* 09/30/2003,05/31/2005
* Philip Cole, Catholic University of America
* Continuing grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 05/31/2005
* USD 81,495.00

9874653 Cole The research component of this five-year Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program Award will yield insights into the underlying
symmetry of the quark degrees of freedom in the nucleon, the nature of the
parity exchange between the incident photon and target nucleon, and will touch
upon the strangeness content of the nucleon, as well as other OZI-evading
processes. With his collaborators, the Principal Investigator (PI) will measure
the photoproduction of vector mesons by using a beam of linearly-polarized
photons from both the CEBAF Large Acceptance Spectrometer (CLAS) in Hall B of
Jefferson Lab and the GRAAL detector at the European Synchrotron Radiation
Facility. The PI is a cospokesperson on three approved experiments, E94-109,
E98-109, and E99-013, which will take place in Hall B of Jefferson Lab. With the
high-quality beam of linearly-polarized photons provided, and the 4-pi detectors
at these two facilities, we shall increase the world's data by a factor of
approximately three orders of magnitude. This rich pool of data will allow us to
accurately measure the evolution of the angular distributions of the daughter
spin-0 mesons resulting from the decay of the parent vector mesons as functions
of c.m. energy, and polar and azimuthal scattering angles with unprecented high
precision by extracting the spin density matrix elements in a model-independent
way. At his home institution, the PI has been actively engaged in developing the
science component to an algebra-based pre-engineering science course in the
effort to elevate awareness of physics and chemistry with the objective of
increasing the retention rate of entering students. The PI is promoting physics
within his department in the capacity of the faculty advisor to the Society of
Physics Students (SPS). Within the wider context of the El Paso community, he is
promoting physics by combining the SPS and the Physics Circus; the PI and
several undergraduate students carry out a set of exciting and interactive
physics demonstrations for audiences at UTEP and at area schools. In that El
Paso is the gateway to Latin America, and that the student population of the
primarily undergraduate University of Texas at El Paso is 66% Hispanic,
establishing a high-caliber research program in experimental nuclear physics
will provide unique research opportunities for Hispanic students, who
traditionally have been underrepresented in physics. The funding for this CAREER
grant is a crucial step towards establishing and carrying out a high-caliber
medium-energy nuclear physics program at the University of Texas at El Paso.
Furthermore, this research program will provide a meaningful and state-of-the-
art undergraduate and master's student research experience in keeping with the
mission of the NSF Model Institutions for Excellence agenda.

