* 0417233
* AIID/Hats: An Architecture for the Interpretation of Intelligence Data
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Paul Cohen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2006
* USD 239,500.00

AIID/Hats: An Architecture for Interpreting Intelligence Data&lt;br/&gt;Paul
Cohen, Center for Research on Unexpected Events, USC Information Sciences
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will demonstrate how the new
technology of Bayesian blackboards scales to problems involving ambiguous and
incomplete data about thousands of individuals. &lt;br/&gt;The Center for
Research on Unexpected Events (CRUE) has developed a prototype of a Bayesian
blackboard system called AIID, Architecture for the Interpretation of
Intelligence Data. A Bayesian blackboard combines the technologies of blackboard
systems and Bayesian belief networks. One consequence of this marriage is that
the control of intelligence gathering in the world and inference on the
blackboard can be rational, that is, grounded in probability and utility
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of this project is a simulator of
terrorist activities called Hats. The simulator is home to thousands of agents
("hats"), which travel to meetings. Some hats are covert terrorists and a very
few hats are known terrorists. All hats are governed by plans generated by a
planner. Terrorist plans end in the destruction of landmarks. The object of a
game against the Hats simulator is to find terrorist task forces before they
carry out their plans. One pays for information about hats, and also for false
arrests and destroyed landmarks. At the end of a game, one is given a score,
which is the sum of these costs. The goal is to play Hats rationally, that is,
to catch terrorist groups with the least combined cost of information, false
arrests, and destroyed landmarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bayesian blackboard
is a marriage of the best knowledge-based information fusion architecture and
the best methods to organize and reason with probabilistic
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;The Bayesian blackboard, because it gives a sound
probabilistic semantics to hypotheses, enables a theory of rational intelligence
analysis, or, equivalently, the development of mathematical formulations of the
utility of intelligence and action against suspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of an effort by the Center for Research on Unexpected Events
(CRUE) at USC's Information Sciences Institute to develop tools for rational
intelligence analysis. CRUE's scientific focus is mathematical and simulation
models which unify apparently diverse activities such as intrusion detection and
biosurveillance. Taken together these models constitute a new field called
informatics for urban security. These models will be tested in the AIID/Hats
system, and AIID will be developed as a tool for intelligence analysts. The
current proposal, and all CRUE efforts, serve the intelligence community; in
this instance through the KD-D program.&lt;br/&gt;