* 0417286
* RUI: Fixing the Leaky Educational Pipeline: Friendships as Protective Factors for the Academic Adjustment of Latino Students Transitioning to Middle School
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Anne Sebanc, Whittier College
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 09/30/2008
* USD 175,717.00

Latinos have the highest dropout rate and lowest college attendance of any
ethnic group in America. The transition from elementary to middle school is one
of the leaky points in the educational pipeline for Latino students. Recent
research on non-Latino children has shown that friendships help students
successfully deal with school transitions. Students who keep old friends and
make new friends have more positive attitudes about school and are more
academically successful than those who are unable to keep or make friends. The
purpose of the proposed study is to investigate academic achievement, motivation
and self esteem of Latino students transitioning to middle school, as well as
determine the extent to which friendships are related to these measures of
adjustment. The following four hypotheses will be tested: 1) The transition to
middle school will be stressful for some Latino students and not others,
depending on certain characteristics. 2) Friendships between children who are
more similar on ethnic and linguistic characteristics will be more positive than
friendships between dissimilar peers. 3) The academic achievement and motivation
of Latino students will in part be predicted by the quality of their friendships
and the identity of their friends. 4) Students' bilingualism, family immigration
status, and country of origin may moderate the influence that friends have on
academic achievement. In a two-year longitudinal study, academic adjustment data
(achievement, self-esteem, motivation, academic self-confidence) will be
gathered from self reports, peer reports, teacher ratings and school transcripts
at three time points. Self-report friendship quality questionnaires will also be
used to characterize individual differences in the identity and quality of
Latino students' friendships. By determining the risk and protective factors
related to academic achievement of Latino students, this study will help fix the
leaky pipeline in several ways. First, Latino undergraduates at a Hispanic
serving institution will conduct the study and their involvement in
undergraduate research may help them complete college and continue on to
graduate programs. Second, the undergraduate researchers may be able to
encourage younger Latino students' academic achievement immediately. Because
most undergraduate researchers on this project plan to teach in Hispanic serving
schools upon graduation, they can promote academic achievement of their Latino
students once they know the protective factors for academic achievement. Third,
this study will affect school policies on a broader scale through the
dissemination of findings to school administrators as well as developmental and
educational researchers.