* 0417425
* CMG: Nonintegrable Hamiltonian Systems in Ocean Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Francisco Beron-Vera, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2009
* USD 963,976.00

Abstract: 0417425&lt;br/&gt;CMG: Nonintegrable Hamiltonian Systems in Ocean
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on two sets of problems in
ocean physics in which the underlying dynamics are those of a nonintegrable
Hamiltonian system: (i) particle trajectory (Lagrangian) dynamics in unsteady
two-dimensional incompressible flows; and (ii) wave propagation in inhomogeneous
moving media. The issues to be investigated in both cases are motivated by
oceanographic questions rather than purely mathematical issues. However, it is
anticipated that greater attention to mathematical detail than has heretofore
been applied will lead to new insights into some very practical
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Traditional approaches to the
above two classes of problem rely heavily on strictly stochastic methods. From a
dynamical systems perspective such an approach is unrealistic and unnecessarily
restrictive. Topics relating to problem (i) to be investigated include:
stochastic vs. chaotic dynamics; tracer patchiness and anomalous diffusion; the
importance of the background flow on trajectory stability; the importance of
vorticity constraints on trajectory stability; adiabatic invariance; and a
detailed investigation of mixing in perturbed Taylor-Couette flows. Of
particular concern in problem (ii) is the development of a theory of wave
propagation in random inhomogeneous media (WPRIM); preliminary work on this
problem suggests that it differs in some fundamental respects from the
traditional (homogeneous background) WPRM problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The proposed work is a collaboration between geoscientists and a
mathematician. It will serve to launch the careers of two promising, young
scientists who are members of underrepresented groups. The collaboration between
the geoscientists and mathematicians will improve the level of mathematical
rigorof the geophysically motivated research performed and develop geophysically
motivated teaching material for use in mathematics courses. The latter is
particularly important at the undergraduate level to point out the practical
importance of the material being taught. Web-based teaching aids will be
developed. The proposed activity offers several possibilities to further the
education of graduate students; at least one will be involved in the proposed
work. The proposed work also has numerous practical applications that are
beneficial to society. The principal application of the Lagrangian dynamics work
is to mixing (e.g. pollutant dispersal) in the atmosphere, the ocean, or other
natural bodies of water. The issue of Lagrangian predictability is relevant to
pollutant dispersal issues and search and rescue operations at sea.
Understanding tracer concentration statistics, including tracer patchiness, can
be critically important in biological applications. The proposed work relating
to mixing in Taylor-Couette flows has immediate industrial applications, for
example to the mixing of chemicals or drugs; in the latter case, failure to
thoroughly mix could lead to a localized concentration of a substance that is
toxic to humans. The principal application of the WPRIM work is to inverse
problems (tomography, nondestructive evaluation) and communication. Waves
(acoustics, elastic, electromagnetic) are widely used in geophysical
applications of both types. The environment in almost all such geophysical
applications is characterized by an inhomogeneous background; hence the
importance of the proposed work for understanding wavefield statistics and loss
of signal coherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;