* 0417634
* Empirical Studies in the Political Economy of Development
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Rohini Pande, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2006
* USD 208,595.00

This research consists of three empirical studies in the political economy of
development. It combines sensible empirical techniques with a rich Indian
district panel data set to study how economic development affects, and is
affected by, the functioning of political institutions. The first study uses
data on large dam construction to study how the political process affects public
good provision, and thereby economic development. This study exploits
differences in the geographic potential of dam construction in districts and in
their political influence for identification. The second study uses Indian
district-level data to study how differential rates of economic growth across
occupations interacts with occupational choices of different religious groups to
affect the likelihood of group conflict, particularly the incidence of communal
violence. By improving our understanding of how economic development affects
group conflict, this study will contribute to the policy debate on the optimal
architecture of governance in low-income countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
third study uses a field survey to examine how economic development affects the
incidence of politician corruption. The results of this study will help us
assess the relative importance of political and economic reforms in reducing
corruption in poor countries. The research will also develop curricula for
advanced undergraduate and graduate development economics courses, with a
special focus on the political economy of development. The curricula will
integrate the use of data sets from low-income countries and theoretical
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These three studies have the potential to
greatly expand our understanding of the relationship between economic
development and political processes in low-income countries. The data collected
for this research will be very useful to other researchers. The proposed
educational agenda of this research will also make the political economy of
development an integral part of development economics
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;