* 0417880
* The Grammar of Raising and Control
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* William Davies, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2007
* USD 18,697.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Stanley Dubinsky and Dr. William
Davies will organize a scholarly panel in connection with the Linguistic Society
of America's annual meeting in January, 2005, and a two-day workshop to be held
at the LSA Summer Institute in July, 2005. The topic of these meetings is the
analysis of two grammatical constructions, called Raising and Control, which
have been central to the development of linguistic theory over the past 40
years. The January 2005 panel will gather leading researchers in order to
articulate a common set of research questions to be addressed in the July 2005
workshop. Workshop participants will be asked to focus on new empirical data,
especially from understudied languages. Workshop participants will be sought
from both theoretical linguists and linguists whose research interests lie in
the interdisciplinary areas of language acquisition, historical linguistics,
sociolinguistics and language variation, and neurolinguistics. In order to make
the proceedings of the panel widely available, a digital recording of the
January panel will be made accessible on the project's website, along with a
textual transcript. The website will also provide access to the workshop program
and abstracts, and will provide the opportunity for participants to make drafts
of their research available to the public. Selected papers from the panel and
workshop will be published as a book.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;