* 0417559
* Network Modeling of International Peace and Trade Data
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Peter Hoff, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

Despite the desire to focus on the interconnected nature of politics and
economics at the global scale, most empirical studies assume that the major
actors are not only sovereign countries, but also that their relationships are
independent. This means, for example, that trade is often studied without taking
into account the interdependence of one country's trade with another. Similarly
in international politics, it is often assumed that the policies of one country
are entirely independent of the policies in another, even though we may observe
consultation between them. Statistical studies have typically assumed that these
kinds of dependencies can be ignored. In contrast, this research will employ
newly developed statistical methods to reveal these heretofore hidden
interdependencies among both trade and international politics. The research will
develop and estimate statistical models for dependent dyadic data that
simultaneously estimate the correlation of actions having the same initiator,
the correlation of actions having the same recipient, as well as the reciprocity
of actions between a pair of actors and third-order dependencies involving the
clustering of three or more actors. The investigators will reexamine some of the
claims of the democratic peace hypothesis to see whether they may be explained
in part by the dependencies among the actions of countries. They also will
reexamine standard models of international trade to gauge whether international
commerce can be better understood in the context of dependencies among trading
patterns. Preliminary results suggest that there is considerable leverage to be
gained by focusing on the dependencies in dyadic data of the kind represented by
international trade as well as international conflict and
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of this approach has the
promise of transforming empirical studies of dyadic, or transactional, data in
political science, geography, and economics. In so doing, it may help to
reenergize examination of the impacts of international dependencies upon
international cooperation and commerce. Understanding the second and third order
dependencies among trading countries will help provide a clearer picture of the
global opportunities and barriers to increased levels of global trade.