* 0417180
* Beetles and Their Yeast Associates from Basidiocarp Habitats
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2011
* Meredith Blackwell, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 06/30/2011
* USD 494,027.00

Abstract. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungi often have been suggested as determinants
of plant diversity, and plant diversification has been implicated as a major
factor affecting the diversity of beetles and other insect groups. Direct
relationships between fungi and insect evolution, however, remain under
appreciated. Gut-inhabiting fungi, including yeasts, are known to be essential
to the nutrition of some insects. The current study is based on results of
previous NSF supported research in which the PIs isolated about 200 new species
of yeasts out of 650 isolates from digestive tracts of beetles in 27 families in
selected Panamanian and USA localities, an increase of 30% of all known yeast
species. Statistical analyses estimate that resampling of only the previously
sampled restricted habitats could produce additional undescribed taxa to
increase current yeast numbers from all habitats worldwide by 50%. The discovery
of the great diversity of undescribed yeasts in association with beetles is
stunning, especially when one extrapolates beyond the highly restricted
taxonomic, temporal, ecological, and geographical scope of this study.
Phylogenetic analyses placed the beetle gut yeasts in at least 45 independent
clades among all known yeasts with clustering of major insect-associated groups,
suggesting high yeast diversity arose by occasional horizontal transmission in
common habitats and subsequent specialization with the insects. In addition to
discovery of new yeast species the current study will attack physiological,
ecological, and evolutionary questions, regarding the nature of the yeast-insect
associations, the universality of associations worldwide, and the role that
yeasts may play in habitat expansion and speciation of insects, and the PIs will
use field and cultural methods as well as molecular techniques, including DNA
sequencing to answer the questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will have
broader scientific significance because yeasts have great potential in
industrial processes. In this work the PIs discovered that yeasts associated
with wood-ingesting beetles have potential in efficient conversion of plant
material to fuel alcohol. Other newly discovered yeasts synthesize a wide
variety of other enzymes and vitamins, and the PIs will collaborate to determine
if these might be useful in industrial processes. The PIs will continue to be
highly interactive and will disperse the findings of this study widely. An added
benefit will be the continued training of undergraduates and graduate students
in methods of modern evolutionary and ecological studies as in the previous
study. In addition to the training of graduate students, the PIs were especially
effective in using the previous project as a focus for training 17
undergraduates on aspects of insect-fungus associations; these included 4 men
and 13 women, two of whom were minority women. All graduated students have gone
to graduate or medical school; one is a George C. Marshall Scholar at Oxford
University. Four papers with undergraduate authors were published, and two
presentations at national meetings involved undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;