* 0417477
* Conference:  Student Paper Competition at the 2004 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium to be held in Ft. Worth, TX on June 6-11, 2004.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Charles Goldsmith, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2005
* USD 10,000.00

0417477&lt;br/&gt;Goldsmith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests travel
support for 16 students from U.S. universities in the Student Paper Competition
at the 2004 International Microwave Symposium (IMS). The IMS is the annual
meeting of the Microwave Theory and Techniques Society (MTT-S) of the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE). The IMS is also the major
international conference in the microwave field and a focus of research results
in wireless communications. In 2004, the IMS will be held in Ft. Worth, Texas,
USA from June 6 to June 11.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student Paper
Competition&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, the MTT-S promotes student education
and research in microwave through a number of mechanisms. For instance, it
sponsors a highly competitive and prestigious Graduate Fellowship program under
which several full-time graduate students are sponsored for education and
research in microwave. However, the Society's broadest outreach to students is
the annual Student Paper Competition at the IMS. This program is open to any
full-time student (typically, although not necessarily, a graduate student) who
is the lead and principal author of a paper presented at the IMS. The selective
program brings the world's best students together in an integrated program in
which they present their work not only to a technical audience but also to a
group of judges. The program helps develop the students' technical acumen as
well as their communication skills. It also introduces them to the international
technical community and helps to build a community of students who will lead the
next generation of microwave professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMS
provides financial support of various forms but does not reimburse
travel&lt;br/&gt;expenses. Travel support from NSF will ensure that the program
is open to the widest&lt;br/&gt;range of interested applicants from U.S.
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;