* 0417367
* RUI:  Diversity and Dynamics of Forest Butterflies in Ghana's Indigenous Sacred Groves and Forest Reserves
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Janice Bossart, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 03/31/2006
* USD 306,876.00

Abstract DEB 0417367 Bossart

This project will document the butterfly biodiversity of relict forest 'islands'
from one of the most biologically unique, critically imperiled, and understudied
regions in the world; the tropical forests of Ghana. The project emphasizes
survey and conservation of forest reserves and irreplaceable sacred groves.
Sacred groves are isolated forest areas that have been protected for hundreds of
years by indigenous peoples and that were within living memory part of
continuous forest. Major goals are to 1) investigate how forest fragmentation
impacts communities of forest-dependent species and to identify what factors
promote their persistence versus extinction, and 2) narrow the pervasive
knowledge gap that currently exists for the unique forest ecosystems of West
Africa. Butterflies are excellent models for evaluating the status of natural
communities in degraded landscapes because they show a wide diversity of
relative sensitivities to environmental change, are tightly linked to ecological
systems as both primary consumers (herbivores) and food items, and are easily
collected and identified. Primary field activities associated with the project
will occur over three years and include regular and systematic survey of nine
forest sites using baited traps and net collections, intensive spot surveys of
at least six additional unique forest sites, measurement of forest
characteristics at each site (e.g., size and canopy cover), and purposeful
collection of caterpillars and their food plant dependencies to amass much
needed, but largely nonexistent, information on species' biology and natural
histories. The project will 1) greatly expand our understanding of forest
biodiversity in tropical West Africa, 2) test broad ecological and biogeographic
hypotheses that have relevance beyond this particular system, 3) establish a
data and image-rich library of the Ghanaian butterfly fauna on the world wide
web, 4) make species checklists and summary findings rapidly available to local
communities and conservation agencies to facilitate science-based conservation
plans, 5) help solidify permanent reference and museum collections in the host
country, and 6) generate a reference framework for future research in molecular
biology, ecology, evolution, and systematics.

The project emphasizes education, training, capacity building, and cultural
exchange. It is an international collaboration that includes overseas research
and professional opportunities for U.S. and Ghanaian students and scientists,
and involves cooperating specialists from the U.S., Britain, Belgium, and
Vietnam, and multiple institutions and staff in the U.S. (Rose-Hulman Institute
of Technology and Carnegie Museum of Natural History) and Ghana (Forestry
Research Institute of Ghana, Kwame-Nkrumah University of Science and Technology,
Ghana Wildlife Division, and Nature Conservation Research Centre).

This award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering.