* 0417898
* Poverty and Environment: Estimating the Effect of Natural Resource Availability on Household Incomes in Rural India
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Urvashi Narain, Resources For the Future Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2006
* USD 65,214.00

This project analyzes the effect of natural resource availability on household
incomes in rural India by estimating the extent to which the stock of natural
resources (forests, grazing lands, and groundwater) available to rural
households affects their income from agriculture and other productive
activities. It will collect the data needed for this empirical analysis through
household and village surveys specifically designed for this purpose. The
investigators have already completed the process of collecting the first year of
data from 60 villages in the Jhabua district of Madhya Pradesh in India. The
grant provides funds to construct a panel by collecting data for additional
years. Besides allowing the investigators to better identify the underlying
empirical relationship, it is only with data spanning several years that the
investigators can begin to examine resource-stock dynamics and distinguish long-
run sustainable impacts of resource stocks on income from short-run impacts that
may be due to unsustainably high levels of extraction.

To estimate the contribution of natural resource stocks to household profits,
the investigators will estimate a variant of the Symmetric Normalized Quadratic
Restricted Profit Function. Since it is reasonable to presume that stocks of
land, capital, livestock, and natural resources are affected by household
incomes, an endogeneity problem would arise if they were to regress profits on
contemporaneous values of these stocks. In the household survey, the
investigators therefore ask for the values of these stocks at the start of the
survey year, and they will similarly use predetermined measures of the natural
resource stocks. Since they expect error terms to be serially correlated,
however, merely using predetermined values does not suffice to ensure
identification. A key element of identification will therefore be to use panel
data, as this will enable them to estimate a fixed-effects model. Finally they
will use instruments for own assets and natural assets to control for
correlation between differenced income shocks and differenced asset values.

Broader Impacts: By quantifying the impact of natural resource management on
poverty alleviation, this project will inform the debate on whether presently-
poor countries will have to deplete, often irreversibly, their stocks of natural
resources (forests, water resources, grazing lands) in order to improve their
living standards, or whether, in contrast, advancements in living standards can
come from improvements in the stocks of natural resources.