* 0417426
* Conference:   "Frontiers in Plant Reproduction II"  -  October 2004  in Albany, New York
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Dmitry Belostotsky, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The purpose of this proposal is to provide support for the "Frontiers in Plant
Reproduction II" Conference at the State University of New York, Albany, on
October 15-17, 2004. Sexual plant reproduction is a rapidly advancing area of
plant biology that has immediate practical implications for feeding the human
population and supporting its other basic needs. This meeting will serve as an
international forum (including researchers from North America, Europe, Asia and
Australia) for the review and discussion of the state of the art in the field
from diverse viewpoints, including classical plant physiology, molecular
biology, biophysics, genetics and genomics. Cutting edge, high-throughput
approaches will be emphasized. The conference will feature platform
presentations, as well as poster and discussion sessions. This meeting is
deliberately structured to facilitate meaningful participation by researchers
and students representing a diversity of experimental systems, approaches,
career level, ethnicity and gender. First priority in providing support will be
given to the participants from underrepresented groups, women and beginning
investigators. Participation of the local scientific and teaching community,
including universities and other research institutions, colleges, and high
schools, will be encouraged. Results of this conference will be widely
disseminated, and its summary published in a leading plant journal.

