* 0417722
* SGER: Direct Synthesis of L10 Phase FePt Nanoparticles Using Supercritical Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Hong Yang, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 05/31/2006
* USD 63,772.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0417722&lt;br/&gt;H. Yang, U of
Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent development in the ultrahigh magnetic
storage media has posed new challenges for the creation of nanomaterials with
the design compositions and structures. Among the potential candidates, FePt
nanoparticles have been considered as one of the most promising materials in
longitudinal magnetic storage applications. Methods developed for the synthesis
of quantum dots have recently been extended to this class of alloy. Monodisperse
nanoparticles of disordered face-centered cubic (fcc) phase FePt alloys have
been made using the so-called polyol process. The FePt nanoparticles however,
need to be ordered face-centered tetragonal (fct, also known as L10) phase in
order to have the high magnetic anisotropy and coercivity required for data
storage applications. The transition temperatures from disordered fcc to ordered
fct phase of FePt alloy beyond the reach of conventional solvents. The post-
synthetic solid state treatment at the high temperature leads to the coalescence
of FePt nanoparticles and makes them unsuitable for the applications. To explore
the full potential of the materials, we propose to develop a direct synthesis of
fct phase FePt nanoparticles at high reaction temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Supercritical fluids
maintain the liquid state under high temperature and pressure conditions. Such
fluids have only one single phase and been used in the particle synthesis and
process. In this proposal, the synthesis of L10 phase FePt nanoparticles in
supercritical fluids at a temperature range (&gt; 400 degrees C) that favors the
formation of ordered fct phase will be explored. &lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives are as follows: 1) examine temperature dependent solubility of
different precursors and capping ligands, particularly iron carbonyl, platinum
acetylacetonate, octanol, oleic acid and oleylamine, in supercritical fluids; 2)
map out the supercritical or near-supercritical conditions for the synthesis of
temperature-dependent and fct phase-specific FePt &lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles; 3)
study the structure-magnetic property relation of synthesized nanoparticles
using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), atomic (and magnetic) force
microcopy (AFM/MFM), superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID)
magnetometer, powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD), energy disperse X-ray (EDX), and
electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Motivated by developing new concepts pivotal to the
advancement of advanced magnetic materials, we expect that the outcome of this
research will directly impact on the microelectronic and data storage
industries. The knowledge gained during this project will provide the
fundamental understanding of nanoparticle formation at high temperatures under
supercritical conditions and have broader impact in the design and synthesis of
multi-component &lt;br/&gt;nanomaterials. Students trained through this project
will master cutting-edge synthetic and characterization skills, and cultivate
critical knowledge required for the future workforce in nanoscience and
nanotechnology. This project will expand the research collaborations at the
University of Rochester. The research outcome will be disseminated to students
and the public through the incorporation of research results into the course
curriculum, outreach programs with local high schools (currently with Pittsford
Central High School, Career Intern Program), undergraduate research programs,
and scholarly publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;