* 0417676
* CMG Collaborative Research : Spatiotemporal Multifractal Modeling and Local Prediction of Magnetic Storms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Stephen Watson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 285,678.00

Magnetic storms result when the magnetized plasma that propagates away from the
sun interacts with the near-earth space plasma environment. Such storms
typically begin with a sudden worldwide increase in the magnetic field that
lasts several minutes to several hours, followed by the main phase, which
typically lasts about a day, and features large reductions in the magnetic field
strength. The global influence of magnetic storms was recognized over eighty
years ago, and the currents that they induce in earth and space-borne systems
can have considerable impacts. For example, damage from the March 1989 storm was
estimated in the order of billions of dollars. Given that the magnetic field can
vary significantly within the continental scale, and that its rate of change
causes damage, there is a need to model and predict local
variability.&lt;br/&gt; This project will lay the mathematical foundation for a
localized magnetic storm prediction system, which will allow assessment of
geomagnetically induced currents and implementation of damage limitation
strategies where necessary. Information on fluctuations in the magnetic field
can be gleaned from ground and satellite based magnetometers. Although
individual magnetometers provide a wealth of temporal information, the paucity
of ground-based magnetometers limits our predictive capability of the local
behavior of magnetic storms. New mathematical techniques are
required.&lt;br/&gt; To address the above issue, we propose to solve the
following geophysical problems: (i) modeling and prediction of magnetometer time
series; (ii) spatiotemporal modeling of the magnetic field; (iii) spatial
interpolation of the magnetic field at unobserved locations. We will concentrate
our study on the available high acquisition-rate magnetometers in North America.
Although these stations offer limited spatial coverage, they provide an
abundance of temporal data. The methodologies employed in this project go beyond
existing approaches and take into account the very high time resolution of
magnetometer measurements. This will compensate for the sparsity of spatial
measurements and yield information at unobserved locations.&lt;br/&gt; The
spatiotemporal mathematical and statistical modeling techniques presented in
this proposal are novel and innovative. As such, this proposal will advance the
state of the art in both geosciences and mathematical sciences. Members of the
project team, which is composed of geoscientists and mathematical scientists,
possess the expertise to achieve these aims in a truly interdisciplinary
fashion. By providing a physical framework for the spatiotemporal variability of
magnetic fields, the proposed work will allow for deeper insight into the
underlying physical mechanisms of magnetic storms. Many monitoring systems
perform spatially sparse measurements. The proposed work, which addresses the
spatial interpolation problem, will therefore find applications in diverse areas
of the geosciences and broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt; The most
developed societies, which rely upon high technologies for daily essentials such
as energy and communications, are most susceptible to the effects of magnetic
storms. As society becomes increasingly dependent upon high-technology earth-
and space-borne systems, the need to model and predict spatiotemporal
fluctuations in the magnetosphere will become increasingly important.