* 0417759
* The House Whip System and Party Theories of Congress
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* C. Lawrence Evans, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2008
* USD 143,254.00

This project uses archival records of the whip counts conducted by party leaders
in the U.S. House to address significant scholarly disputes about the role of
partisan institutions in Congress. A whip count is a private poll conducted by
party leaders in which the positions of individual legislators are categorized
as .yes,. .leaning yes,. .undecided,. .leaning no,. .no,. or nonresponsive.
Detailed records of the whip counts conducted by House Democrats for 1955-1986
and House Republicans for 1975-80 have been compiled from the personal papers of
former party leaders. Included are records for over 600 whip counts, covering
hundreds of the most significant measures considered by Congress since World War
II (e.g., federal aid to education in the 1950s and 1960s, the Vietnam conflict,
the energy battles of the 1970s, and Reaganomics and U.S. involvement in
Nicaragua during the 1980s). The research team will transform the archival
materials into usable quantitative data, integrate relevant contextual evidence,
and conduct the additional archival research necessary to incorporate more
recent materials for the House and evidence from the Senate. &lt;br/&gt;Among
other topics, these data will be used to evaluate the independent impact of
party leaders in the legislative process. According to party-based theories of
Congress, when policy preferences within the House majority party are
homogeneous and preferences between the two parties are polarized, the majority
party may be able to secure noncentrist outcomes that better reflect majority
party viewpoints than chamber opinion as a whole. Other scholars, however,
maintain that legislative outcomes derive from the preferences &lt;br/&gt;of
rank-and-file lawmakers, rather than the machinations of party leaders. Attempts
to resolve this dispute empirically have been undermined by problems of
observational equivalence because scholars generally lack measures of member
positions prior to the roll call decision. The records of past whip counts,
however, can provide such a window into the evolving preferences of legislators
in the days and weeks before floor action on major issues. In addition to the
conceptual debate over party power, this study will address other important
questions about the coalition-building process: What factors shape the size and
contents of party legislative agendas in Congress? What is the distribution of
preferences confronting the leadership prior to significant roll calls? What
factors determine whether individual lawmakers will stay loyal or defect from
the party line? How successful are party leaders at mobilizing support for party
programs? And how do the answers to these questions vary by issue, party, and
period? &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The data sets created for this project will
be made available to scholars and students via an elaborate website, providing
the entire research community with valuable evidence about the dynamics of
coalition building on Capitol Hill. Scholars and students alike will be able to
conduct guided searches of the data base and download personalized data sets
organized by bill, policy area, date, and legislator. Identifiers will be
included to facilitate the merging of files with information from other on-line
sources, such as the Policy Agendas Project at the University of Washington. The
whip evidence will help scholars answer a range of questions, as well as inform
student research for course assignments about the Congress. Additional data from
congressional and presidential archives will be added as it becomes available. A
long-term goal of this project, then, is to develop and maintain one of the more
valuable and highly-used research websites about the American legislative
process. &lt;br/&gt;