* 0417548
* CRCD/EI:    Speaking of Software:    Integrating Communication and Documentation Techniques Into An Undergraduate Software Engineering Curriculum
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Robert Johnson, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 12/31/2007
* USD 319,249.00

Speaking of software:Integrating communication and documentation techniques into
an undergraduate software engineering curriculum

Project summary

Given the ever-increasing influence of computer software on our lives, it is
crucial for the developers of software products to communicate easily and
precisely with a wide range of stakeholders. Furthermore, today's software
products are artifacts of great complexity and variety, so great care must be
taken in defining the format and content of such communication. Typically,
however, the process of sharing knowledge between developer, customer, end user,
and other stakeholders is discussed very little in undergraduate CISE education.

The proposed project seeks to enhance the education of undergraduate software
engineering students in three ways: enlightening them about the needs and
knowledge of other stakeholders, empowering them to engage in active
communication with these stakeholders, and enabling them to communicate
precisely and effectively. Curricular materials will draw from results from
research in technical communication, using scenarios to draw end users and other
traditionally marginalized stakeholders into the development process. The
project will also use new software engineering tools and methodologies for
documenting requirements and design. Problem frames will be used to structure
and analyze software problems, and Abstract State Machines will be used for
design documentation, prototyping, and verification.

Intellectual merit. This project brings together experts in technical
communication and computer science to generate novel approaches to software
engineering education. The material drawn from current software engineering
research has not yet been brought into the classroom to any significant extent.
The implementation and evaluation of the new curricular materials are to be
performed in a variety of settings, by faculty members active in research and
experienced in undergraduate education.

Broader impact. The curricular enhancements proposed in this project will help
to produce more effective software engineers and better software. Training in
careful, intensive communication with customers and users will increase customer
satisfaction through greater usability and fewer defects. Instilling a
discipline of literate, precise documentation will foster understanding among
developers and simplify maintenance.

In addition, the proposed project will enliven the CISE curriculum and equip
future software engineers with useful skills. Empowering students to participate
in active communication will make them more engaged in their profession and less
prone to frustration and burnout. The focus on real software problems will
attract those students who prefer "computing with a purpose" and become
disillusioned with the usual computer-centrism of CISE education. Recent studies
have indicated that many female students fit this description, and that
providing the motivation of realistic applications may help recruit and retain
more women in CISE disciplines.