* 0417900
* CMG Collaborative Research:  Development and Application of Inference Methods for Imaging Neighborhoods of Earth's Core-Mantle Boundary with Broad-Band Scs and SKKS Coda Waves
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Gunther Uhlmann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 122,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose a quantitative, multi-disciplinary
investigation of Earth's core mantle boundary, the remote interface between
Earth's solid silicate mantle and its liquid iron-alloy outer core. With
innovative techniques for interpreting (very) large amounts of broad-band
waveform data - obtained from dense networks of seismograph stations - they aim
to map, characterize, and interpret multi-scale variations in acousto-elastic
properties at and near interfaces in Earth's deep interior. Initially, the team
focuses on the physical shell that encompasses Earth's lowermost mantle, the
core mantle boundary (CMB), and the outermost core. They will (1) investigate
inverse scattering theory based on microlocal analysis making use of generalized
Fourier integral operators (GFIOs), (2) develop statistical models based on
&lt;br/&gt;such operators, and (3) apply the new techniques to a large number
(millions) of seismogram windows containing waves that reflect at the top (ScS)
and underside (SKKS) of the CMB. From a mathematical &lt;br/&gt;sciences
perspective, the anticipated result is a generalized Radon transform (GRT) that
can generate common image point gathers (IGs) from large data volumes. The IGs
are used to (i) detect and determine &lt;br/&gt;the depth to elasticity
contrasts (singularities), (ii) determine the regularity of the singularities,
and (iii) study characteristic length scales of variations in the inferred
parameters. Novel statistical &lt;br/&gt;methods will be used to enhance the S/N
in the transforms, glean more information from the IGs, and provide uncertainty
estimates. The geosciences motivation is to use these gathers to improve the
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of (i) the contact between high-viscous mantle and
liquid core, (ii) the effect of convective flow on the D'' structure and the
character of the CMB, and (iii) outer core heterogeneity (if &lt;br/&gt;any) and
its relationship to outer core magneto-hydrodynamics. The collaboration will not
only contribute to our general understanding of the composition and phase
chemistry of the deep mantle and outermost &lt;br/&gt;core, core-mantle
transitions and interactions, and planetary formation. It also offers a unique
educational experience for the students, postdocs, and senior staff involved.
Indeed, the &lt;br/&gt;investigators believe that educating students in
geophysics with strong background in mathematics &lt;br/&gt;is important for the
future development of the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;