* 0417772
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Observational and Modeling Study of the Pulsating AGB Stars
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2004,04/30/2009
* J. Robert Buchler, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 04/30/2009
* USD 30,000.00

OISE 0417772&lt;br/&gt;J. Robert Buchler, University of
Florida&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award makes possible a collaboration in
astrophysics between Prof. J. Robert Buchler and his group at the University of
Florida, and Dr. Peter Wood and his group at the Australian National University.
They share an interest in variable stars, particularly in the type referred to
as "pulsating Asymptotic Giant Branch (AGB) stars." Their collaboration benefits
from sharing of resources and expertise: the Australian collaborator has access
to, and is thoroughly familiar with, the MACHO (Massive Compact Halo Objects)
astronomical data archive on variable stars, and he has longstanding interest
and expertise in the modeling of long-period variables. The American PI has
developed unique and specialized computer tools for the analysis of the
observational data, and he has longstanding experience with the (nonlinear)
numerical hydrodynamical modeling of stellar pulsations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCIENTIFIC MERIT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The important groups
of irregularly pulsating stars to be studied in this collaboration include the W
Virginis type, the RV Tauri type, the Semi-regular variable stars and some of
the variable stars in the Mira region. These bright variable stars are playing
an increasingly important role in the observational study of star clusters and
dwarf galaxies where standard candles such as classical Cepheid stars may be
rare. The investigators' 'asteroseismological' goal is to extract unique,
quantitative information from the analysis of the observed irregular light
curves. A test is also planned of the hypothesis that a single resonant
mechanism is at the heart of the irregular pulsations of these stars. Further,
the study will shed new light on the uncertain evolutionary status of these
stars. New observational data, novel methods of analysis adapted from nonlinear
dynamics, and progress in numerical convective hydrocodes lend such a study a
timely status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Postdoctoral fellows and graduate students on both sides
will benefit from the proposed international collaboration. The project also has
a broader impact, in that the techniques they have developed are very useful in
other research areas as well, ranging from astronomy to nonlinear dynamics to
medicine. Two of the PI's codes are being made user-friendly and publicly
accessible: TIFRAN, the time-frequency analysis, has medical applications as a
diagnostic tool for speech disorders, otolaryngology and neurology among other
things, and FLOWRECON, the flow reconstruction from a time-series, has wide
applications in nonlinear dynamics research. Under the supervision of the PI, an
undergraduate student has started developing a popular audio and video website
on variable stars. The teaching of the large undergraduate noncalculus Physics
class provides the PI with the opportunity to bring astrophysics, and his own
research in particular, to the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;