* 0417737
* Privacy and Information Acquisition in Competitive Markets
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Curtis Taylor, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 142,942.00

Privacy and Information Acquisition in Competitive
Markets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have witnessed dramatic advances in
virtually all aspects of &lt;br/&gt;information technology including: storage,
processing, and &lt;br/&gt;transmission. Between 1988 and 2000, the cost of a
gigabyte of hard disk &lt;br/&gt;storage fell from about $11,500 to around a
dollar. Between 1989 and 2000, &lt;br/&gt;the number of transistors on a
standard PC mother board increased by a &lt;br/&gt;factor of 42. Between 1990
and 1998, the number of nodes on the Internet &lt;br/&gt;increased from 313,000
to 29,670,000. Such innovations in information &lt;br/&gt;technology have
revolutionized many industries. They have reshaped modern &lt;br/&gt;economies
and profoundly impacted society. They have given rise to new &lt;br/&gt;markets
for new goods and services while at the same time spawning new
&lt;br/&gt;concerns regarding questions of public policy. The question at the
heart &lt;br/&gt;of this project concerns the impact of the revolution in
information &lt;br/&gt;technology on personal privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
dramatic advances in information technology occurring over the past 15
&lt;br/&gt;years have generated both social benefits and costs. The benefits
derive &lt;br/&gt;from a more efficient allocation of goods and services and job
&lt;br/&gt;assignments. For example, insurance policies, debt contracts, and
&lt;br/&gt;apartment leases can be tailored to better fit the characteristics of
&lt;br/&gt;prospective customers. Likewise, employment and college-enrollment
offers &lt;br/&gt;can be better matched with the skills and aptitudes of
applicants. There &lt;br/&gt;are, however, two costs associated with increased
information &lt;br/&gt;acquisition. First, there is obviously a direct resource
cost involving &lt;br/&gt;the collection, storage, and processing of data.
Second, there is a cost &lt;br/&gt;in terms of personal privacy. Specifically,
while consumers and/or &lt;br/&gt;prospective employees are typically willing to
divulge some personal &lt;br/&gt;information in order to secure more favorable
contract terms, firms often &lt;br/&gt;do not possess incentives for efficient
information collection when &lt;br/&gt;screening their applicants. In
particular, when firms' data-collection &lt;br/&gt;efforts are unobservable (and
therefore not contractible), a divergence &lt;br/&gt;between the marginal social
benefit and marginal private benefit of &lt;br/&gt;information acquisition
arises. In environments where information &lt;br/&gt;acquisition corresponds to
searching for `bad news' about applicants, the &lt;br/&gt;marginal private
benefit is typically larger, inducing firms to reject too &lt;br/&gt;many
applicants. By contrast, in environments where information
&lt;br/&gt;acquisition corresponds to searching for `good news,' the marginal
private &lt;br/&gt;benefit to screening is lower than the marginal social
benefit, and too few &lt;br/&gt;applicants are approved. Hence, firms have
incentives to search too hard &lt;br/&gt;for bad news about their applicants and
not hard enough for good news.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the economic consequences deriving from this &lt;br/&gt;fundamental
divergence between the private and social benefits of &lt;br/&gt;information
acquisition in a variety of market settings. Issues such as &lt;br/&gt;the
assignment of privacy rights, price and access discrimination, and the
&lt;br/&gt;efficiency of trading relationships will be analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;