* 0417960
* Processes That Control Children's False-Memory Reports: Recollection, Rejection, and Phantom Recollection
* SBE,BCS
* 12/06/2003,01/31/2006
* Charles Brainerd, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 01/31/2006
* USD 277,233.00

This project continues the researchers' program of research on children's false
memories. That program of research is theory-driven, and to date, it has
produced a number of new findings about false memories that were originally
predicted on theoretical grounds. This project consists of three large-scale
developmental experiments. The experiments focus on two cognitive operations
that are believed to be key controlling factors in children's false-memory
reports: recollection rejection and phantom recollection. The existence of both
operations is predicted by the researchers' theoretical account of false memory
(i.e., fuzzy-trace theory), and evidence of the use of both operations by adults
has been reported in previous experiments. Recollection rejection is an
operation that suppresses the reporting of false events that are consistent with
the gist of children's experience. Suppression is accomplished via the detection
of mismatches between false-but-gist-consistent events and verbatim traces of
actual events. For instance, after hearing a narrative containing the statement
"The bird is inside the cage" and "The cage is under the table," children could
reject the unpresented statement "The bird is under the table" by retrieving
verbatim traces of either presented sentence and noticing that the words "bird"
and "table" do not appear together in the sentence. Phantom recollection, on the
other hand, is an operation that supports the reporting of false events that are
consistent with the gist of children's experience by generating illusory vivid
phenomenologies for those events. Fuzzy-trace theory posits that gist memories
sometimes cause false events to be accompanied by illusory vivid phenomenologies
that are difficult to distinguish from the vivid phenomenologies that accompany
true events. These phantom recollections cause things that were not experienced
to be remembered as physical "occurrences" (e.g, they are seen in the mind's eye
or heard in the mind's ear). Fuzzy-trace theory predicts that phantom
recollection can occur when two conditions are met: (a) Experienced events
repeatedly cue some familiar meaning, so that gist memories of that meaning are
very strong, and (b) the false events that provoke phantom recollection are
especially good retrieval cues for strong gist memories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments implement a new paradigm, conjoint
recognition. This paradigm provides a reliable behavioral method of measuring
recollection rejection and phantom recollection in children. Children respond to
memory tests under three types of instructions (accept only experienced events,
accept only nonexperienced events that are consistent with the gist of
experience, and accept experienced events + nonexperienced events that are
consistent with the gist of experience). Recollection rejection and phantom
recollection are identified with distinct patterns of responses across these
different types of instructions. A mathematical model that is defined over the
paradigm corrects raw response patterns for the influence of extraneous
variables, which allows researchers to separate and quantify the effects of
recollection rejection and phantom recollection. Implementation of this paradigm
generates detailed findings on how recollection rejection and phantom
recollection affect false-memory reports, on how these operations change with
age, and on how they react to forensically-significant task variables. In
Experiment 1, the effects of recollection rejection and phantom recollection on
spontaneous false memories of narratives are studied in younger children (4- and
5-year-olds), older children (10- and 11-year-olds), and adults. Experiment 1
also determines how the two operations react to five forensically-significant
task variables (repetition of events, recency of events, order of memory tests,
timing of memory tests, and repetition of memory tests). Fuzzy-trace theory
makes predictions about each of these variable's effects on recollection
rejection and phantom recollection. In Experiment 2, the effects of recollection
rejection and phantom recollection on implanted false memories of narratives are
studied at the same three age levels by interpolating a memory-suggestion
procedure following narrative presentation. Experiment 2 includes the same five
task variables as Experiment 1. The aim of Experiment 3 is to determine how well
the results of Experiments 1 and 2 generalize to more naturalistic eyewitness
situations. The narrative false-memory procedure is replaced by a standardized
quasi-forensic task involving a misdemeanor theft. The effects of recollection
rejection and phantom recollection on both spontaneous and implanted false
memories are assessed with this eyewitness procedure. The same three age levels
are studied, and the design includes three of the five task variables that
figure in Experiments 1 and 2 (repetition of events, timing of memory tests, and
repetition of memory tests). &lt;br/&gt;