* 0417563
* Thermofluidic Transport in Printing and Laser Curing of Nanoparticle Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 279,395.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project investigates a new process
for the low-temperature printing and curing of thin gold lines, using
nanoparticle slurry microdeposition (printing) and laser heating (curing). This
hybrid microprinting and laser curing method will be used for the fabrication of
conductors in electronic circuits. The main physical phenomena involve
nanoparticle melting and bonding in the presence of the liquid carrier
evaporation under the influence of laser radiation. The process is mediated by
the spreading of the printed droplets on the substrate and by the dynamic
evolution of the capillary flow. A methodology will be developed for writing
high electrical conductivity microlines on flexible polymer substrates. On-line
diagnostics will be implemented for monitoring and optimizing the dynamic
evolution of the process. Theoretical analysis and numerical computations of the
thermophysical transport in the droplet spreading, of the solvent evaporation
and nanoparticle bonding will be conducted. The mechanics of the nanoparticle
bonding will be investigated by time-resolved, near-field-optical scanning
microscopy (NSOM) experimental diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will establish the scientific basis for a host of novel technologies utilizing
the unique thermophysical properties of nanoparticle materials. Specifically,
the complex thermofluidic transport phenomena in the microprinting, the laser-
assisted curing of nanoparticle suspensions and nanoparticle bonding processes
will be understood via an array of new experiments coupled with detailed
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology developed in this project will
be utilized to build interconnections in electronics on flexible substrates,
including the manufacture of flat panel displays, crossover conductors,
capacitors and antennae. Fine features for the fabrication of functional micro-
components will be achieved by applying highly localized and pulsed laser
radiation. The direct writing of three-dimensional conducting microstructures,
as well as rapid prototyping and microfabrication processes that take advantage
of this technology will be pursued. The research findings will be incorporated
into coursework, a formal seminar and a workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has been jointly funded by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing
Program of the Division of Chemical and Transport Processes and the
Nanomanufacturing Program of the Division of Design, Manufacturing and
Industrial Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;