* 0417373
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Is It What They Say, or Who Says It? An Experimental Study of Lobbying Influence and Agenda Setting in Congress
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Beth Leech, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2007
* USD 14,802.00

How do legislators' cognitive predispositions affect which organizations they
listen to and which arguments they accept or reject? The popular portrayal of
interest group influence in Congress is that well-heeled lobbyists pressure
those in power to provide the groups they represent with special benefits such
as tax concessions, lucrative government contracts, or sympathetic regulatory
policies. Yet, many political practitioners and social scientists alike have
long acknowledged that interest groups are an important part of the political
system because they provide valuable information about policy proposals,
constituent preferences, and political consequences to legislators.
&lt;br/&gt;This study adopts the social cognition approach to decision making to
learn how legislators' impressions about interest group coalitions affect how
they evaluate and interpret information supplied by them. When receiving policy-
relevant information from lobbyists, lawmakers are hypothesized to be motivated
by existing attitudes towards interest groups and towards policies, meaning that
evaluations of both the group's interests and the group's message affect how
influential lobbyists may be. When lobbyists attempt to influence members of
Congress who are relatively uninformed about a policy area, legislators will
tend to rely on a .group interests. heuristic that cues them into whether or not
the issue being advocated is important. On the contrary, when lobbyists target
relative experts, legislators will be inclined to scrutinize and interpret the
arguments being made. The student will recruit congressional staff to
participate in an experimental study that simulates lobbying and agenda-setting
under controlled conditions. By systematically manipulating the content and
source of the lobby messages in an experimental setting, the student will be
able to hypothetically test how legislators. perceptions of groups. interest
bias their judgments about policy arguments, and vice versa. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The implications for normative theories of interest representation are
that policymakers are not merely passive lobbying targets who dispassionately
deliberate over the pros and cons of all public policy proposals, but are rather
selectively attentive participants whose perceptions are biased in favor of some
interests over that of others. This study will therefore improve our
understanding of the degree to which traditionally underrepresented groups are
given serious attention in the policy process. &lt;br/&gt;