* 0417911
* Adaptive Estimation, the Block-Block Bootstrap, Optimal Tests with Weak Instruments, and Inference with Common Shocks
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Donald Andrews, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 243,201.00

This research covers four difficult areas of applied econometrics. The first
project is adaptive estimation of semiparametric and nonparametric models. In
many econometric models, such as the smoothed maximum score estimator, the
optimal rate of convergence of an estimator depends on an unknown smoothness,
say s, of some function(s). This project will specify a general method that
takes existing estimators designed for given values of s and use them to
construct an estimator that does not depend on s but obtains the optimal rate of
convergence for the case of known s up to a logarithmic factor. This method is a
generalized variant of Lepskii (1990) method. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The second
project considers the block-block bootstrap, a method that is useful in time
series GMM contexts. The block-block bootstrap, proposed by the PI, yields
larger asymptotic refinements than the block bootstrap. This research will
develop the block-block bootstrap to cover cases in which an HAC variance matrix
estimator is required. The third project deals with optimal tests in an
instrumental variable regression model with weak instruments. For models with
normal reduced-form errors and known covariance matrix, this project will
develop a class of similar invariant tests that have maximum weighted average
power in finite samples and develop analogous asymptotic tests for models with
non-normal errors and unknown covariance matrices. The research will also
develop heteroskedasticity-robust and heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation-
robust versions of these tests. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fourth project is on
inference in cross-section and panel models with common shocks, such as
macroeconomic and political shocks. This research explores the implications of a
new asymptotic framework that the PI has developed for cross-section models that
allows for general forms of cross-section dependence but yields simple
asymptotics. It investigates the properties of GMM estimators and tests in
nonlinear cross-section models with common shocks and various procedures in
panel models with large numbers of cross-section and time series observations
and common shocks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research contributes original
ideas to solve many difficult problems in econometrics. The results will be
extremely helpful to applied econometricians, and in the process, improve
economic policy-making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;