* 0417118
* Molecular Mechanisms of CO2 Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2010
* Julian Schroeder, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 09/30/2010
* USD 660,000.00

Stomatal pores are formed by guard cell pairs in the epidermis of leaves.
Stomata regulate the diffusion of CO2 into leaves for photosynthetic carbon
fixation and control transpirational water loss of plants. A network of signal
transduction mechanisms in guard cells sense and transduce CO2, water status,
light and other environmental stimuli to regulate stomatal apertures for
optimization of CO2 influx, water loss and plant growth under diverse
conditions. Elevated CO2 concentrations in leaves cause stomatal closure,
whereas reduced CO2 concentrations result in stomatal opening. Photosynthesis
and respiration cause CO2 concentration changes in leaves. Moreover, atmospheric
[CO2] is predicted to double within the present century and these ambient CO2
increases reduce stomatal apertures of different plant species by up to 40 %.
However, relatively little is known about the molecular signal transduction
mechanisms in guard cells that mediate CO2-induced stomatal movements. A study
suggests that cytosolic calcium ([Ca2+]cyt) elevations contribute to CO2-induced
stomatal movements. New findings in the P.I.'s laboratory show that changes in
[CO2] modulate cytosolic [Ca2+]cyt elevations in Arabidopsis guard cells. The
guard cell CO2 response provides an opportune system to analyze hypotheses that
cytosolic Ca2+ patterns contribute to signal transduction in plants. The long
term goal of this research is to achieve an understanding of the molecular
mechanisms that mediate CO2 signal transduction in guard cells. The research
will investigate the hypothesis that CO2 modulation of the [Ca2+]cyt elevation
pattern in guard cells contributes to CO2-induced signal transduction during
stomatal closing and/or opening. To test this hypothesis, studies with the
following specific aims will be pursued: Characterize CO2 responses of wildtype
guard cells. Examine the effects on CO2 signal transduction of known mutants
that affect Ca2+ and/or abscisic acid signaling at distinct points within the
guard cell signaling network, to characterize genetic mechanisms that affect CO2
signaling and to determine which components are specific to defined signaling
pathways. Gain insight into how [Ca2+]cyt is transduced and specifically define
the roles of selected guard cell-expressed CDPKs in stomatal responses.
Characterize new CO2 signaling mutants. The P.I. will further pursue outreach
efforts through public forums and through research and career training and
preparation of undergraduate and high school students. Understanding the
molecular mechanisms by which CO2 modulates stomatal apertures is fundamental to
understanding the regulation of gas exchange between plants and the atmosphere,
will help to predict effects of atmospheric CO2 elevation on stomata and may
also contribute to future engineering of crop plants and plant carbon sinks in
the face of changing environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;