* 0417412
* LTER: Long-Term Dynamics of a Coral Reef Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2012
* Robert Carpenter, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2012
* USD 5,904,638.00

Coral reefs are of great ecological importance, having the highest species
diversity of any marine habitat and ranking near the top of all ecosystems with
respect to annual total gross productivity. The communities are supported
structurally by reef-building corals and trophically by efficient recycling. The
key biotic interaction underlying reef systems is the mutualistic relationship
between hermatypic corals and photosynthetic zooxanthellae. Hermatypic corals
are both functional autotrophs and heterotrophs and derive carbon from multiple
sources. In addition to biotic interactions, numerous other biological processes
are influenced by a variety of abiotic events that can operate at spatial scales
ranging from millimeters to hundreds of kilometers, and which can vary on short
to long time scales. Coral reef ecosystems can be affected by perturbations
ranging from short and relatively localized disturbances, where return to the
original state is possible, to more chronic, widespread influence of shifts in
climate over decades that may fundamentally alter the ecosystem. The latter
perturbation is predicted to cause sweeping change in coral reef ecosystems in
the coming decades. While there are coral reef monitoring programs, descriptive
ecology alone cannot elucidate the mechanistic basis of change in these systems.
&lt;br/&gt;This award will establish a Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site
focused on dynamics of coral reef ecosystems, at the island of Moorea, French
Polynesia, location of the University of California's Gump Research Station.
This LTER will estimate long-term trends and address key gaps in understanding
through long-term observations and experiments supplemented by shorter-term
process studies. The goals are to better understand key processes that (i)
modulate ecosystem function, (ii) shape community structure and diversity, and
(iii) determine abundance and dynamics of constituent populations. Such
mechanistic understanding will allow more accurate predictions of how coral reef
ecosystems will respond to qualitatively different types of environmental
change. &lt;br/&gt;Coordinated interdisciplinary research by the team of 20
investigators will address issues central to the LTER program. The themes that
will form the core research thrusts of the proposed LTER include: (1) the
biological bases for variation in ecological performance of hermatypic corals
(the foundational group); (2) population dynamics of key groups; (3) food web
and nutrient dynamics; and (4) the maintenance and functional consequences of
diversity. Two additional research components cut across these themes and will
help to integrate and generalize the research endeavors of the thematic areas.
These are: (a) an explicit focus on physical - biological coupling (including
but not limited to abiotic forcing) over multiple scales; and (b) hydrodynamic,
food-web and ecosystem modeling to obtain greater insight and predictive power,
and to further guide empirical efforts. Major issues within each thematic area
will be addressed through focused, process-oriented studies and by long-term
monitoring of key abiotic conditions and important ecosystem processes,
community attributes, and demographic processes for representative functional
groups of organisms. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Both the scientific community
and the public have tremendous interest in and concern about conservation of
coral reef ecosystems. This project will greatly increase understanding of these
systems, and as such, will inform government officials, resource managers and
others charged with conservation and management of coral reefs. LTER cross-site
comparisons that reveal generality across different ecosystems will lead to more
effective management of natural resources in general. Scientific findings and
technical information from the project will be broadly disseminated through a
website, scientific publications and presentations, and in the media. Outreach
activities will be extensive, and will involve K-12 programs in Southern
California as well as community and school outreach in French Polynesia and an
internship program for Tahitian university students (coordinated by the Atitia
Center). Undergraduate and graduate students from under-represented groups
(particularly Hispanic, Native American and Pacific Island) will be involved in
an education and research training program, linking California State University
Northridge (a minority institution) and University of California Santa Barbara,
that will provide training in research, team research experiences, and
development of skills needed to carry out interdisciplinary, collaborative
research. The project also will engage in post-doctoral training, and will build
international linkages between US scientists and those in South Pacific island
nations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;