* 0417202
* Paternity, Cooperative Breeding, and Genetic Chimerism in Callitrichids
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Jeffrey French, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 09/30/2006
* USD 161,198.00

Paternity, Cooperative Breeding, and Genetic Chimerism in
Callitrichids&lt;br/&gt;PI: Guillermo Orti, Jeffrey A. French and Corinna
Ross&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marmosets are New World monkeys of the family
Callitrichidae that form large cooperative breeding groups in which many
individuals care for the offspring of the breeding pair. In order to explain
this behavior based on indirect fitness benefits for the help providers, it is
necessary to determine the true genetic relationship among individuals. This is
not easy to do for marmosets because of their unique reproductive system.
Marmosets produce fraternal twins, whose placentas fuse during early embryonic
development, resulting in genetic exchange through the blood flowing between the
twins. This genetic exchange causes the infants to be genetic chimeras, having
tissues with mixtures of cells with their own DNA and cells with the DNA of
their twin. Little is known about the extent of genetic exchange and what
tissues are affected. The proposed study will use microsatellite genetic markers
to assess the extent and distribution of genetic exchange between twins during
development. At least ten types of tissues from twin sets of known female-male
pairings of Callithrix kuhlii will be assayed, using specimens archived from a
breeding colony. Further studies will assess genetic paternity in the breeding
groups that contained multiple males, in order to determine whether it is
possible that multiple males are siring a single set of twins. Documentation of
horizontal genetic exchange may drastically affect calculations of indirect
fitness due to an increase in shared alleles between individuals. The study of
this unique system will provide insights into the mechanisms affecting
alloparental care, kin recognition, and kin selection and may alter current
views of the evolution of social behavior.&lt;br/&gt;