* 0417811
* CMG Collaborative Training: Modern Mathematical Methods in Physical Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Steven Rutledge, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 142,505.00

Abstract: 0417811: CMG COLLABORATIVE TRAINING Modern Mathematical Methods in
Physical Oceanography

Intellectual Merit: A summer school combining theoretical physical oceanography,
advanced mathematical techniques and modern oceanographic observational methods
will be developed. The motivation for this training effort comes from (i) the
proliferation of high quality oceanographic data streams, (ii)recent
developments in mathematical and computational physics, (iii) the unfortunate
decline of the graduate student population in physical oceanography, and (iv)
recent experience of the PIs with a comparable summer school held in Europe. The
goals of the summer school are to (i) promote challenging and interesting
oceanographic problems both within the subdiscipline of physical oceanography
and the related non-oceanographic fields of applied mathematics, engineering and
physics, (ii) introduce a select body of national and international students to
the quantitative analysis of front rank problems in physical oceanography, and
(iii) promote interactions between the summer school faculty and the student
body. It is anticipated that the school will recruit talented physically and
mathematically oriented graduate students from a variety of fields to address
oceanographically significant problems, advance the use of novel and advanced
mathematical methods in physical oceanography and identify promising new
problems and paradigms within physical oceanography for cutting edge
mathematical investigation.

Broader Impacts: The summer school will facilitate the development, application
and distribution of advanced mathematical techniques within the oceanographic
community, as well as expose the unique flavor and complexity of oceanographic
problems to mathematically minded allied disciplines.

