* 0417867
* Collaborative Research:  CMG: Predictability and Dynamics of Models of Quasigeostrophic Turbulence and Their Low-Dimensional Truncations
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Roland Glowinski, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Walter A. Robinson
* 09/30/2008
* USD 422,694.00

This project will develop new mathematical strategies for quantifying the
predictability of complex geosystems. One part of the project will quantify the
predictability of deterministic truncations of the doubly-periodic, two-layer
representations of oceanic and atmospheric flows, derived by Galerkin
projections, and compare this to the rate of loss of information in the full
two-layer model. Loss of information will be measured by using relative entropy.
The behavior of the spectra of Lyapunov exponents of the models will also be
compared. The study will examine whether signatures of low-dimensional chaotic
structures can be found in solutions of the full two-layer problem. The direct
calculation of relative entropy will be compared with estimates derived from
moments. A second part of the project will extend this type of analysis to
stochastic extensions of low-dimensional models with a view to searching for
changes in predictability and in the nature of the low-dimensional chaotic
structures. The project will conclude with further statistical tests to describe
the behavior of climatological variables, e.g. to examine transition pathways
between regimes. This research will advance knowledge and understanding of mid-
latitude atmospheric processes. Fundamental questions such as the way in which
low-dimensional phase space structures are affected by intrinsic stochastic
noise and how to develop reduced models that represent low-frequency variability
of the atmosphere will be addressed. In addition, novel numerical methods
applicable to the simulation and predictability analysis of a wide range of
models in atmosphere/ocean science will be developed.