* 0417081
* RUI: Molecular Properties of the Theromyzon (Annelida: Hirudinae) Cocoon
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Daniel Shain, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2007
* USD 425,773.00

Molecular Properties of the Theromyzon (Annelida: Hirudinea)
Cocoon&lt;br/&gt;Daniel H. Shain&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cocoons provide a micro-
environment necessary for development in several animal groups (e.g.,
arthropods, annelids, flatworms). Perhaps the most well known cocoon is spun by
the silkworm, Bombyx mori, which provides the crude material for extracting
silk. Lesser known are cocoons secreted by clitellate annelids (e.g.,
earthworms, leeches) which have several fascinating properties of their own. For
example, aquatic species secrete specialized proteins that assemble underwater
into a membranous sheath sealed at either end by an underwater "glue", requiring
the synthesis of thousands of kilometers of "fiber" within a few hours. The goal
of this proposal is to examine the molecular aspects of the cocoon produced by
Theromyzon rude, an aquatic leech endemic to North America and sanguivorous to
waterfowl. The T. rude cocoon is particularly resilient to denaturing chemicals
and heat (&gt;250C), yet is a thin, flexible and transparent membrane. A major
protein component of the T. rude cocoon membrane has been isolated (called
Theromyzon cocoon protein, or Tcp) and its amino acid sequence revealed 6 tandem
repeats, each comprising 12 ordered Cys residues in a ~62 amino acid repeating
unit. Tcp contains an unusually high Cys content (18%); other abundant amino
acids include Glu (13%), Val (10%) and Pro (9%). The first half of each repeat
(Cys residues 1-6) shares strong sequence similarity with antistasin, a leech
anticoagulant with protease inhibitor properties, while the second half (Cys
residues 7-12) shares similarity with notch/EGF-like protein domains which play
roles in cell signaling. Tcp-like repeats (i.e., 12 ordered Cys residues) with
unknown functions are present in disparate animal phyla including Arthropoda and
Nematoda, suggesting that a pre-Cambrian Tcp-like ancestral protein was co-opted
for a structural role in clitellate annelid cocoons. In this proposal, Tcp gene
expression will be examined in situ to monitor events within the clitellum
leading up to cocoon production, and the Tcp promoter will be characterized to
understand the regulated expression of cocoon synthesis. The underlying
architecture of the cocoon membrane will be investigated by classical electron
microscopy, and with a Tcp-specific antibody aimed at determining the assembly,
contribution and spatial arrangement of Tcp monomer in the cocoon membrane.
Collectively, these research aims will explore the fundamental properties of an
unusual biomaterial in the context of leech biology, while expanding our
knowledge in a scientifically underrepresented phylum (Annelida).&lt;br/&gt;The
resources to support these research objectives will impact a variety of academic
activities on the Rutgers/Camden campus. Undergraduate students within the
biology department will gain opportunities to address the proposed research aims
through an independent study research program and will report their results as
part of a weekly, departmental seminar series. Components of this study will be
integrated into existing 'Electron Microscopy' and 'Computers in Biology'
courses that will provide students an opportunity to become engaged in an active
research area within the department. In addition, these funds will facilitate
student participation in state and local symposia (e.g., Rutgers University
Annual Undergraduate Symposium, New Jersey Academy of Sciences) and will help to
provide the infrastructure for the PI's continued participation in
research/education outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;