* 0417392
* IMR:  Acquisition of a High Resolution Electron Spectrometer for Subnanometer Electron Microscopy, Nanocharacterization Research and Education
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* John Silcox, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 278,600.00

This project supports the acquisition of a high energy resolution electron
spectrometer to be installed on an electron microscope whose energy spread has
been sharpened by a gun monochromator. The combined system will be capable of
performing spectroscopic analysis with 100-500 millivolt energy resolution and
0.2-2nm spatial resolution, allowing optical, compositional and electronic
structure to be determined from not only individual nanostructures, but also
individual defects, interfaces or atomic columns inside those nanostructures.
The primary thrust of research with this new spectrometer is to explore how
electronic structure at small length scales affects the macroscopic properties
of materials, particularly interface-dominated transport properties, atomic-
scale defects and dopants in nano-devices, and interfaces in molecular
electronics.

The instrument will be part of the Cornell Center for Materials Science (CCMR)
and be accessible to researchers and students across the campus as well as from
other universities, and government and industrial laboratories. The new
instrument complements the current instrumentation in CCMR with new techniques
including millivolt-resolution core and valence spectroscopy, exit wave
reconstructions and also energy-filtered quantitative electron diffraction from
probes as small as 0.2 nm. Students will be trained in the use of these
sophisticated capabilities, including in a course on nanocharacterization and
substantial undergraduate research opportunities will be offered. Programs on
spectroscopy in physics, including a simple spectrometer that can be built by
teens, will be developed for high school teachers.

This project will purchase an electron spectrometer to be installed on an
electron microscope. We will explore how structure at small length scales
affects the macroscopic, everyday properties of materials. This is most
important at interfaces, where two materials join, and the success or failure of
a modern device, be it a turbine blade or a transistor, depends on changes that
occur in a few atomic layers. The new instrument will be capable of studying
these phenomena at that level of detail, allowing optical, compositional and
electronic properties to be determined from individual defects, interfaces, and
nanodevices. The instrument will be part of the Cornell Center for Materials
Science which provides support for interdisciplinary research and instrument
access to researchers and students across campus as well as from other
universities, and government and industrial laboratories. As part of the broader
impact of this project, students will be trained in the use of this
sophisticated tool, including a new course offering. High school physics
teachers will be instructed in introducing some of this instrumentation to their
students.