* 0417807
* Nonradiative and Radiative Processes of Doped Nanocrystallites in Porous Glasses
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Leslie Issacs, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 03/31/2008
* USD 209,955.00

0417807 ALFANO

The objective of this project is to initiate the development of laser Active
Cr4+-doped nano-crystallites embedded in porous glass media for wide spectral
band laser and optical amplification applications (1100 nm to 1600 nm). These
materials combine favorable radiative properties of Cr4+-doped crystals and the
advantages of glasses. The proposed research will be focus on materials that
overcome these problems and combine favorable radiative properties of Cr4+ doped
crystals and the advantages of glasses. Media of such type can be considered an
intermediate between single crystals and glasses. The optical properties of
doped nanocrystals are expected to be very different than the properties of bulk
materials, due to size effects and good isolation of the nanocrystals from the
surrounding matrix. The interaction between the doped nanocrystals and the glass
matrix will provide information to better understand the nonradiative quenching
mechanism in solids. To study the optical properties and energy transfer
mechanisms in the porous glass with embedded nanosize crystals, a set of
spectroscopic and time-resolved Raman measurements will be performed. Spatial
resolved measurements with SNOM and Scanning Confocal microscopy will reveal
optical properties locally at the nanocrystals. The measurements will be carried
out on doped nanocrystals of different chemical compositions grown into pores of
the glass matrix. Samples will be prepared in house at the City College of New
York. The proposed research may lead to the design of more efficient Photonics
materials and has the potential to revolutionize wide band optical
communications and optical device technology for optical amplifiers and lasers.
The project will integrate research and educational activities to Extend
opportunity for advancing the technology and training of skilled personnel.
Several graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in sol-gel material
preparation, spectroscopic measurements and laser technology, several high
school students (grades 11-12) will also become involved in laser development
research.



