* 0417317
* RUI: Taphonomic Character of Plant Fossil Assemblages at the Permian-Triassic Boundary, Karoo Basin, South Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Robert Gastaldo, Colby College
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2010
* USD 93,572.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Page A&lt;br/&gt;Many hypotheses have been proposed
for the response of the land plants, insects, and&lt;br/&gt;vertebrates to the
P/Tr boundary extinction event. Many of these hypotheses are based
on&lt;br/&gt;poorly unconstrained spatial and/or temporal data. Most lack any
contextual constraint&lt;br/&gt;of the paleontological data used in the analysis
used to support the interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;Hence, it is not possible to know
if the ?trends? or ?changes? seen to occur from the&lt;br/&gt;preboundary
assemblages into the transitional and post-boundary assemblages are a
true&lt;br/&gt;reflection of the ecosystem or are biased
taphonomically.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal hypothesizes that an isotaphonomic data
set of pre-boundary,&lt;br/&gt;trans-boundary, and post-boundary plant-fossil
assemblages will allow for the emergence of&lt;br/&gt;a credible
characterization of the response within this part of the terrestrial
ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;at this critical point in Earth history. Will the
isotaphonomic plant-fossil record&lt;br/&gt;parallel or be tangential to the
well established response in the marine realm? Or, will&lt;br/&gt;there be no
change in biodiversity; might the replacement and/or turnover occur earlier
or&lt;br/&gt;later in time than directly at the P/Tr
boundary?&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted, to date, in KwaZulu Natal Province,
South Africa, in the northeastern&lt;br/&gt;part of the Karoo Basin indicates
that Late Permian megafloral assemblages are preserved&lt;br/&gt;in four
different sedimentologic and taphonomic conditions. Each megafloral
assemblage&lt;br/&gt;type preserves a very different signature of the vegetation
contributed to the fossil&lt;br/&gt;record. These are: (1) parautochthonous
assemblages within abandoned fluvial channel fill&lt;br/&gt;sequences, similar
to modern and other ancient oxbow lakes; (2) dispersed and
isolated,&lt;br/&gt;allochthonous assemblages preserved on foreset beds and
reactivation surfaces within&lt;br/&gt;large, fine-grained fluvial regimes; (3)
concentrated, mat-like allochthonous assemblages&lt;br/&gt;within bedload dunes
of coarse siltstone channels; and (4) dispersed, sorted assemblages&lt;br/&gt;in
turbidites. Data presented in the text concerning two localities ? Bulwer
and&lt;br/&gt;Wagendrift Dam ? demonstrate that previous interpretations of the
fossil assemblages in&lt;br/&gt;these sites are incorrect. And if these data are
used from the literature as the basis&lt;br/&gt;for interpretation, the
resulting suppositions are inappropriate.&lt;br/&gt;With an increasing
continentalization of the sedimentary package in the Karoo into
the&lt;br/&gt;Triassic, all but the last taphonomic assemblage type should be
encountered in the&lt;br/&gt;transitional and post-boundary sections. Seven
cross boundary and post boundary sections&lt;br/&gt;have been identified in
which plant fossils and/or vertebrates are preserved, and will&lt;br/&gt;serve
as the basis for the 2004 field season. It is anticipated that identification
of&lt;br/&gt;isotaphonomic assemblages in this part of the stratigraphy will
allow for direct&lt;br/&gt;comparison of biodiversity indices with those
presently being determined by other members&lt;br/&gt;of an international
research team, involving U.S., Dutch, and South African
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;The present proposal requests funds to support
undergraduate student research designed to&lt;br/&gt;assist in the acquisition
of an isotaphonomic data set in the Karoo Basin, South Africa.&lt;br/&gt;Through
the next two years of field work and laboratory analysis, P/Tr and early to
middle&lt;br/&gt;Triassic localities will be assessed to identify and
characterize those depositional&lt;br/&gt;sequences as found in the latest
Permian.