* 0417396
* Doctoral Dissertation: Party System Regionalization and Coalition Stability in Latin America
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Barbara Geddes, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,905.00

This dissertation examines how the structure of party systems affects the
stability of presidential coalitions in Latin America. Scholars believe that the
incoherent and unstable party systems in several Latin American countries
contribute to poor governance, economic instability, and the fragility of
democracy in the region. This dissertation seeks to explain how regional
interest differences within countries affect the dimensions of conflict and the
stability of coalitions in their party systems. It will show that although
conditions conducive to the aggregation of local and regional interests into
stable parties or multiparty coalitions exist in some Latin American countries,
they are absent in others. Although we have a theoretical expectation that in
seeking to control government, politicians and the interests they represent will
form long-lived, majority parties or coalitions, this dissertation will argue
that for some types of regional interests aggregated into regional parties and
for presidents, short coalitions often make political sense. Regional parties
that care most about pork for their districts and policies orthogonal to the
main left-right policy dimension can only meet their constituents. needs by
becoming part of the president's coalition. Consequently, they compete fiercely
for places in coalitions of any ideological coloration. This competition tends
to drive down the price presidents have to pay to attract coalition partners and
to lead to coalition instability as different parties jockey for places. In the
empirical investigation of this argument, the researchers expect to find that
the presence of parties seeking region-specific and distributive policies is
associated with shorter presidential coalitions, even after taking into account
different institutional and historical factors that might influence coalition
building. The research will involve both in-depth examinations of social and
electoral data at the sub-national level in some countries and cross-national
empirical analyses for most of Latin America in the current democratic period.
The investigation will measure the extent of variation in the vote shares
parties receive in different regions of each country, and identify the types of
interests represented by regionally-based parties. It will use census and other
socio- economic data to map local interests onto vote shares for different kinds
of parties; data on the ideological positioning and policy goals of parties to
show that some regional parties do not fit onto the standard left-right policy
dimension; and data on the length of presidential cabinets, legislative
coalitions, and alliances across second-round presidential elections to show
that regionalized party systems are associated with shorter coalitions. Broader
Impact: The results of this dissertation project will give political scientists
a better understanding of the electoral landscape in Latin America and the
conditions under which narrow, regionally-based parties survive to play an
important role in national politics in some of these countries. These findings
will address the relationship, or trade-off, between broad or diverse
representation and stable government in the context of highly unequal and
territorially heterogeneous societies.