* 0417604
* CRCD/EI:     Combined Research Curriculum Development in Signal Processing for Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* cihan tepedelenlioglu, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Signal Processing for Communications (SP-COM) is an area that focuses
on re-search associated with the infrastructure, hardware, and algorithms of
future generation digital communications systems. The primary objective of the
CRCD/EI project is to provide scientific and investigative experiences to under-
graduate students by immersing them into state-of-the-art communications and
signal processing research. The methods employed to accomplish this ob-jective
use curriculum strategies that include: a) immersing research-oriented modules
in four existing junior and senior level classes, b) offering a new senior level
undergraduate course entitled "Introduction to signal processing and
communications research," c) the integration of senior-level capstone projects
in the ongoing research activities of the PIs, d) the institution of summer
research freshman and sophomore camps along with an outreach program. The
project will impact student learning by instilling the process of scientific
inquiry through a continuous research exposure in the undergraduate curriculum.
Several SP-COM research topics, such as those dealing with channel equaliza-
tion, source and channel coding, are immersed in courses within the framework of
this CRCD project. CRCD curriculum courses and modules involve at least one
self-contained computer laboratory experience. ASU's Java-DSP (J-DSP) web-based
simulation environment is used for these laboratories. Students can access J-DSP
on the web, perform computer laboratory exercises, and submit electronic lab
reports. Significant pedagogical foundations and strategies for the transition
of research to the curriculum are formed with the assistance of in-structional
specialists. Dissemination and assessment strategies include: an annual CRCD
workshop, a CRCD interactive web site, publications in research and education
journals, industrial dissemination through industry partners.&lt;br/&gt;