* 0417830
* The Surface Structure and Reactivity of Mn-Oxides and Their Impact on As Transformation in the Environment: A Multi-Scale Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Donald Sparks, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Research is proposed that investigates the chemical and
physical properties of the environmentally important oxides of manganese that
play an important role in soil redox chemistry. It is well accepted in the soil
science community that Mn-oxides exist as coatings and as discrete particles in
soils, in part with nano-dimensions. Their rich redox chemistry affects the
mobility and bioavailability of environmental toxins including many metals and
metaloids. Research will be focused primarily on the surface structure and
chemical reactivity of both the bulk birnessite (MnO2) phase of Mn-oxide and
also a nano-MnOOH phase under a variety of environmentally relevant conditions.
In particular, a selection of advanced surface spectroscopic techniques,
including attenuated total reflection infrared and synchrotron-based
photoelectron spectroscopy, will be used to develop a picture of the reacting
Mn-oxide surface, such as determining the relative surface concentration of
different oxidation states, over a range of established soil pH values. These
Mn-oxide surfaces will then be probed via reaction with aqueous arsenic
oxyanions to establish the control that differences in Mn-oxide structure and
reactivity exert on the transformation of As3+ to As5+, one of the central As
detoxification pathways in the environment.&lt;br/&gt;While birnessite, found in
a wide range of soil environments, is a primary target of the proposed research,
nanosized Mn-oxides also exist in the environment and are of interest in the
current research. Toward developing an understanding of the role that nano-Mn-
oxides might play in soil chemistry, research will investigate the reactivity
and electronic structure of MnOOH nanoparticles as a function of size. Nano-
MnOOH with homogeneous size distributions from 20 to 80 will be prepared and
studied in solutions with varying pH and the As oxidation reaction will again be
used as a probe for reactivity. This particular phase of the research project
will not only develop an understanding of the size-reactivity relationship for
Mn-oxide, but will in general contribute to the broader effort in geo- and soil
chemical communities to evaluate the importance of nano-chemistry in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed
Activity &lt;br/&gt;The proposed study has a significant educational component.
First, NSF funds will be used to support and train a postdoctoral associate at
the University of Delaware and a graduate student at Temple University. Second,
by virtue of this study being strongly interdisciplinary in nature, the
scientific breadth of researchers in this project will benefit from the constant
exchange of ideas and concepts between groups having expertise in diverse areas
of soil and surface chemistry. This collaboration fits into the broader need for
interdisciplinary studies to understand complex environmental chemistry. The
studies will advance not only the frontiers of environmental geochemistry, but
also provide important predictive information on contaminant transformations
that will benefit society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;