* 0417401
* SGER:      Discovery of Research Trends and Classification in Domain-Specific Text:    Application to Nanoscale Science and Engineering Field
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Abdelghani Bellaachia, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 01/31/2007
* USD 99,662.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0417401&lt;br/&gt;A. Bellaachia, George Washington
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the explosion of the World Wide Web and the
massive amount of data available from several research areas, the need for
knowledge discovery techniques that help extract hidden information has
increased. Analysis of these data may lead to the discovery of new trends and
patterns hidden within the data that would be impossible to discover by just
traditional query-based systems. These would improve forecasting, efficiency of
resource allocations, and quality of the decision making process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our initial analysis of this exploratory research
project, we have queried the &lt;br/&gt;250,000 NSF online awards for nanoscale
science and engineering (NSE) abstracts. The retrieved data were analyzed,
cleaned, and stored in a web-based database. This database can be accessed at
http://128.164.158.138/bellaTest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have started the
exploration of data mining techniques to extract new research areas and new
research topics. So far we have implemented the popular k-mean technique along
with the singular value decomposition. Currently, we are in the process of
analyzing the results of our initial experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
request, we are planning to finish the analysis of our preliminary mining
techniques and we would also like to explore two other clustering techniques:
the Self-Organizing Oscillators Network (SOON) clustering algorithm and the
E-CAST clustering techniques. Both of these techniques do not require any
knowledge about the number of clusters. They have also been successfully used in
other domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this exploratory research, we would like
to request additional fund to conduct the following tasks: &lt;br/&gt;- Finish
the analysis of our initial data mining techniques. &lt;br/&gt;- Conduct other
experiments using the predefined set of existing seven concepts as seeds to the
k-mean technique. &lt;br/&gt;- Since k-mean requires the specification of the
number of clusters, we are also planning to explore two other data mining
techniques that do not require the number of clusters: the Self-Organizing
Oscillators Network (SOON) and the E-CAST clustering techniques. &lt;br/&gt;-
Analyze all the above techniques and determine key terms that best describe new
emerging research areas in the field of NSE field. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
addition to mining new trends and research areas in the NSE awards, we are also
planning to add new features to the NSF website. These include the display of
details of awards in the form a US map with Hover features, and searching
largest awards, top funded investigators, etc. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit and new contributions of this request include a comprehensive
understanding of how to process small, special-purpose collection of data in
other domains. Students, researchers, and educators can also use our system to
discover new research areas. The proposed system has broader impacts that can be
applied to other applications such retrieval systems and digital library
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;