* 0417126
* QEIB: Collaborative Research: Unifying Mechanistic and Dynamic Mathematical Models of Stomatal Behavior and Photosynthesis.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Stephen Long, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 04/30/2008
* USD 395,155.00

Photosynthesis within the leaves of green plants is one of the best known and
most researched of biological processes. In this series of chemical and physical
reactions, light energy is used to convert atmospheric CO2 into sugars,
producing oxygen as a by-product. Thus, photosynthesis is the ultimate source of
essentially all organic matter and all oxygen in the biosphere. Each of the 78
discrete steps from light capture to carbohydrate synthesis is known in some
detail and their kinetic properties described. For photosynthesis to occur, CO2
must enter the leaf through tiny pores called stomata, which are found on the
surfaces of leaves. As CO2 diffuses into the leaf, water and O2 diffuse out, and
stomatal aperture must vary dynamically throughout the day to admit sufficient
CO2 for photosynthesis while preventing excessive water loss. Although less well
understood than photosynthesis, many of the biochemical and biophysical steps
controlling stomatal opening are now described, and there is new evidence that
photosynthetic processes may underlie many stomatal responses. Computational
power and numerical methods are now sufficient to allow the simulation of the
complete process of leaf photosynthesis from carbon dioxide and oxygen exchange
through the stomata to light energy transduction into carbohydrate in the
underlying photosynthetic tissue. This work, for the first time, brings together
the complete description of the photosynthetic process and hypothesized
mechanisms of stomatal movements to produce a computer or in silico
representation of the leaf. The product of this effort will be capable of
mimicking the dynamic responses of leaves to changes in light, carbon dioxide
and oxygen, and comparisons to real measurements of the dynamics of leaf
photosynthesis will be used to test and improve the model. It will provide a
workbench for investigating the dynamic linkages between stomatal movement and
photosynthesis. More broadly it will provide a means for exploring the
mathematical properties of a complex natural system that is unusually rich in
measurable properties. The project will contribute to education by providing a
portal to the in silico leaf, allowing classroom investigation of both dynamic
environmental responses and genetic modification of individual steps in the
photosynthetic process. Undergraduate Research Experiences linked to this
project will aid this implementation of the portal.

