* 0417416
* Presynaptic Ca2+ Dynamics, Ca2+ Buffers and the Mechanisms of Facilitation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Victor Matveev, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2008
* USD 98,632.00

Using computational modeling, the investigator studies the spatiotemporal
dynamics of intracellular calcium influx, diffusion and buffering in a synaptic
terminal. The particular phenomenon explored by the investigator is the short-
term facilitation of synaptic response, that is, the transient increase in
synaptic strength elicited with just a few action potentials, and decaying on
time scales of tens to hundreds of milliseconds. Facilitation is observed in a
wide variety of systems, and must play an important role in neural dynamics and
information processing. Although facilitation is known to depend on the
presynaptic accumulation of residual calcium, its precise mechanisms are still
under debate. The investigator focuses on the role of endogenous calcium buffers
in several different mechanisms previously proposed to explain facilitation.
Among such mechanisms is buffer saturation, recently shown experimentally to
underlie facilitation at certain central synapses, and a facilitation model
relying on both free and bound residual calcium. The study concentrates on two
model systems that have been widely used to explore the mechanisms of synaptic
transmission: the crayfish neuromuscular junction and the auditory calyx of Held
synapse. The abundance of experimental data obtained at these synapses allows
detailed modeling of the calcium-secretion coupling. One of the main goals of
this study is to explore how variations in endogenous buffering characteristics
affect the spatiotemporal calcium concentration profile during trains of action
potentials. This in turn helps in elucidating the mechanisms of facilitation and
in ascertaining the role of calcium buffers in these and other synapses. Another
objective of this work is to estimate the properties of endogenous buffers at
the crayfish NMJ and at the calyx of Held. A modeling approach is indispensable
in this respect: apart from the over-all buffering capacity, the specific
buffering properties are inaccessible to direct measurement at most synapses.

The investigator applies computational tools to the study of a fundamental
biological process, that of the movement of calcium ions inside a cell. It is
known that calcium regulates a vast number of crucial biological events, such as
gene transcription, muscle contraction, immune system response, and many others.
In order to understand how a single element can regulate such a diverse set of
biological reactions, it is necessary to know in detail how calcium
concentration is controlled inside a cell. This is particularly important for a
better understanding of synaptic transmission, which is at the center of the
investigator's work. In synaptic transmission, the entry of calcium into the
synapse causes the release of a neurotransmitter chemical, binding of which to
the receptors of the neighboring neuron allows the electric activity to be
transmitted from one cell to the next. This is the fundamental process of
communication between neurons in the nervous system. It is interesting that the
strength of the synaptic connection between two neurons does not remain the
same, but is constantly changing. The investigator explores how the accumulation
of calcium causes some synapses to temporarily increase (facilitate) their
strength. Along with other forms of synaptic change (termed synaptic
plasticity), such facilitation must play an important role in the functioning of
the nervous system. Apart from the immediate goal of further elucidating the
synaptic transmission mechanisms, this study of intracellular calcium dynamics
helps to shed light on other important biological processes that are also
controlled by calcium. Finally, this work contributes to the widening of the use
of computational methods in biosciences, which is necessary in order to maintain
the current rapid progress in biology.