* 0417404
* Creating and Transferring Status Beliefs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Cecilia Ridgeway, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2006
* USD 112,585.00

SES-0417404&lt;br/&gt;Cecilia L. Ridgeway&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widely shared status beliefs are the key to the
organization of status inequality, whether it be between social groups in
society, such as occupations, races, or the sexes, or between individuals.
Status beliefs are cultural beliefs that associate greater social worthiness and
general competence with people who belong to one category of a recognized social
difference (e.g., professional, whites, men) than those who belong to another
category of that difference (laborers, people of color, women). Not only do
widely held status beliefs signal the respect and honor culturally attached to
different groups in society, they also shape the status hierarchies that develop
among individuals. How do status beliefs develop? Although there may be many
ways, status construction theory proposes one set of processes that are
sufficient to create, spread, maintain, or potentially undermine status beliefs
about a widely recognized social difference. This project seeks to increase our
knowledge of how status beliefs about social differences are created and spread
in society by testing a central argument of status construction theory. The
theory argues that everyday encounters between people from different social
categories are important contexts for the development and spread of status
beliefs about social differences. In such encounters, there is a chance that
participants will associate their influence and esteem in the encounter,
whatever its true source, with their social difference and form status beliefs
about the difference. Once people form such beliefs, they carry (i.e., transfer)
them to their subsequent encounters with those from the other category. By
treating others according to the new status beliefs, people teach these beliefs
to at least some others, creating a diffusion process that spreads the beliefs
through the population. Under structural conditions specified by the theory,
this can lead to widely shared status beliefs about the social difference
Previous research has shown that people do form status beliefs from encounters
with socially different others and that if they transfer these beliefs to
subsequent encounters, they can spread them to others as the theory argues But
do people spontaneously transfer new status beliefs from one encounter to
another, as they must if widely held status beliefs are to emerge in the
population?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A two-phase experiment will conducted to study
this question. In the first phase, paid undergraduate volunteers will be induced
to form status beliefs about a social difference by replicating procedures from
previous studies that had that effect. In the second phase a day or two later,
these subjects will work with a new partner from the other social group.
Subjects' deference and influence behavior toward the new partner will indicate
whether they have transferred their status beliefs to the new encounter, as the
theory argues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will has several broader
impacts in addition to addressing a significant social issue. It will promote
education and training by involving a graduate student and up to a dozen
undergraduates as experimenters, confederates, schedulers, and coders. As in
previous related projects, 3 or more of these students are expected to be racial
or ethnic minorities and about half will be women. All will receive first hand
research training. Results of the research will be disseminated broadly in
sociological journals and scholarly presentations. &lt;br/&gt;