* 0417748
* CMG: Theory and Modeling of Differential-Geometrical Structures in Ocean-Atmosphere Optics for Inversion of Satellite Data
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert Frouin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 386,033.00

Abstract: 0417748&lt;br/&gt;CMG: Theory and Modeling of Differential-Geometrical
Structures in Ocean-Atmosphere Optics for Inversion of Satellite Data&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this study is to develop a general mathematical
methodology for the "inversion" of satellite measurements under varying
observation geometry so as to provide estimates of the geophysical parameters of
interest that influence the measurements. This inverse problem is in fact a
continuum of similar inverse problems continuously indexed by the angular
variables which characterize the positions of the sun and of the satellite
sensor with respect to the target point on the Earth's surface. In this study,
the maps to be inverted are defined on and valued in Riemannian manifolds. These
differential geometrical structures arise naturally; they are among the best
descriptions of the domains and ranges of the maps to be inverted. Consequently,
they are core ingredients towards an improvement, in terms of accuracy and
robustness, of the resolution of those inverse problems. Due to uncertainties in
the measurements, as well as in the geophysical models, random objects valued in
Riemannian manifolds will be considered. The investigations will yield a
rigorous framework for performing the regression of a manifold valued random
object on another one, and its extension to the case of a field of manifold
valued random objects. Mathematical tools, based on ridge functions, will be
developed to approximate, within any required accuracy, a field of regression
functions between manifolds by a field of parameterized models. Dedicated
algorithms to estimate the free parameters of the models will accompany those
tools. This general mathematical methodology will be applied to the ocean color
remote sensing problem, which consists of estimating the concentration and
inherent optical properties of oceanic constituents, such as phytoplankton,
sediments, and yellow substances, from top-of-atmosphere reflectance
measurements. The differential-geometrical structures arising in that problem
will be obtained from the analytical physical models and equations governing the
radiative transfer in the ocean-atmosphere system. More precisely, the set of
permitted values for the marine and top-of-atmosphere reflectance spectra,
respectively, will be given the structure of a Riemannian manifold, to allow
applicability of the mathematical methodology. The resulting models will be
evaluated theoretically and tested on actual satellite ocean color data, from
sensors such as the Sea-viewing Wide-Field-of-view Sensor (SeaWiFS) and the
MODerate resolution Imaging Spectrometer (MODIS). Performance will be
quantified, as well as improvements compared with other inversion schemes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The study will contribute
original results to the mathematical fields of approximation theory and
statistical analysis on manifolds. In geosciences, it will provide a mostly
analytical, robust and accurate inversion methodology with rigorous mathematical
grounding for inversion of satellite data. The methodology will be applicable to
other geophysical problems with varying observation geometry than ocean color
remote sensing. The project will promote interdisciplinary and international
collaboration The benefits to society will be through more accurate satellite
data sets which are increasingly used in environmental applications and in the
study of biogeochemistry and climate dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;