* 0417205
* Developmental Physiology of the Avian Ductus Arteriosi
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Edward Dzialowski, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2008
* USD 394,062.00

Title: Developmental physiology of the avian ductus
arteriosi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Edward M. Dzialowski, University of North
Texas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ductus arteriosus plays a critical role during
embryonic development of tetrapod vertebrates, but it must close shortly after
initiation of lung ventilation so that neonatal metabolism can be fully
supported. In developing mammals and birds, the ductus arteriosi provides a
right-to-left shunt of blood away from the high resistance pulmonary circuit to
the lower resistance systemic circuit, ensuring that the developing animal has
adequate blood flow to the embryonic gas exchanger. In contrast to the mammalian
fetus with a single ductus arteriosus, the developing avian embryo has two
ductus arteriosi that allow for this shunt of blood. In the bird, the right and
left ductus arteriosi connect the right and left pulmonary arteries to the aorta
to form the descending aorta. Upon the initiation of lung ventilation, the
ductus arteriosi of both groups begins to constrict. Hatching and the
constriction of the right and left ductus arteriosi lasts roughly 20 to 30 hours
in the chicken and emu, up to ten times longer than most mammals. The prolonged
time it takes the avian ductus arteriosi to close makes the developing bird
embryo an exciting model for studying the regulation of ductus vessel tone
during the transition to lung ventilation. The long-term goal is to understand
the mechanisms regulating in vivo avian ductus arteriosi tone from the embryonic
stage through hatching and to use the avian model to understand the influence of
environmental and pharmacological stressors on ductus arteriosi function prior
to, during, and after initiation of lung ventilation. The specific goals of the
proposed research are to examine the role of oxygen, prostaglandins, and nitric
oxide in regulating avian ductus arteriosi tone through development and
determine the timing of the functional and anatomical closure of the avian
ductus arteriosi. This study provides the first comprehensive examination of the
physiology of a non-mammalian ductus arteriosus and insight into the mechanisms
involved in avian cardiovascular regulation during the transition to ex ovo
life. The research proposed here is a necessary step toward discovering the
factors regulating avian ductus arteriosi tone in vivo during hatching and will
expand the role of the avian embryo as a model system in developmental
cardiovascular physiology. This project will train a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate level students in the emerging field of developmental
physiology. Finally, local high school biology teachers will participate in
summer research and take the experience back into their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;