* 0417845
* CMG Collaborative Research:  Structures of Uncertainty in Coupled Phys-Bio-Biological EstimStructures of Uncertainty in Coupled Physical-Biological Estimation in the Coastal Ocean
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Andrew Solow, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2009
* USD 577,612.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation addresses phenomena in the Coastal
Ocean that present a directed structure of causation and inference. It will
focus on the interface between biological and physical phenomena, where the
causal structure is one-way, physics affecting biology via advection,
temperature, salt, light, and turbulence. The transfer of physical uncertainty
toward biological phenomena is of primary concern. Rigorous representations of
that transfer, and its implications for state and parameter estimation, will be
developed. Examples will be drawn from contemporary experience with
observational programs and simulations. Due to their huge complexity, these
site-specific, coupled problems favor careful problem formulation which is
compatible with concurrent oceanographic measurement programs. Both Eulerian and
Lagrangian (Individual-Based) models will be used, operating in spatially-
explicit environments. Essential nonlinearities will be accommodated with
ensemble (Monte Carlo) methods in algorithm design; and with maximum likelihood
estimation where simpler least-squares approaches are not justified.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General problems of Environmental and Natural
Resource Management are now being appreciated globally, and particularly in the
coastal ocean. Access to transportation, oil and gas, marine fisheries,
recreation, and waste disposal are increasingly dominant there; and the USA has
created numerous public management requirements for those resources and
activities. This work addresses contemporary US coastal ocean problems that are
multi-disciplinary in nature. The proposed collaboration unites expertise in
Probability and Statistics, Ocean Science, and Computational Science. The
problems selected are at the forefront of the interfaces among these
disciplines. As presented in the ocean, these problems are big and complex.
Progress at their interface is needed in which workable computational
algorithms, sound mathematical formulations, and useful scientific reduction
collaborate in intellectually lasting ways. The PI's have standing in their
disciplines and at their interfaces. Progress of relevance to major ongoing
coastal management programs will be balanced across the collaborating
disciplines and focused on the interdisciplinary Coastal Ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;