* 0417172
* The Machinery of Mitochondrial Recombination in Higher Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Sally Mackenzie, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2007
* USD 494,080.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Plant mitochondria, as subcellular compartments
involved in energy metabolism, contain their own genetic information. The
dynamic nature of the plant mitochondrial genome represents an important feature
that distinguishes plants and animals. An understanding of the underlying
genetic basis of this trait is important to developing an appreciation of its
value to evolution and its amenability to manipulation. Two types of genetic
exchange are characteristic of plant mitochondria: high frequency DNA exchange
that occurs at "like" sequences found as large, interspersed repeats, and
infrequent DNA exchange at "unlike" sites containing as little as six or seven
shared nucleotides. Both appear to represent important sources of genetic
variation in plants. &lt;br/&gt;The laboratory of the PI has cloned a gene in
the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana, designated MSH1, that is
associated with mitochondrial DNA maintenance and possibly with DNA exchange
activity. In this proposal, the function of MSH1 will be analyzed. As a
corollary to these studies, mitochondrial DNA exchange activity dependent on the
gene RecA will be investigated. The central hypothesis of the research is that
RecA, together with interacting protein components, control recombination
activity in higher plant mitochondria by mechanisms that are distinct from MSH1
activity. As tests of this hypothesis, proteins that demonstrate interaction
with RecA will be isolated, as well as mitochondrial DNA sequences to which this
putative protein complex binds. Functional analysis of RecA will involve
mutation studies and plant transformations. Evidence for RecA and MSH1
functional and physical interaction will also be sought. The importance of the
proposed study will be to identify and characterize components of a genetic
network that appears to be uniquely adapted to plants, and to understand the
role of recombination processes in plant mitochondrial genome maintenance and
transmission. &lt;br/&gt;From a practical standpoint, an understanding of
mitochondrial recombination activity is key to the development of mutations that
cause male sterility, and hence the proposed research should be useful to the
agricultural seed industry for hybrid seed. The project will also involve
training opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows; recruitment of under-represented minorities will be a
priority.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;