* 0417800
* CMG:     Modeling the Multiscale Phenomena of the Magnetosphere
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Parvez Guzdar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,072,022.00

Earth's magnetosphere, which is a cavity formed by the interaction of the
turbulent solar wind with the dipole magnetic field, is a key region of geospace
involving a broad range of interacting scales, a complex geometry and a rich
variety of physical processes. The data from the ground and space based
observatories have been used extensively to develop data-derived models of the
magnetosphere. The coherence on the global scale, obtained in terms of low
dimensionality of its dynamics, and the consequent predictability of its
dynamics, has been instrumental in the development of initiatives for
forecasting space weather. The multi-scale properties, on the other hand, can
not be predicted dynamically and the methods of nonlinear dynamics and
statistical physics have been combined to develop comprehensive models that
yield deterministic predictions of the global features and probabilistic
predictions of its multi-scale aspects. The next challenge lies in the
development of the mathematical framework for these results, and requires a
strong collaborative efforts between geosciences and mathematics. The multi-
scale properties make the fractional kinetic equations, which combines the
dynamical and statistical approaches, a natural choice as a mathematical
framework for modeling the coupled solar wind - magnetosphere system. The
project will develop comprehensive models of multi-scale phenomena of the
magnetosphere by combining three approaches, viz., data derived modeling, theory
of fractional kinetics, and global MHD simulations. The combination of these
three approaches requires a close interdisciplinary collaboration of
mathematicians and geoscientists, and will be undertaken by research teams at
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences and University of Maryland.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have broader impacts by
providing a mathematical framework enabling improved forecasting of geospace
disturbances. Such a framework is essential for improving the current forecasts
of the hazardous events in the near-Earth space. The geospace storms and
substorms have serious impacts on modern technological systems such as
communication satellites, power grids, human space flight, etc. The improvement
of the current capabilities for forcasting the conditions in the different
regions of geospace, such as the ionosphere and the radiation belt, is of
strategic importance to national security. Further, the development of
mathematical framework for multiscale behavior of the geospace will stimulate
the understanding of the similar features in the atmosphere, and potentially of
the linkages between these two regions and how they are controlled by changes in
the solar activity. &lt;br/&gt;