* 0417999
* Illustrated World Catalog of the Phylum Rotifera: Survey and Inventory of Rotifers from Freshwaters in Northern Mongolia
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Robert Wallace, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2010
* USD 249,998.00

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research on northern Mongolian Rotifera will be
the most comprehensive survey of a group of freshwater microinvertebrates ever
conducted in Mongolia. It will address biodiversity issues such as discovery of
new species, ecology, and biogeography of a little known group in an unexplored
ecoregion. Specimen-level information and locality data will be incorporated
into the database that will be web-accessible through the Academy's website. All
data will be fully geo-referenced to facilitate mapping and GIS applications.
Newly discovered rotifers will be described in scientific journals available to
rotifer specialists, and permanent slide preparations will be integrated in the
ANSP collection. Biodiversity issues are further addressed by drawing on the
pooled resources and expertise of taxonomists specializing on other little
studied micro-invertebrate taxa (ciliated Protozoa, Copepoda, Cladocera,
Tardigrada).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: To aid in advancing scientific
research and to support biodiversity conservation in Mongolia, a local reference
collection will be started in Ulaanbaatar. Taxonomic and curatorial training of
local students and collaborating scientists will help build in-country expertise
for future biodiversity studies. Our survey will not only generate basic
biodiversity data, but it will also provide a baseline for future ecological
integrity assessment of Mongolian aquatic habitats that suffer from accelerating
anthropogenic stress (agriculture, over-grazing, mining) and climate-triggered
changes (permafrost thaw) in their biota. With its public outreach, the website
can touch broader audiences and increase awareness for the "invisible life in a
water drop", thereby reducing the "minor phylum" image and expand general
research on the Rotifera.&lt;br/&gt;