* 0417813
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Beyond Membership: A Sense of Community and Political Action
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Jeffery Mondak, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The long-term goal of this project is to gain a broader understanding of how
multiple contexts in which individuals interact influence political behavior and
attitudes. By drawing upon and adapting work from community psychology the
research questions in this project ask 1) from where does an individual get
his/her sense of community --does it come from one, two, or multiple contexts?
and 2) how does sense of community influence political behaviors and attitudes
such as participation, tolerance, community satisfaction, and political
knowledge? For example, people might have a sense of community from their
neighborhoods or their workplaces but they may also have a sense of community
from belonging to an organization or a church. Attention to where this sense of
community develops and how much variation exists within each context are
critical to broadening our understanding of how to model the process of how,
why, and when social forces influence individuals. attitudes and behaviors. Does
sense of community enhance participation, foster tolerance, lead to greater
community satisfaction, increased trust, and produce more interest in local
governance? Original data from a random group of citizens in Tallahassee,
Florida will be collected to address these questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual Merit In recent years, academic research in the social sciences
rightly has paid increasing attention to the impact of social context on the
behaviors and attitudes of the individuals. Unfortunately, this research has
approached the concept of .context. quite narrowly, most often merely
identifying a single context per individual, with little or no information
included regarding the nature of the person's actions within that context. By
drawing on insights from the work in the field of community psychology, the
proposed project promises a significant intellectual advance. First, the process
underlying contextual effects can be modeled with considerably more nuance and
sophistication than has been typical in past research, potentially bringing a
much richer understanding of the interplay between individuals and the contexts
in which they are embedded. Second, by demonstrating the relevance of research
in community psychology for questions examined in political science, this
project will exemplify the benefits of interdisciplinary research. Findings will
help strengthen theoretical advancements in community psychology by establishing
how well those theories .travel,. and use of those theories will bring a
stronger, more rigorous foundation to substantive social science research in
this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Generally speaking, social
scientists agree that community influences individual behavior and attitudes.
This project takes an interdisciplinary approach to understanding how multiple
contexts in which individuals interact influence their behaviors and attitudes
by combining elements of political science, sociology, and community psychology
research. As community leaders and local policymakers attempt to meet the needs
of their citizens and promote democratic values within their cities it is
critical that they have a broader understanding of how social forces
(particularly ommunity) influence individuals. behaviors and attitudes.
&lt;br/&gt;