* 0417003
* RUI: Molecular Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on the Cell Cycle and Development of Sea Urchins
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Nikki Adams, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 382,678.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RUI: Molecular effects of ultraviolet radiation on
the cell cycle &lt;br/&gt;and development of sea
urchins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nikki L. Adams, Cal Poly State University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many marine invertebrates are exposed to damaging levels
of naturally occurring ultraviolet radiation (UVR, 290-400 nm), which can lead
to detrimental effects at the ecological, organismal, cellular and molecular
levels. Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that broadcast spawned
gametes, embryos, and larvae of marine invertebrates are the most sensitive life
stages to UVR. One of the best model organisms for studying effects of UVR at
the molecular and organismal levels is the sea urchin egg and embryo. UV-
irradiation of sea urchin eggs and embryos delays cell division and can cause
later developmental delays and gross abnormalities that lead to death or
malformation of larvae. Such delays and defects in development may increase the
risk of further damage and may eventually affect population dynamics.
Fortunately, some sea urchin eggs and embryos contain natural sunscreening
compounds, mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs), which protect them from some UV-
induced damage. However, the molecular targets of UVR have not been identified
and the mechanism of protection by MAAs remains elusive. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will identify molecules that are affected by UV-irradiation and that
affect progression through mitosis in sea urchins eggs and embryos using
controlled laboratory and field experimental approaches. More specifically:
effects of UVR on the activity of the cell cycle regulatory proteins (cyclins,
cyclin dependent kinases, and proteins that regulate their activity) and DNA
will be identified in embryos of the sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus),
Ultimately, targets will be tested to determine whether they are protected from
UVR by MAAs. These studies integrate ecology, physiology, developmental biology
and cell and molecular biology and have implications for all organisms that
undergo cell division and are exposed to sunlight. The proposed experiments
strive to provide a foundation to answer long- standing questions about the
molecular mechanisms controlling stress-induced abnormalities in development of
marine invertebrates. In addition, undergraduate and graduate students will
participate significantly in this work as intellectual partners, whereby they
design their own experiments, test hypotheses and learn how to present their
results orally and in scientific manuscripts, so they are better prepared for
careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;