* 0417152
* RUI:  Novel Heme Chemistry of Cytochrome c'
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Colin Andrew, Eastern Oregon University
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 12/31/2007
* USD 235,627.00

This research at an undergraduate institution (RUI) will investigate the novel
heme chemistry of cytochrome c', a hemoprotein recently shown by the PI and
coworkers to bind nitric oxide (NO) to its proximal (rather than distal) heme
face. The interaction of NO with heme centers in proteins is important in
cellular signaling processes, as well as in the regulation of NO-levels. The
discovery of a proximal heme-NO coordination opens up exciting new possibilities
for ligand binding mechanisms in hemoproteins, particularly those connected with
heme-based NO-sensing and protection against NO toxicity. The scientific
objectives of this proposal are (i) to investigate the chemical ramifications of
proximal heme-NO coordination in cytochrome c'; (ii) to understand why NO binds
to the proximal (rather than distal) heme face; (iii) to understand how
cytochrome c' modulates its reactivity with NO, and (iv) to investigate possible
mechanisms by which cytochrome c' could help reduce the levels of free NO in
solution. The heme chemistry of cytochrome c' will be studied using the
techniques of UV-visible absorption, resonance Raman spectroscopy, flash-
photolysis, and stopped-flow kinetics. Recombinant cytochrome c' proteins will
be used to study the effect of amino acid replacements on heme reactivity.
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include opportunities for
undergraduate students at Eastern Oregon University to be engaged in cutting-
edge research. Due to the collaborative nature of this project, students will
gain hands-on experience in a variety of biochemical and biophysical techniques
in different laboratory environments, which will augment their academic studies
and provide valuable skills for future scientific endeavors. The project will
continue the tradition of the PI's department in supporting and promoting
undergraduate research, and will add momentum to the current transformation of
biochemistry education and research at this institution. Moreover, the project
will enable the PI to maintain intellectual vibrancy within the classroom and
research community. &lt;br/&gt;