* 0417056
* Characterization of a Novel Acyltranferase Implicated in Capsaicin Biosynthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Margaret Jahn, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2008
* USD 566,826.00

This project focuses on capsaicin biosynthesis and the genes that define and
regulate the pathway in Capsicum. Apart from portions of the biosynthetic
pathway common to other primary metabolic pathways, the remainder of the pathway
remains unknown. Of particular interest among the enzymes uncharacterized to
date is the terminal acyltransferase, capsaicin synthase (CS), which joins the
alkaloid moiety of the capsaicin molecule derived from phenylpropanoid
biosynthesis to the fatty acid moiety. Preliminary results have identified three
novel putative acyltransferases (ATs) that are highly up-regulated during
capsaicin accumulation. Based on genetic studies in this laboratory, AT3 is Pun1
(formerly the C locus), the genetic determinant long known as the on/off switch
for this pathway. AT3 will be evaluated as a candidate for CS activity through
biochemical experiments designed to characterize the CS enzyme and show CS
activity is inherently linked to the presence of the AT3 protein. In the event
that AT3 is not CS, it is still clear that the enzyme encoded by the Pun1 locus
is critical for expression of the pathway. Experiments will be undertaken to
gain insight as to the identity of this enzyme, if it is not CS. The second
objective focuses on AT3 as a regulator of pungency. Preliminary data indicate
that extreme transcript down-regulation occurs for many of the genes required
for biosynthesis when the pun1 allele, which possesses a large deletion of the
promoter and the first exon, is homozygous.

Broader Impact: Finally, capsaicin biosynthesis represents an ideal focus for a
project aimed at integrating educational and research objectives because of the
popularity and familiarity of products containing capsaicin and its rapidly
growing economic significance in a wide array of food products, in medicine,
industry, law enforcement, and pest control (it has become a leading insect
repellent in organic agriculture and is the active ingredient in many of the
most effective deer and rodent repellents). Well-developed alliances with Alcorn
State University in Mississippi, Texas A&M at Kingsville, and New Mexico State
allow for recruitment of underrepresented minorities for summer and graduate
opportunities and assistance in providing resources for their own research
programs.