* 0417291
* Molecular Definition of the Unique Phenylpropanoid Radical Coupling Mechanisms of Dirigent Proteins, Their Homologues, and Associated Metabolism:  A Discovery-Based Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Norman Lewis, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2010
* USD 894,266.00

The control of oxidative free radical coupling/polymerization chemistry in
plants was a decisive adaptation of such organisms in order to access a land-
based habitat. In so doing, these diverse plant forms elaborated new
biochemistries to generate a plethora of phenylpropanoid (acetate) natural
products with important roles, e.g. in plant defense and later with applications
in human health (including as antiviral, anticancer and bactericidal agents).
These metabolic pathways also gave the structurally complex biopolymers, the
lignins, which largely determine woody textural properties, and the suberins (in
cork tissue) that enabled plants to survive in desiccating environments. This
contrasts with other organismal types (e.g. with mammals), where radical
chemistry is not as well controlled, e.g. in humans, where this lack of control
can lead to more rapid aging and increased susceptibility to various diseases.

This project will investigate the basis of how such radical
coupling/polymerization chemistries are actually controlled in plants, and how
they evolved, as well as building upon discovery of dirigent proteins. The
latter represents the first example of a protein controlling radical-radical
coupling, and thus the research to be undertaken will determine the nature of
the key features on the protein involved in radical binding, stabilization and
ultimately its product formation. The technologies that will be used in this
study are those of electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, X-ray
crystallography and site-directed mutagenesis, i.e. procedures, which will
enable identification of the key features in dirigent proteins that control such
radical chemistries, as well as those in related polyphenol oxidase and
regiospecific coupling enzymes. This, in turn, will make it possible to
establish how nature actually makes such diverse and complex natural products;
this can be anticipated to be of immense value in many different undertakings,
such as controlled radical polymerization processes leading to new materials, in
nanotechnology, in medicine, and in the study of protein evolution.

Broader Impact

The broader impact of NSF support is in the ability to encourage and nurture
young scientists (particularly from underrepresented and underserved groups) at
the undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, visiting scientist and high school
teacher levels in developing their careers. The latter mechanism gives an
excellent avenue for introducing the latest technological insights and advances
into schools. In addition to the scientific benefits described above, these
investigators are involved in a number of other outreach activities including
the Washington State University (WSU) Plant Biochemistry Summer Course, the
annual WSU Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Workshop; and general talks to high school
students and the general public, for example on the pros and cons of genetically
modified foods and the diversity of dietary phytochemicals.

