* 0417668
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Playing Hardball in a Dress?  Gender Differences in the Reliance and Effectiveness of Negative Campaigns
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Kim Fridkin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/2005
* USD 3,500.00

Sex stereotypes are ubiquitous (Ashmore, Del Boca and Wohlers, 1986; Broverman
et al., 1972; Williams and Best, 1990), and lead people to perceive men as
possessing agentic traits such as boldness and aggressiveness, while women are
perceived as possessing communal traits such as warmth and sympathy (McKee and
Sheriffs, 1957, 1958; Parsons and Bales, 1955). In the context of modern
political campaigns, where negative campaigning is on the rise (e.g., Mayer,
1996; Johnson-Cartee and Copeland, 1991; Ansolabehere and Iyengar, 1995), and is
often viewed as an effective strategy (see Finkel and Geer, 1998; Kahn and
Kenney, 1999; Freedman and Goldstein, 1999; Brians and Wattenberg, 1996),
examining how stereotypes influence the impact of negative campaigning is an
important question. &lt;br/&gt;To examine this question, a content analysis will
be conducted to examine gender differences in the reliance on negative
advertisements in congressional campaigns, using 1998 and 2000 data from the
Wisconsin Advertising Project and the Campaign Media Analysis Group (CMAG). To
examine differences in the effectiveness of negative campaigns for men and women
candidates, an innovative experiment will be implemented. Political commercials
will be created and shown to subjects in an experimental setting; and four
factors will be varied in the commercials: (1) the gender of the sponsor of the
ad; (2) the tone of the ad; (3) the gender of the target of the ad; and (4) the
content of the ad, creating a 2 (tone) x 2 (sponsor gender) x 2 (target gender)
x 4 (content) factorial design. By only varying the independent variables of
interest, and by keeping all other content the same in each of the commercials,
the differences in subjects. evaluations of the candidates can be attributed to
the variation in the independent variables. Finally, an examination on whether
the subjects. political and demographic background (e.g., political party, race,
gender) condition the impact that stereotypes have on their reaction to negative
campaigning will be examined. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
dissertation project is that first, it builds on the psychological literature
that examines gender stereotypes by revising ideas about the substance,
pervasiveness, and consequences of gender stereotypes. Second, it builds on the
political science and communication literature that examines negative
campaigning by improving scholars understanding of the effectiveness of
different types of political messages for different political candidates. The
broader impacts resulting from the project include a deeper understanding of how
effective negative campaigns are for women congressional candidates. Since
research shows that women politicians often expand the legislative agenda
(Clark, 1998; Dodson, 1998; Mandel and Dodson, 1992; Thomas, 1994; Thomas and
Welch, 1991), and are successful at addressing issues that get short shrift by
male officeholders (e.g., women and children.s issues) (Dodson et al., 1995;
Dodson 1995; Schreiber 1995; Witt, Paget, and Matthews, 1994), increasing the
number of women in elective office is an important goal in our representative
democracy. Therefore, it is necessary to explore the obstacles women face when
running for office. In this study, by examining how gender stereotypes influence
the impact of negative campaigns, women.s likelihood of increasing their
electoral presence will be examined. &lt;br/&gt;