* 0417805
* CMG Training:  Summer School in Geophysical Porous Media: Multidisciplinary Science from Nanoscale (Clay) to Global (Magma) Migration
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* John Cushman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rong Chen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Rarely do students working on multidisciplinary math/geophysics projects get the
whole picture of the problem and hence a full understanding of it. This summer
school is designed to begin overcoming this dual-mode, mathematics vs.
geophysics, way of doing science by providing an environment that encourages the
geoscientists to look more seriously at the theory and the mathematicians to
look more seriously at the physics while learning to communicate in each others
languages. To help reach this goal, basic tutorials will be prepared and
presentations will be given by experts in the fields of mathematics and
geophysics working on common problems. These will expose the participants to the
current limitations in the application field and show the two groups how to
communicate with one another. The 'capstone' experience of the school will be
collaborative student projects that can't be completed without close
collaboration between geophysics and mathematics students. These projects will
be small research efforts directed at one of the themes presented in the
overview talks. The student teams will be guided by two faculty mentors (a
mathematician and a geoscientist) and will make a presentation to the school on
the final day. While it is hoped that these team projects might be the seed of
new research efforts, the primary goal is to give the students the experience of
working closely with researchers having different background than their own,
i.e. to teach them to do multidisciplinary science. Projects will be chosen that
can not be completed without a serious collaborative effort. Geophysical porous
media on scales ranging from the nano to the global will be the focus
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Most graduate students working on multidisciplinary
projects focus on a piece of the project of relevance to their major field of
study, either applied math or geophysics. For example, mathematics students tend
to neglect or over simplify the physics so they can prove a theorem, while
geophysics students tend to neglect mathematical rigor in their modeling efforts
so they can get a better understanding of the real physics. This summer school
is designed to begin overcoming this dual-mode way of doing science by providing
an environment that encourages the geoscientists to look more seriously at the
theory and the mathematicians to look more seriously at the physics while
learning to communicate in each others languages. &lt;br/&gt;