* 0417422
* Integrative studies of post-glacial cap carbonates in Namibia and Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Paul Hoffman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2009
* USD 369,782.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The Neoproterozoic "snowball Earth" hypothesis (Kirschvink,
1992; Hoffman et al., 1998; Kirschvink et al., 2000; Hoffman &amp; Schrag, 2002)
attempts to explain not only paloemagnetic data showing extensive glaciation in
the tropics, but other observations including the widespread occurrence of post-
glacial "cap carbonates" (Fairchild, 1994; Grotzinger &amp; Knoll, 1995;
Kennedy, 1996; James et al., 2001; Hoffman &amp; Schrag, 2002), which are
continuous layers of lithologically-distinctive dolomite and/or limestone that
directly overlie glacial marine sequences globally without significant hiatus.
No issue in Neoproterozoic geology is more contentious than the origin of cap
carbonates, nor more central to the snowball Earth concept. Cap carbonates
display a unique panoply of enigmatic sedimentary structures and petrographic
types, which recur in broadly the same stratigraphic sequence on continental
margins and basins on virtually every paleocontinent.&lt;br/&gt;We propose a
comprehensive investigation of the post-Marinoan depositional sequence in two
regions.northern Namibia and the Mackenzie Mountains of northwest Canada. The
proposed work will continue the productive collaboration between Paul Hoffman
and Dan Schrag. After years of study, the stratigraphic and chemostratigraphic
development of the Otavi carbonate platform in northern Namibia is relatively
well known on the regional scale (Hedberg, 1979; Kaufman et al., 1991; Hoffmann
&amp; Prave, 1996; Hoffman et al., 1998; Halverson et al., 2002; Hoffman, 2002).
A continuous transect from the lower slope to the shelf break was recently
identified and we propose to map out and log the pre-, syn- and post-glacial
sequences there in detail. We will also explore a series of distinctive
sedimentary structures in Marinoan cap carbonates along this transect, which
have potential implications for the intensity of tropical storms during the
deglaciation. We also propose to perform a series of geochemical analyses to
better characterize the chemical and isotopic stratification and evolution of
seawater after the glaciations. Carbon and oxygen isotope records have been
obtained from the Maieberg capcarbonate sequence in Namibia, but other proxy
records (e.g., sulfur and oxygen isotopes in sulfate, and redox-sensitive
elements) have been obtained from one or two sections only. With the support
requested here, we wish to replicate the new proxy records in Namibia, and to
obtain similar and complementary records from northwest Canada, using sample
sets already in hand.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, we propose to advance our
geochemical modeling efforts by extending the scope of our previous box modeling
to include sulfur and oxygen isotopes of sulfate. Of particular interest is a
continuous barite-rich horizon that occurs between dolomite and calcite units in
the cap sequence.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The unique post-glacial cap
carbonate associated with the hypothesized Marinoan snowball Earth will be
characterized sedimentologically, petrographically, geochemically and
isotopically in the regions where it is texturally best preserved (northwest
Canada), and where its paleoenvironmental zonation is best exposed (northern
Namibia). These observations will form a reliable basis for evaluating competing
theories for the origin of cap carbonates, and their significance in the larger
problem of lowlatitude Proterozoic glaciation.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: One
PhD student supervised by Paul Hoffman and Dan Schrag will be supported by the
proposed research, and a number of fieldbased research projects for
undergraduates will be undertaken in Namibia. We have long had a minimal
website, from which one can download our published and unpublished articles on
snowball Earth, as well as a set of teaching slides. We could do much more: the
literature on snowball Earth is doubling annually and it attracts interest from
biologists, planetologists, meteorologists, oceanographers, geochemists, climate
dynamicists, glaciologists, atmospheric scientists, and students of all ages. We
propose to hire part-time a former research geologist (Robert S. Hildebrand, PhD
1980) who has experience and skills developed with the Geological Survey of
Canada that make him well suited for the task of researching, creating, and
maintaining an attractive, comprehensive and useful website for issues relating
to the snowball Earth hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;