* 0417810
* CMG: Improve the Computational Performance of Global Atmospheric Chemistry Models through Spatial Mechanism Reduction
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Daniel Jacob, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 321,223.00

The ability to model oxidant concentrations (ozone and OH) in the lower
atmosphere (troposphere) is central to a wide range of environmental issues. It
plays an essential role in addressing issues of air quality, aerosol and acid
formation, and global budgets of greenhouse gases. Our fundamental understanding
of the chemical factors controlling tropospheric oxidants is fairly well
established, but the computational challenge of atmospheric modeling is
enormous. Chemical mechanisms include hundreds of coupled chemical species
reacting on timescales ranging from milliseconds to many years. The cost of
solving the resulting stiff system of coupled differential equations in a global
model is such as to prevent simulations of adequate spatial resolution or
temporal extent. This computational difficulty hinders general progress in our
ability to model atmospheric chemistry and to address related environmental
issues. The problem will be exacerbated over the next decade as satellite
observations provide vast amounts of data on atmospheric composition.
Exploitation of these data will require fast models. Meeting this challenge
requires substantial advances in both computational resources and numerical
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project will improve numerical
algorithms for describing oxidant chemistry in global models through the
collaboration of an applied mathematician (Brenner) and an atmospheric chemistry
modeler (Jacob). Our central idea is that most of the chemical complexity is
confined to a relatively small atmospheric domain (chemical boundary layer) near
the continental surface where emissions take place. There is thus the
possibility of using a targeted reduction of the chemical mechanism in which a
reduced set of reactants is used in the remote atmosphere and the full chemical
mechanism is used in the chemical boundary layer. Implementation is complicated
by the dynamic nature of the chemical boundary layer, the need to have different
definitions of the chemical boundary layer for different chemical species, and
the need for a matching procedure to accurately connect the two regimes. We
expect that results from this project will significantly enhance the
capabilities of global atmospheric chemistry models and in this manner will
improve our ability to address a range of important environmental issues.