* 0417481
* CRCD/EI:  Incorporating Power-Aware Computing Techniques Into the Curriculum
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Israel Koren, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

Incorporating Power-aware Computing Techniques into the Classroom Abstract

Power-aware computing has become a significant area of research and development
both in industry and academia. Various techniques for reducing the energy
consumption have been developed. The techniques developed for achieving the
reduced power and energy cover many phases of the computer system design
including circuits, voltage scaling, micro-architectures, operating systems, and
compilers.

The current curriculum and the available textbooks for the relevant computer
engineering courses do not adequately address power-aware computing. Our overall
aim is to incorporate power-aware techniques into both the graduate and
undergraduate curricula. Funds derived from this project will be used to develop
a proof-of-concept in this regard.

The proof-of-concept will consist of developing instructional modules covering
the following topics: (i) Power simulators, (ii) Static and Dynamic sources of
power consumption, (iii) Fetch throttling as a means of reducing power
consumption in high-end processors, and (iv) Voltage-scaling techniques in real-
time systems. We will develop detailed plans for a two-course sequence in power-
aware computing. This course sequence will be suitable for students who have had
some prior exposure to computer architecture, operating systems, and compilers.
It will include special-purpose applications such as embedded systems. Finally,
we will develop in detail, an evaluation framework by which the quality of our
offerings can be measured and improved.

