* 0417678
* LTREB: Linking Long-term Alterations in Atmospheric Chemistry to Changes in Nutrient Dynamics and Sustainable Productivity in Central Appalachian Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* William Peterjohn, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2010
* USD 319,979.00

This project will continue long-term measurements and experiments at the Fernow
Experimental Forest in order to better understand how air pollution affects the
fertility, productivity, and composition of hardwood forests in central
Appalachia. Recent changes at this site suggest that continued acid deposition
will deplete essential soil nutrients and alter the balance of available
nutrients in ways that reduce forest productivity. Continuing measurements of
precipitation, stream water, soils, and vegetation (in both untreated and
experimentally manipulated sites) will answer several important questions: (1)
Is there evidence that acid deposition has reduced forest productivity ?; (2)
How long can some forests resist the effects of chronic acid deposition ?; (3)
Why are long-term changes in stream-water chemistry at this site different than
changes observed in other polluted regions of the eastern US ?; and (4) Will
continued acid deposition alter the diversity and composition of tree
species?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term data are rare but necessary for
detecting environmental change, and for quantifying its ecological impact. Thus,
results from this project will significantly improve our understanding of the
link between changes in air pollution and forest productivity in ways that can
inform public policy, ecological theory, and forest management
practices.&lt;br/&gt;