* 0417695
* Analysis of Radio Signatures Associated with the Origin, Nature, Dynamics and Interrelationship of Solar Transient Phenomena
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* N. Gopalswamy, Catholic University of America
* Continuing grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 07/31/2007
* USD 294,103.00

The objective of this proposal is to use radio, white-light, and X-ray
observations of the Sun, as well as in-situ plasma and particle data, to provide
temporal and dynamic constraints that will lead to a better physics-based
understanding of the origin, nature, dynamics, and interrelationship of
individual solar transient phenomena (such as CMEs and solar energetic
particles) that affect the near-Earth space environment. The PI's goal is to
determine how the interpretation of solar radio data can benefit from the
constraints imposed by complementary solar observations, and vice versa.

The PI will focus on three interrelated areas: Coronal Mass Ejection (CME)
origin and dynamics, the origin and propagation of accelerated solar energetic
particles, and solar cycle comparisons of CME-generated radio emissions. To
carry out these investigations, the low frequency radio data from the Wind,
Ulysses, ISEE-3, and eventually STEREO spacecraft will be augmented with ground-
based radio observations, as well as with soft and hard X-ray data, CME height-
time and density data, solar images, and in-situ solar wind plasma and particle
data. These various observations will be analyzed, within the context of
appropriate physical models, to achieve a quantitative understanding of the
interrelation of these solar transient phenomena and their relevance to space
weather. These comprehensive analyses will advance the knowledge needed to track
CMEs and solar energetic particle events to improve space weather predictions,
as well as to quantify the characteristics and dynamics of these solar
transients over the 11-year sunspot cycle.

Contributing to broader impacts, the PI will establish and maintain a web-based
public database of observed type II/IV radio events. He will also analyze
individual type II events as these data are received. The results of these
preliminary analyses will be e-mailed to other researchers and space weather
forecasters. In addition to predicting the velocity profiles and Earth arrival
times of CMEs, the PI's analyses will also help correlate particular solar
events with space weather events. The PI will continue his participation in
interdisciplinary conferences and workshops [e.g., SHINE, International Solar
Cycle Studies (ISCS), and the Elmau/ISSI CME Workshops] and he will maintain and
strengthen his collaboration with the theory group at the University of Sydney,
including their Ph.D. students.