* 0417624
* Irregular Firing in Dopaminergic Neurons and Related Problems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Georgi Medvedev, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 07/31/2008
* USD 269,113.00

Understanding mechanisms for generating different firing patterns in neurons and
transitions between them is fundamental for understanding how the nervous system
processes information. After a classical series of papers by Hodgkin and Huxley,
nonlinear differential equations became the main framework for modeling
electrical activity in neural cells. Today the language and techniques of the
applied dynamical systems theory are an indispensable part of understanding
computational biology. One of the most important concepts of the dynamical
systems theory is that of stability. Historically, the development of the theory
of DS was motivated by physical problems, in particular, by problems in
mechanics and electronics. In this context, it was natural to study stable
solutions (i.e., those that persist under small perturbations), because such
solutions are expected to be physically observable. On the system level, this
led to study of structurally stable systems, i.e. systems whose solutions
preserve their qualitative properties under small variations of parameters. A
phenomenon of loss of structural stability is called a bifurcation. From a
physical point of view, systems near a bifurcation are rare. The situation is
different in modeling biological systems. A distinctive feature of biological
models is that they are often close to a bifurcation. In particular, many known
models of neural cells reside near a bifurcation. The proximity to a bifurcation
creates a source of variability in neuronal models and has a significant impact
on the firing patterns that they produce. Near a bifurcation systems acquire
greater flexibility in generating dynamical patterns varying in form and
frequency. Transient changes in the frequency of oscillations in certain cells
are known to affect the rates of neurotransmitter release and hormone secretion,
as well as other important physiological and cognitive processes. Therefore,
understanding the mechanisms for control and variability of different modes of
firing is essential for determining how neural cells function. The goal of the
present research is to investigate the implications of the proximity to a
bifurcation in the models of Hodgkin-Huxley type with and without noise. For
this, the PI uses the techniques of the theory of nonlinear differential
equations and the theory of random processes. The theory to be developed in the
course of this research will be applied to study the mechanisms for generating
firing patterns in concrete biophysical systems. The latter include (but are not
limited to) dopaminergic neurons in the mammalian midbrain, pancreatic beta-
cells, and pyramidal cells in agranular neocortex. The broader scientific
impacts of this research are twofold: first, it enhances understanding of
complex biological phenomena through the use of advanced mathematical
techniques; second, it identifies new mathematical problems motivated by
biology. The results of the present project are expected to generate interest in
a broad community of researchers working in nonlinear science and to stimulate
new research in nonlinear dynamics. This research reflects the goal of the
Department of Mathematics in the PI's home institution to develop stronger links
to the new Drexel College of Medicine. The PI will train a graduate student and
engage him/her into research relevant to this project. Based in part on the
results of this research, the PI will develop and teach a course 'Computational
Neuroscience' at Drexel University. Appropriate problems drawn from this
research will be integrated in the courses on differential equations, which the
PI teaches for graduate and undergraduate students at Drexel University.