* 0417972
* Collaborative Research:  CMG: Multi-scaling Random Fields and Pollution Migration
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* David Benson, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rong Chen
* 07/31/2005
* USD 372,714.00

The properties of groundwater aquifers are uncertain at almost
all&lt;br/&gt;physical locations. Only a small fraction of an aquifer can be
sampled&lt;br/&gt;and tested. Some statistical model must be chosen and
implemented that&lt;br/&gt;describes the distribution and correlation structure
of the parameters&lt;br/&gt;(primarily the hydraulic conductivity) that control
the motion of&lt;br/&gt;groundwater and dissolved pollutants. Based on the
statistical model,&lt;br/&gt;replicas of the aquifers are constructed to make
predictions of flow and&lt;br/&gt;transport. These replicas must contain the
structures that may be&lt;br/&gt;present across all scales of interest. The
replicas should honor the&lt;br/&gt;real data where measured (including a
possibly non-Gaussian&lt;br/&gt;distribution), and should represent correlation
that might be restricted&lt;br/&gt;to very narrow directional windows; for
example, discrete fracture set&lt;br/&gt;orientations. The investigators are
working on one model that can honor&lt;br/&gt;the data from many well-studied
aquifers (granular and/or fractured). &lt;br/&gt;The model uses operator-
fractional noise and motions, since the scaling,&lt;br/&gt;or fractal,
properties of aquifers vary with direction. The operator&lt;br/&gt;fractional
motions are based on the investigators' recent definitions of&lt;br/&gt;3-D
fractional integro-differentiation. The operator-fractional
motions&lt;br/&gt;have what is known in the earth sciences as "generalized
scale&lt;br/&gt;invariance" in which the index of scaling depends on direction.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators are rigorously defining the mathematical properties
of&lt;br/&gt;these motions and their numerical implementations. They are
also&lt;br/&gt;studying the correspondence between transport through
the&lt;br/&gt;operator-fractional aquifer replicas and simple analytic
descriptions of&lt;br/&gt;transport embodied in fractional-order transport
equations and&lt;br/&gt;generalized continuous time random walks.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The spreading of pollution in an aquifer is controlled by
sediment&lt;br/&gt;structures that are present across a huge range of scales.
Tiny bits of&lt;br/&gt;silt and clay may retain pollutants for years, while
buried (remnant)&lt;br/&gt;gravelly stream channels might move some pollutants
for miles in a short&lt;br/&gt;time. To make realistic predictions of drinking
water vulnerability or&lt;br/&gt;eventual cleanup, it is important to construct
models of aquifers that&lt;br/&gt;have this kind of multi-scale structure. In
another setting more&lt;br/&gt;germane to nuclear waste storage, the
simultaneous presence of small and&lt;br/&gt;large fractures will account for
both the slow and fast pathways for the&lt;br/&gt;spreading of radioactivity
away from future repositories. &lt;br/&gt;Representative models of these
aquifers must be "buildable" and&lt;br/&gt;testable, so the investigators are
first pouring a concrete mathematical&lt;br/&gt;footing. While the work deals
primarily with mathematics and hydrology,&lt;br/&gt;the results also contribute
to applied studies in physics, fluid&lt;br/&gt;dynamics, electrical engineering,
and finance. The financial&lt;br/&gt;applications are revealed when looking at a
graph of a stock price:&lt;br/&gt;there are minute-to-minute fluctuations that
are similar to year-to-year&lt;br/&gt;gains and losses. Some stocks are tightly
coupled; others are not. Not&lt;br/&gt;all markets respond at the same rate, nor
are the magnitudes of the&lt;br/&gt;changes easily characterized. Finally,
several graduate students and a&lt;br/&gt;post-doctoral researcher are also
supported by the grant. Each of them&lt;br/&gt;is receiving extensive training
in both physical sciences and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. This cross-training
engenders more fruitful cooperation&lt;br/&gt;between the theoretical and
applied sciences. &lt;br/&gt;