* 0417094
* Natural Selection and Evolutionary Constraints in an Elevated CO2 Environment
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2007
* USD 243,452.00

Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2) are increasing rapidly and
within 50 years are expected to increase by more than 30%. Previous studies have
shown that increased concentrations of CO2 may affect plant physiology, growth,
and ecological communities. Increased concentrations of CO2 may also affect the
number of seeds plants produce. This research will investigate whether
atmospheric CO2 concentrations alter the relationship between seed production
and various measures of plant growth, development, and anti-herbivore defense.
CO2 dependent changes in the relationships between plant traits and seed
production mean that increased CO2 concentrations may affect patterns of
selection acting on plant traits. In other words, the plant traits that confer
high seed production in today's atmosphere may not be the same traits that
confer high seed production in the near future. Evidence for CO2-dependent
differences in selection will mean that evolution may be an important response
of natural communities to ongoing climate change. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to
examining patterns of selection, the researchers will use genomic technology to
investigate whether the genetic basis of seed production, growth, and anti-
herbivore defense differ depending on the CO2 environment in which plants are
grown. All experimental work will be conducted in an existing NSF-supported
Free-Air CO2 Enrichment experiment located at Cedar Creek Natural History Area
in Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide inter-disciplinary training
opportunities for several undergraduate students, a graduate student, and a
post-doctoral researcher. The undergraduate students will work in both the field
and laboratory and gain experience with basic principles of experimental design
and statistical analyses. The graduate student and post-doctoral researcher will
gain expertise in plant physiology, evolution, and statistical analysis.