* 0417434
* "Quaternary Grassland Forest Dynamics" -- 18th Biennial Meeting of the American Quaternary Association; Lawrence, Kansas; June 26-28, 2004
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Elmer Bettis III, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2005
* USD 9,900.00

This award helps support a conference entitled, "Quaternary Grassland Forest
Dynamics" at the biennial meeting of the American Quaternary Association (AMQUA)
in Lawrence, Kansas on June 26 - 28, 2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the award provides participant support for approximately fifteen (15) graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers to participate in presentations and
discussions that examine the complex interaction among climatic, geologic,
biologic, and human systems in the dynamics of grassland-forest
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the organizer's objectives are: 1)
provide a forum for presentation of new data and approaches for understanding
the biological, geological, paleoclimatological, and cultural aspects of
grassland/forest transitions; 2) bring together a diverse group of researchers
to foster synergistic activities that will benefit both established
investigators as well as students; and 3) encourage interactions that will
promote new projects aimed at collecting data, foster the development of novel
tools for research and analysis, and enable integrative efforts among
researchers and students that are in scientific disciplines that do not often
participate in the same meetings or conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
presentations at the conference will be published by AMQUA in a volume of
abstracts that will be available for purchase by the wider scientific community.