* 0417006
* The Biology of Intruders and Cheating in the Soldier-Producing Aphid, Pemphigus obesinymphae
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Patrick Abbot, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* daniel wiegmann
* 07/31/2008
* USD 240,080.00

The Biology of Intruders And Cheating in the Soldier-producing Aphid, Pemphigus
obesinymphae&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A relatively
small number of species on earth are highly social: they live in cooperative
groups in which only some members reproduce, and others self-sacrificially
assist the reproducing individuals by nurturing offspring, foraging, or defense
and maintenance of the dwelling or nest. The ants, bees, and termites are
familiar examples. In recent years, important discoveries have been made outside
of these well-known groups. Now, the list of highly social organisms includes
such diverse groups as African mole rats, aphids, thrips, snapping shrimp and
even microorganisms. However, we still know very little about the breadth and
diversity of group dynamics in most of these novel social species. Abbot's work
focuses on social aphids, which produce highly aggressive larval soldiers that
protect their mother from attack by predators. The purpose of the proposed study
is to further develop our understanding of the dynamics of sociality in the
soldier-producing aphids, building on promising results from prior work that
revealed unexpected complexities in the societies of these social
insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Abbot will employ highly variable molecular
markers to explore cooperation and conflict in Pemphigus obesinymphae, the only
North American social aphid studied in detail. In previous work, Abbot
established that the social groups in which these aphids occur are invaded and
exploited by intruders from neighboring groups. But prior work left unanswered
fundamental questions about the patterns of conflict in aphid societies. This
work uses microsatellite markers and field experiments to accurately quantify
the pattern of relatedness in P. obesinymphae social groups, the relationship
between relatedness and cheating in natural populations, and the consequences of
cheating for colony productivity. Abbot's study will constitute the most
thorough examination of cheating and conflict in social aphids to date. Results
will advance our understanding of complexity in an important group of social
organisms, and will offer social biologists new perspectives as they assemble
the puzzle of exploitation and altruism across animals and
microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;