* 0417983
* CMG: Improved Seismic Inference via Better Spectrum Estimation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Ronald Graham, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,230.00

CMG RESEARCH: Improved Seismic Inference via Better
SpectrumEstimation&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Much of the inference in
seismology, from normal--mode studies to&lt;br/&gt;analysis of faulting
mechanisms, depends on having reliable estimates of spectra and,
possibly&lt;br/&gt;more important, reliable estimates of their uncertainties.
The collaborative effort between&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and geophysics in this
proposal is being driven by the development and deployment&lt;br/&gt;of high
dynamic range broadband sensors networks in the field of seismology that require
the&lt;br/&gt;development and implementation of sophisticated data analysis
tools to create a better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the earthquake source and
Earth structure.&lt;br/&gt;The spectra of the transient elastic body waves (P
and S waves) provide fundamental&lt;br/&gt;information and constraints on
earthquake source properties and physics. Currently the state-of-
the-&lt;br/&gt;art for the study of the physics of earthquakes is the estimation
of source parameters, usually&lt;br/&gt;estimated from the spectra of the
transient seismic waves.&lt;br/&gt;Spectral analysis has recently undergone a
revolution with the development of&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated techniques in which
the data are multiplied in turn by a set of tapers that are&lt;br/&gt;designed
to maximize resolution and minimize bias. In addition to minimizing the bias
while&lt;br/&gt;maintaining a given resolution, the multi-taper approach allows
an estimate of the statistical&lt;br/&gt;significance of features in the power
spectrum. Developing quadratic inverse theory that utilizes&lt;br/&gt;not only
the spectral estimators, but the time and frequency derivatives of the spectrum,
to&lt;br/&gt;generate a much higher resolution spectra. This project will extend
this theory from a univariate&lt;br/&gt;theory to generalized multivariate
theory. While the applications discussed here are seismic, it is&lt;br/&gt;clear
that there are other geophysical, scientific, and engineering applications that
will benefit&lt;br/&gt;from the proposed studies. Obvious candidates are climate
studies (both paleo and modern), and&lt;br/&gt;space physics.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Advancing discovery and understanding while promoting teaching,
training,&lt;br/&gt;and learning. Broaden participation of underrepresented
groups by participation of minority&lt;br/&gt;students and by presenting project
related web pages in English and Spanish. Broad&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of
results will be accomplished through conference presentations, journal
articles,&lt;br/&gt;and web presentations.