* 0417458
* CRCD/EI: Effective Distance Learning Through Sustained Interactivity and Visual Realism
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Melissa Dark, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan J. Winter
* 08/31/2008
* USD 539,999.00

0417458&lt;br/&gt;Voicu Popescu&lt;br/&gt;Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;"CRCD/EI:
Effective Distance Learning Through Sustained Interactivity and Visual
Realism"&lt;br/&gt;$539,999&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines research
in vision, image processing, robotics, and computer graphics to create a novel
distance learning system that enables instructors and remote learners to feel a
"sense of presence" in the classroom. The project involves researching,
developing, deploying and assessing a distance learning system that extends the
real classroom to accommodate remotely located students in a unique way. The
system's effectiveness comes from conveying a strong sense to both remote and
local participants that the remote participants are actually present in the
classroom. The sense of presence is enabled by: Interactivity -- the system
supports high-bandwidth, low-latency, uninterrupted, and secure communications
between the participants; High-quality graphics -- the system provides
realistic, visual descriptions of the classroom, instructor, students, and of
the lecture materials by combining segmented high-resolution real-time video
with pre-downloaded photorealistic 3D models and presentation materials. The
virtual classroom that hosts the remotely located students is seamlessly
integrated with the real classroom. The real classroom is extended to
accommodate remotely located students. Each remotely located student is acquired
in real-time and integrated in a common virtual 3D classroom that is rendered
and projected continually on a wall of the real classroom. At the local site,
the instructor sees the remotely located students as if they were local students
seated in additional rows at the back of the classroom. The model of the virtual
classroom is photorealistic, with a geometry that allows the instructor to
easily see the remote participants well. At the remote site students participate
in the lecture using a personal computer and a digital video camera with a rapid
interface broadband connection to the Internet. The PIs anticipate that their
system will overcome many of the shortcomings of current distance education
including: inadequate graphical representation of the remote students;
inadequate integration of the virtual classroom; lack of support for individual
remotely located students; lack of support of other educational activities; and
missing or inadequate tools for digital content creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;