* 0417352
* Investment Dynamics with Common and Private Values:  A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Dan Levin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 247,384.00

Investment Dynamics with Common and Private Values: A Theoretical and
Experimental Investigation



Project Abstract

An enduring debate in Economics, with important public policy implications, is
whether markets efficiently aggregate the information that is held by individual
decision makers like investors or corporations, and whether efficient
allocations are the result. For example, do businesses delay profitable
investments in new technologies, because it is more profitable for them to wait,
observe market activity, and learn something about the information of others? If
too many businesses adopt a delay strategy, will the lack of investment wrongly
convince market participants that other businesses view investment as
unprofitable? This research will investigate these sorts of questions, in the
context of a simple investment game. Of central importance are the inferences
investors make about the information of other investors. When one player
invests, others must disentangle the possibility that the player has favorable
information about everyone's investment returns, and the possibility that
investment is favorable only for that player (due to low investment costs).
Investors face a tradeoff between the desire to start earning profits earlier by
investing right away, and the temptation to delay investment in order to learn
from others. The research uses both theoretical and experimental methodologies.
Understanding the economic incentives and psychological motivations may suggest
effective policy tools that encourage more efficient dispersion of information,
thereby allowing markets to be more efficient.