* 0417657
* Collaborative Research: Language Change, Dialect Awareness, and Place Identity in Pittsburgh
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Barbara Johnstone, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2007
* USD 71,204.00

With National Science Foundation support, Professors Barbara Johnstone of
Carnegie Mellon University and Scott F. Kiesling of the University of Pittsburgh
will study the dialect of western Pennsylvania and the roles it plays in local
life. The region is differentiated from some other dialect areas in its close
association of regional identity with what is locally known as "Pittsburghese,"
features of which appear frequently in vernacular dictionaries and on postcards
and t-shirts. The Pittsburgh Speech and Society Project (PSSP) seeks to
understand the relationship between local identity and the path of change in the
dialect by exploring the social conditions under which dialect awareness arises
and spreads, and the linguistic consequences of that awareness. It is
hypothesized that dialect features that Pittsburghers identify with being a
"true" Pittsburgher will pattern differently from those that Pittsburghers do
not use to symbolize local identity. NSF-funding will be used for the third in a
series of sociolinguistic/ethnographic neighborhood studies documenting local
speech, dialect awareness, and place identity in three contrasting Pittsburgh-
area neighborhoods, and for a community-of-practice study involving intensive
participant observation, recording, and playback and perception procedures.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As the first large-scale study of urban speech in the
trans-Appalachian&lt;br/&gt;northeast to focus on pronunciation as well as words
and structures, this&lt;br/&gt;project will make an important contribution to
the study of regional and&lt;br/&gt;social variation in American speech. The
primary theoretical outcome of the&lt;br/&gt;project will be a deeper
understanding of the processes by which awareness&lt;br/&gt;of regional and
social dialects arises and spreads, and of the roles of such&lt;br/&gt;awareness
in language change. Because language is so important to&lt;br/&gt;Pittsburgh's
local identity, local archivists, scholars, designers, and&lt;br/&gt;others have
been recruited in the attempt to legitimize local speech as
a&lt;br/&gt;recognized aspect of local heritage and local cultural
distinctiveness. This&lt;br/&gt;work includes the archiving of interview data
for historic preservation and&lt;br/&gt;scholarship, workshops and lectures for
community organizations, the design&lt;br/&gt;and publication of a website for
the general public, and consultation with&lt;br/&gt;educators and media
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;