* 0417290
* Photodynamics and Maturation of Coral Fluorescent Proteins
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Stephen Remington, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Nara Gavini
* 07/31/2007
* USD 525,000.00

Time resolved crystallographic and kinetic studies will be used to investigate
the unusual photocycle of amFP595, the "kindling fluorescent protein", a GFP-
like chromoprotein isolated from reef organisms. The reversible light-induced
transition from the dark nonfluorescent state to the fluorescent state and its
subsequent slow relaxation in the dark will be analyzed at very high resolution
using optical pumping and synchrotron radiation in various temperature regimes.
The research will determine the nature of the structural transitions of the
chromophore within the protein matrix, the nature of intermediate states and
determine how the protein matrix controls both the ground state conformation and
the excited state decay pathways of the chromophore. Mutagenesis combined with
Arrhenius plot analysis will be used to study the energetic contributions of
selected side chains to conformational stability, dark relaxation rates and
reversibility of the fluorescence transition. These studies will be combined
with limited crystallographic analysis and mutagenesis of two very closely
related fluorescent proteins, blue fluorescent amFP486 and yellow fluorescent
zFP538, in order to elucidate the structural basis for the differences in
maturation behavior. It is postulated that the same chemical intermediates are
formed in each protein, but suffer different final fates, due to the subtle
effects of a small number of protein side chains close to the chromophore. While
the research is directly relevant to the photodynamic processes involved in
human vision, a potential practical outcome of the project is the development of
a transient fluorescent tag for use in studies of material transport within
living cells.

Broader Impacts: The results of the proposed studies are expected to have broad
impact as they will be relevant to the photophysics of many biological
molecules, such as those involved in vision and photosynthesis. The results may
also provide insight into the transient light/dark switching observed for small
molecule and protein fluorophores used by many researchers. In the long term,
the understanding gained from this work can be used to improve the properties of
fluorescent proteins for use as tools for the study of the development and
dynamic behavior of living creatures on both the subcellular and whole organism
levels. The methodology will include a great variety of techniques drawn from
physical chemistry and molecular biology and will thus provide excellent
multidisciplinary training for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
Due to their visual appeal, ease of production and isolation combined with
exceptional physical stability, fluorescent proteins form an outstanding
teaching resource for laboratory courses at the high school and university
levels.