* 0417447
* Developing a Pilot Collection of Digital Native Science Resources for DLESE
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Dawn Adams, Tapestry Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 05/31/2005
* USD 85,523.00

This project involves rapid development of a small pilot collection of 50 to 100
Native Science resources that will serve as a prototype for culturally-competent
cross-cultural science digital library collections. "Cultural competence is
defined as the ability to relate and communicate effectively when individuals
involved in the interaction do not share the same culture, ethnicity, language
or other salient variables" (GEO 2000). So cultural competence is an essential
criterion of the successful multi- or cross-cultural collection. A culturally
competent resource or collection should present accurate, non-stereotypical, and
non-judgmental views of the ideas, objects, and other aspects of the culture(s)
it represents; should communicate, whenever possible, in the language(s) of the
culture(s) it represents; and should communicate, whenever possible, within the
cultural paradigms of learning and knowing of the culture(s) it represents.

This collection will serve the 2.07 million Native Americans residing within the
continental United States and Alaska, will provide an important science
education resource for Native American students at all levels, and will help
recruit Native Americans into SMET careers. It will stimulate additional
Indigenous collections of science resources, as well as collections competent in
other non-Western cultures, and will bring Native Americans and other members of
underrepresented groups into the Digital Library community as contributors. The
pilot collection will also serve the general American public and engage learners
who are not usually interested in science but are interested in Native American
culture. The collection will serve DLESE by providing a concrete example of "a
culturally diverse collection" for policy development, and a template for the
development of more such collections The collection will serve the American
scientific reseach community and the public that relies on it, by diversifying
the ways that research scientists, and Americans in general, think about science
and the natural world itself.