* 0417770
* A Multiprocessor Computing System for Nanoscale Science and Engineering Research in Chemical Engineering
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2005
* USD 55,600.00

Monson, Peter A., et al U of Massachusetts - Amherst

"A Multiprocessor Computing System for Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Research in Chemical Engineering."

This grant provides funding for the purchase of a 64-processor parallel computer
system for modeling research in nanoscale science and engineering in the
Chemical Engineering Department at the University of Massachusetts. This
computing facility will allow the study of large model systems across multiple
length and time scales, as well as systematic parametric analyses using a range
of modeling techniques including molecular computer simulation and quantum
chemistry. The equipment will serve the computation needs of eight research
projects in the groups of five faculty. Peter Monson's group will use the new
facilities for research projects on fluids confined in nanoporous materials,
solid-fluid phase equilibrium and modeling the growth of nanoporous materials.
Dimitrios Maroudas' group will use the equipment for their research on
multiscale modeling of growth, processing and reliability of electronic
materials. Phillip Westmoreland's group will use the facilities for their work
in applying computational quantum chemistry in reaction engineering. In addition
adjunct professor Scott Auerbach's group will use the facilities for his work on
modeling adsorption and reaction in zeolite molecular sieves. Jeffery Davies's
group will use the facilities for his work on modeling transport in free surface
flows with application in microfluidics.

Broader Impact: A predominant theme among the research projects to be supported
by the new computing facilities is fundamental nanoscale science and engineering
research in areas where there is a close connection with practical application.
As an example, the development of new types of porous materials with nanoscale
properties tailored for specific applications is a major area of research
throughout the world. Understanding of how the collective behavior of adsorbed
molecules is influenced by the nanostructure of the porous material can
contribute significantly in this effort. The PIs are approaching the point where
adsorption experiments can be accompanied by a much more sophisticated
understanding of the structure at small length scales. Peter Monson's project in
this area could provide a foundation for new approaches to the characterization
of porous materials. The range of impact extends across the range of
applications of porous materials from traditional areas such as adsorption and
catalysis to emerging nanotechnology applications which exploit details of the
small scale structure.

Research in the department has consistently had a strong educational component
through the involvement of graduate students, postdoctoral scholars and
undergraduates. The equipment requested will be used by 15 graduate students, 8
postdoctoral researchers as well as undergraduates engaged in independent study
projects. The junior researchers involved will learn important techniques in
parallel computation for engineering applications. The faculty involved have an
established record of bringing nanoscale science and engineering modeling into
the Chemical Engineering curriculum and these activities will be supported by
the new facilities.

