* 0417431
* CMG Research: Multi-scale Flow and Transport Modeling of Large-vug Cretaceous Carbonates
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Todd Arbogast, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 676,572.00

Some carbonate strata contain vugs or cavities about the size of a
few&lt;br/&gt;centimeters. This project unites the expertise of geologists, geo-
engineers,&lt;br/&gt;and mathematicians to study experimentally and
computationally the flow and&lt;br/&gt;transport of solutes in vuggy rocks over
distances of 0.1 to 100 meters.&lt;br/&gt;Experimental studies of the Pipe Creek
Reef outcrop in Central Texas will be&lt;br/&gt;made: (1) in the laboratory on
samples at the sub 10-20 cm scale to determine&lt;br/&gt;rock and vug properties
and micro-scale tracer transport characteristics; (2)&lt;br/&gt;in the field
over 1-10 m scales to determine effective permeabilities and&lt;br/&gt;tracer
injection response; and (3) in the field using ground penetrating
radar&lt;br/&gt;to map the large scale geology over 1-100 m scales. The data
will be used to&lt;br/&gt;construct a micro-scale model of the transport process
at the detailed sub-cm&lt;br/&gt;scale and a macro-scale model to represent the
system, including its&lt;br/&gt;topological vug interconnectivity, time-scales,
and macro-dispersion on scales&lt;br/&gt;of at least 1-100 m. Efficient and
accurate computational implementation will&lt;br/&gt;allow testing and
verification. Statistical analysis will quantify uncertainty&lt;br/&gt;in the
data for use at full field scales. The project is expected to result
in&lt;br/&gt;substantially improved modeling of flow and transport in vuggy
media over the&lt;br/&gt;macro-scale, with a solid empirical basis for the
selection of the effective&lt;br/&gt;parameters in the macro-scale model, and
the handling of parameter uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;It should illuminate modeling
of similar porous media, such as karsts and&lt;br/&gt;fractured systems, and,
more generally, related multi-scale systems. The&lt;br/&gt;project will impact
three Ph.D. students and enhance two outreaches to the&lt;br/&gt;industrial
community, the the Reservoir Characterization Research
Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;(RCRL) and the Center for Subsurface Modeling (CSM).
Finally, since carbonate&lt;br/&gt;rocks comprise many of the world's aquifers
and oil reservoirs, society will&lt;br/&gt;benefit as progress allows more
effective protection of groundwater supplies&lt;br/&gt;and production of
petroleum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some carbonate rock strata contain cavities,
called vugs, about the size of a&lt;br/&gt;few centimeters. Fluid can flow much
more easily in these vugs than within the&lt;br/&gt;rock itself (i.e., between
the rock grains). The transport of chemical&lt;br/&gt;species, such as
groundwater contaminants, is strongly influenced by the nature&lt;br/&gt;of
these vugs. Within an inter-connected vug path, the contaminant can
flow&lt;br/&gt;quite rapidly, but it must slow considerably when it re-enters
the rock.&lt;br/&gt;However, little is currently known about how fluid flows in
such vuggy rocks&lt;br/&gt;over long distances. This project unites the
expertise of geologists,&lt;br/&gt;geo-engineers, and mathematicians to address
the problem. Experimental studies&lt;br/&gt;will be made to determine the
behavior of fluid flow in small vugs over 10-20&lt;br/&gt;centimeters, and
within vug channels up to 10 meters long. Ground penetrating&lt;br/&gt;radar
will be used to map the large scale geology over 1-100 meter
scales.&lt;br/&gt;Using this data, two models, or computer simulation codes,
will be constructed.&lt;br/&gt;The first model will describe the flow at the
detailed sub-cm scale. The&lt;br/&gt;second will describe the flow only in an
average sense, so that it can be used&lt;br/&gt;meaningfully at the field scale
of an entire aquifer or petroleum reservoir.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, statistical
analysis will allow for the quantification of uncertainty&lt;br/&gt;in the data.
The project is expected to result in substantially improved&lt;br/&gt;modeling
of flow and transport in vuggy media over large scales. The
project&lt;br/&gt;will impact the education of three Ph.D. students, who will be
trained in an&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary environment. Since carbonate rocks
comprise many of the&lt;br/&gt;world's aquifers and oil reservoirs, society will
benefit indirectly.&lt;br/&gt;Subsurface simulation is an important engineering
tool. Groundwater&lt;br/&gt;contamination can be remediated or prevented through
the engineering design of&lt;br/&gt;valid, predictable, and cost effective
remediation or containment strategies.&lt;br/&gt;Engineering analysis based on
simulation studies is also used to quantify,&lt;br/&gt;manage, and reduce risks
related to oil reservoir management.