* 0417778
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Donald Bennett, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 09/30/2008
* USD 168,651.00

Intellectual Merit: The university offers degree programs in computer science,
engineering, engineering technology, and mathematics. These disciplines each
have challenging programs of study. Each department has been successful at
producing well-educated graduates, and placement trends are exceptional.
However, each department desires to increase the number of students entering
their programs and retain those students until they have earned their respective
degrees. Scholarship support is particularly lacking for upper level BS students
who find themselves in financial hardship in finishing their programs of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM departments have noted a high percentage of
upper-level students who enroll in fulltime study, yet work a significant number
of hours at off-campus employment in order to pay for their education. This
financial pressure leads to more time away from study, which often causes poor
academic performance, subsequently leading to frustration, discouragement, and
often the abandonment of the student's academic
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues a scholarship program for
deserving students with demonstrated financial need. Faculty "Road Scholar"
teams visit regional high schools and community colleges in order to publicize
MSU's CSEMS degree programs. The funds here provide scholarships for students
who are selected by the project directors. Recipients benefit from a
comprehensive infrastructure of support programs: professional preparatory
seminars and placement services offered through the MSU Office of Career
Services; aptitude surveys, interest assessments, and career advice from the MSU
Counseling and Testing Center; support from the Office of African-American
Student Services; and a unique opportunity for international technical study
through the Office of International Programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This project represents an enhancement of a successful project that has
been in place during the previous four years. The existing CSEMS project has
focused an unparalleled level of attention on the high-tech disciplines on the
MSU campus. Students have participated in professional preparatory workshops,
mentoring programs, and specialized tutoring when needed. They have been
introduced to professionals from industry and the international engineering
community at a personal level. Guest speakers have included the Deputy Director
of NASA-Marshall Space Flight Center and the Director for Nuclear Safety from
the International Atomic Energy Agency. Both these agencies, as well as local
industries, have promised continuing support for students internships and
professional guidance. These scientists and engineers invigorate the students,
motivate them to persist in their studies, and encourage their commitment to
their disciplines. The impact on the recipient's quality of life, both
intellectually and economically, will be felt for generations and will elevate
career aspirations in this geographic region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
continues to give special consideration to populations underrepresented in the
STEM disciplines, and the economic conditions in west Kentucky make this program
especially attractive to regional students. The resulting increase in the number
of graduates with technical degrees promotes a well-educated, technically-
prepared, culturally aware, and diverse workforce that supports state efforts to
boost economic development. Results of the program will be reported at state and
national meetings on STEM education, and to state agencies charged with tracking
educational and economic indicators in the technology sector.