* 0417940
* Collaborative Research : Differing Interpretations of Young Children's Geometric Skills
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Janellen Huttenlocher, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 07/31/2009
* USD 149,900.00

Research over the past two decades has revealed that a wide variety of animal
species, including fish, birds, non-human mammals and humans, share a powerful
sensitivity to the geometric properties of enclosing spaces (e.g., the relative
length of walls defining enclosures). They use such information to reestablish
spatial orientation after being disoriented (Cheng, 1986; Hermer &amp; Spelke,
1996; for a review, see Cheng &amp; Newcombe, in press). Further, it has been
suggested that such geometric processing constitutes a specialized cognitive
module that is normally impenetrable to nongeometric information (Cheng, 1986;
Hermer &amp; Spelke, 1996), with combination of information only made possible
by use of language (Spelke &amp; Hermer, 1996). These findings on geometric
processing and its purported modularity have been exciting to a wide audience of
researchers focused on cognitive architecture, comparative cognition, cognitive
development, and the role of language in behavior. They are relevant to the
hotly-debated issues concerning the extent to which knowledge is innate or
environmentally plastic. Parents, educators and policy makers have a stake in
accurate understanding of the nature of development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vital
issues concerning these proposals remain unsettled, however. This research will
address controversy in two areas. First, the nature of geometric sensitivity is
not yet clear. We will address two questions: how geometric coding is related to
representations of viewer position, and whether information about the lengths of
the sides of a space is retained in an absolute way (as some mental equivalent
of a measured distance) or in a relative fashion (as some lengths being simply
longer or shorter than others). Second, there is doubt about the claim that
geometric information is encapsulated and the associated idea that landmarks are
not integrated with geometric information unless language is used to link
cognitive modules. An alternative account holds that geometric and featural
information are normally integrated in a way that depends on the relative
usefulness of various kinds of information in particular situations. This
research project will contrast these accounts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;