* 0417714
* Time-Resolved Diffraction Studies of Aqueous Cation Exchange and Hydrothermal Synthesis of Metal Oxide Clay Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jeffrey Post, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2008
* USD 334,930.00

Manganese oxide minerals exhibit a variety of crystal structures with layer and
tunnel topologies that offer enhanced capabilities for ion exchange with ambient
water systems. These phases are particularly significant in controlling soil
geochemistry for several reasons: They occur abundantly as nanocrystalline
coatings on soil and sediment particles in surficial environments. The fine
grain sizes of these phases are associated with extremely high surface areas,
which enhance the accessibility of the mineral exchange sites. In addition,
tetravalent Mn is readily reduced to the trivalent and divalent states, and
phyllomanganates and tectomanganates actively engage in oxidation-reduction
reactions. As a result, Mn oxides serve as major traps for anions and cations
(including hydrogen), and they influence groundwater chemistry far out of
proportion to their concentrations in natural environments.&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators of this proposal have studied dehydration and cation exchange
processes in metal oxyhydroxides using novel high-resolution crystallographic
techniques, and they hope to expand on these studies over the next three years.
Their work to date has provided solutions to new Mn oxide structures, and the
authors have used time-resolved synchrotron X-ray powder diffraction to monitor
the structural changes that accompany transformation to high-temperature
dehydrated states. In addition, they have documented the continuous atomic
displacements that occur during the substitution of one cation for another as
aqueous exchange reactions proceed.&lt;br/&gt;In order to model the interactions
of Mn oxides with natural fluids more accurately, they will perform a series of
competitive experiments involving multiple dissolved cationic species. The
P.I.'s also will examine the ability of Mn oxides to incorporate organic
molecules from aqueous solutions, and they hope to document the disposition of
these molecules in Mn oxide organoclays for the first time. In addition, the
investigators will perform hydrothermal synthesis experiments involving Mn, Ti,
and Fe oxides using time-resolved XRD. Whereas a conventional static analysis of
final run products can easily overlook transient intermediate phases, the P.I.'s
already have captured transitional structures not seen before during the
hydrothermal reaction of Mn oxide polymorphs from layer to tunnel
topologies.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed research will elucidate the
capacity of Mn oxide layer and tunnel structures to remove undesirable metals
from contaminated groundwaters.&lt;br/&gt;The exploration of hydrothermal
precipitation of Mn and other metal oxides in aqueous systems may offer new
routes to materials synthesis and a deeper understanding of crystallization
processes in the natural environment. These benefits will complement the
vigorous outreach efforts of the investigators, who are actively involved in
museum programs at their respective institutions.&lt;br/&gt;