* 0417859
* Issues in Identification and Estimation of Discrete Choice Panel Data Models and Discrete Time Duration Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Bo Honore, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 167,765.00

There are cases in econometrics when the parameters of a model may not be easily
identified making estimation and inference very difficult. This research will
study and develop techniques for a number of related statistical and economic
models that can be used to empirically investigate how economic agents (such as
individual or firms) behave over time. These models have been used in many areas
of economics: in labor economics to study the duration of employment or
unemployment; in public economics to study participation in welfare programs; in
marketing to study the long run effects of advertising; and in health economics
to study differences in health status across demographic groups. These are all
important questions, and to answer them it is important to have appropriate
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;The main contribution of this project will be to
investigate exactly what features of these models can be estimated, and how to
estimate them. Even though it is often not possible to exactly estimate the
parameters of interest, even if one had an infinite number of observations, it
is in practice often possible to precisely find bounds for the parameters of
such models. This research will provide techniques to provide such bounds of the
parameters of interest. By providing methods to develop the bounds of
parameters, the PI provides a way to estimate models that hitherto had been
inestimable in a wide range of fields in economics.&lt;br/&gt;Although the main
contributions of the research will be methodological, the project will also
include applications of the methods that are developed. This research will be
joint with more applied economists who are interested in the dynamics of
unemployment and in health economics and thus provide ready applications of the
theory developed in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;