* 0417521
* CMG: Mathematical Modeling of the Dynamics of Multi-scale Phenomena During Folding and Fracturing of Sedimentary Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2011
* Rafe Mazzeo, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 1,210,019.00

In this project, supported by the Collaborations in Mathematical Geosciences
Program (CMG), the investigators are: 1) characterizing the geometric shapes of
km-scale folded sedimentary strata using Airborne Laser Swath Mapping (ALSM)
data and the principles of differential geometry; 2) investigating the dynamics
of the folding process using continuum mechanics and Finite Element Methods
(FEM); and 3) studying the physical interactions between km-scale folds and
m-scale fractures within them using fracture and damage mechanics. Their
underlying hypothesis is that the 3D shape of folded strata adequately
constrains the internal deformation such that the orientation and spatial
density of m-scale fractures can be predicted using these shapes. The study was
motivated by the unprecedented opportunity to characterize fold shapes with
decimeter precision using ALSM data and high resolution digital photography
acquired by the NSF-sponsored National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping
(NCALM), operated jointly by the University of Florida and the University of
California. The folds selected for this study are Sheep Mountain Anticline,
Wyoming, and Raplee Ridge Monocline, Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
addresses three CMG theme areas: 1) mathematical modeling of large, complex
geosystems; 2) analyzing large geoscience data sets; and 3) modeling geosystems
with a broad range of interacting scales. The team of principal investigators
includes a geoscientist with expertise in structural geology, a mathematician
with expertise in differential geometry, and a civil engineer with expertise in
computational mechanics. The broader impacts of this investigation stem from the
fact that folds are common traps for subsurface fluids, and fractures in
hydrocarbon reservoirs and groundwater aquifers are known to be conduits for
fluid flow. In the environmental arena folds are being evaluated as potential
reservoirs for excess CO2 storage. Furthermore, active faults commonly are
associated with folds, so the mitigation of earthquake hazards requires a better
understanding of the folding process. The intellectual merits of this
investigation include the facts that: 1) applications of differential geometry
to geological problems are rare, yet have great promise; 2) strain localization
by fracturing during folding is ripe for a new approach heralded by recent
advances in computational mechanics; 3) the research involves innovative
applications of new technology (ALSM) that promise unprecedented data quantities
and precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;