* 0417839
* Space Weather: Advancement and Validation of Real-Time Assimilative Mapping of Ionospheric Electrodynamics (AMIE) for Space Weather Applications
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Aaron Ridley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* kile baker
* 07/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

A realistic timely knowledge of the high latitude ionospheric electric potential
pattern and auroral configuration is important for both research and operational
space weather needs. This project will advance the state of the art in
specification and prediction of the ionospheric electrodynamics. Specifically, a
new, time-dependent, empirical model of the high latitude electric potential
will be developed. Individual electric potential patterns will be derived using
the Assimilative Mapping of Ionospheric Electrodynamics (AMIE) technique. Since
1997, over 5 million AMIE inversions which have been performed and these
inversions will form the core of the database. The primary data sets that have
been used and will be used are measurements of the variations in the magnetic
field at the earth's surface. Additional data sources will include incoherent
scatter radar data from the Sondrestrom and Millstone Hill radars and electron
density data derived from ionospheric sounders. A new feature of the modeling
will be the inclusion of all-sky white light images into real-time AMIE. This
will dramatically help the real-time specification of the auroral location,
extent, and strength. In addition, it will allow a better specification of the
electric potential through the improvement in the conductance. The AMIE
technique will be improved by incorporating adaptive mesh refinement (AMR). The
AMR will be controlled by the spacing of the polar geophysical data, such that
in regions in which there are multiple data sources, AMIE will resolve features
to the appropriate scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The empirical model will include
the effect of saturation of the polar cap potential drop. No current empirical
model of the potential takes the saturation effect, which occurs when the solar
wind driver is exceptionally strong, into account, and they therefore predict
unrealistically large polar cap potential drops during such periods. In order to
validate the empirical model, an automated system in which real-time AMIE
patterns are continuously compared to DMSP particle precipitation and electric
potential data will be developed. The real-time AMIE results will then be
compared with the empirical model. The results will be posted on a web site for
public inspection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has an
educational/outreach and diversity impact. A high school science teacher from a
predominantly minority region of Detroit will take part in project, and an
automated e-mail system will be set up whereby subscribers will be notified when
it is likely that aurora may be viewed that particular night. Teachers in the
Detroit area will use this tool to help students learn more about the near-Earth
space environment.