* 0417129
* Patterning and Morphogenesis of the Drosophila Egg
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Celeste Berg, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 06/30/2007
* USD 450,000.00

NSF 0417129 Berg, Celeste A.&lt;br/&gt;B. Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;How do cell-
cell interactions regulate cell shapes and movements during
development?&lt;br/&gt;Oogenesis in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster is an
excellent model system for answering this&lt;br/&gt;question. In the fruit fly
ovary, follicle cells surround the oocyte in a single-layer sheet; signaling
from&lt;br/&gt;the oocyte induces a subset of follicle cells to change their
shape and position and form two tubes. These&lt;br/&gt;cells secrete eggshell
proteins into the tube lumens to produce the dorso-lateral respiratory
appendages of&lt;br/&gt;the eggshell. Interactions between cells coordinate this
morphogenetic process.&lt;br/&gt;Two cell types make each tube: cells expressing
the transcription factor Broad form the roof and&lt;br/&gt;sides of each tube,
while cells expressing the rhomboid-lacZ reporter gene make the floor (Dorman et
al.&lt;br/&gt;2004). Evidence suggests that a "boundary" exists between the
roof- and floor-forming cells since they 1)&lt;br/&gt;express different cell-
fate and adhesion markers, 2) exhibit distinct behaviors, 3) never intermingle,
and&lt;br/&gt;4) coordinate their movements, even in patterning and
morphogenesis mutants (James et al. 2002; James&lt;br/&gt;and Berg 2003; Dorman
et al. 2004; Ward and Berg, unpub.). The boundary hypothesis predicts that
an&lt;br/&gt;organizing center facilitates communication between the sub-domains
of the dorsal-appendage primordia.&lt;br/&gt;Unlike previously described
boundaries (reviewed by Irvine and Rauskolb 2001), this
proposal&lt;br/&gt;argues that the boundary between the roof- and floor-forming
cells is important for morphogenesis and&lt;br/&gt;that signaling across this
border coordinates the movement of these two cell types. Aim one
proposes&lt;br/&gt;experiments to test this hypothesis by examining the behavior
of cell clones that are misplaced in the&lt;br/&gt;epithelium. Aim two
investigates the signaling center by disrupting candidate molecules that are
induced&lt;br/&gt;by the initial patterning processes and that likely coordinate
the activity of the roof and floor cells.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
proposed studies will provide insight into events that produce cell
shapechanges&lt;br/&gt;and movements within an epithelial tube (e.g.,
neurulation or kidney development). Boundaries&lt;br/&gt;regulate the growth and
patterning of many insect and vertebrate tissues (reviewed by Blair
1995;&lt;br/&gt;Dahmann and Basler 1999; Irvine and Rauskolb 2001). This
proposal extends the boundary hypothesis to&lt;br/&gt;encompass the regulation
of cell shape-changes and movements, thus providing a new paradigm
for&lt;br/&gt;examining disparate morphogenetic processes.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This proposal addresses fundamental, unsolved aspects of biology: How is
cell&lt;br/&gt;fate translated into specific behaviors? How do cells coordinate
their activities? How is the fidelity of a&lt;br/&gt;morphogenetic process
maintained to ensure production of functional structures? The proposed
studies&lt;br/&gt;evaluate the link between patterning and morphogenesis,
provide insight into aberrations that contribute&lt;br/&gt;to birth defects and
illuminate related processes, such as tumor growth and metastasis.&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator trains undergraduates and graduate students at a large, diverse
state university&lt;br/&gt;and has developed an outreach program to bring
minority high-school students into the lab. She has used&lt;br/&gt;the materials
and tools associated with this project to develop a genetics laboratory-course
required of all&lt;br/&gt;UW biology majors (670-800 students each year). This
project will introduce students to the critical&lt;br/&gt;thinking and
scientific methods that are used to understand developmental mechanisms and will
expose&lt;br/&gt;these students to cell biological and genetic approaches in a
highly tractable model organism.