* 0417909
* Collaborative Research:  CMG: Gridded Analyses of Large Multi-Scale Climate Data Sets with Ensemble Representation of Uncertainty
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Alexey Kaplan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2009
* USD 225,043.00

Understanding past climate variability and predicting future climate changes
requires long records of observed climate fields. However, observations from the
past are typically noisy and irregularly sampled in time and space, with large
spatial gaps. Improved representations of the uncertainty in analyzed fields
would be extremely useful in climatological research. To help meet this need,
this project will pursue research into a systematic and robust method of
producing an analyzed field from gappy climate data. The approach to be taken is
to attempt to fuse two computationally efficient approaches that address
variability at different scales. The first of the two methods was developed in
climate research and uses a low-rank approximation to the system error
covariance matrix. The method reconstructs mainly large-scale features of a
climate field and hence misses most of small-scale variability. The second
approach stems from Bayesian estimation in geostatistics that combines the
strength of a globally estimated covariance with nonstationary local estimates;
it represents the uncertainty not only due to the observational noise and
sampling deficiencies, but also uncertainty due to unknown covariance
relationships. The methods have been developed independently and their coupling
for a practical climatological application or representing uncertainty in a
historical analysis by ensemble has yet to be accomplished. To make this
approach work for realistic climate problems requires the theoretical research
proposed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the result of the project will the
development of an efficient numerical algorithm suitable for very large,
disparate, irregularly spaced climatological data sets that a) reconstructs
variability on different scales, b) produces an average analysis field over a
regular spatio-temporal grid and, c) yields a method to produce a collection of
equally likely analysis fields (an ensemble) which reflects the uncertainty in
the average analysis field. The method will then be applied to data sets of
marine and land climate important to current climatological research. The
results will also provide a better technique for creating the initial conditions
for climate simulation ensembles, permitting better estimation of uncertainty in
predictions of climate variation. Software implementing the new approach and the
climate data sets derived from it will be made publicly available.