* 0417181
* CAREER: Structural Studies of a Highly Conserved Dynein Light Chain and its Role in Dynein Assembly and Cargo Recruitment
* BIO,MCB
* 12/31/2003,06/30/2009
* Elisar Barbar, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2009
* USD 773,888.00

Cytoplasmic dynein is a motor protein complex that is essential in a number of
processes including chromosome segregation during mitosis, movement of vesicular
cargo, positioning of intracellular organelles, and the establishment of cell
polarity in oocyte development. This project focuses on characterizing the role
of dynein light chain LC8 from Drosophila in dynein assembly and cargo
recognition. LC8 is highly conserved, with 94% sequence identity between
Drosophila and human. The dynein intermediate chain IC74 mediates the
interaction between the heavy and light chains, and the assembly of LC8 and IC74
is likely to be a key step in formation of a functional complex. To elucidate
the basis for LC8/IC74 recognition, the structure of the complex will be
determined using NMR spectroscopy. The swallow protein, Swa, an example of
cargo, is an RNA binding protein, which is essential in establishing cell
polarity in developing oocytes. The interaction of Swa with LC8 has been
demonstrated in Drosophila. Identification of binding sites in this interaction
will be determined by limited proteolysis and cross-linking studies.

Broader Impact: Structural studies of LC8 and its interactions with IC74 and Swa
will be a significant contribution to understanding both the assembly of the
dynein motor complex and its attachment to cargo. This work will entail
substantive contributions from a number of undergraduates. The project will also
involve development of a class on the current topics in structural biology and
biophysics, which have become central to much of biological research.