* 0417062
* TAIR: The Arabidopsis Information Resource
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Eva Huala, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 7,988,952.00

Recent technical advances in large scale sequencing and genomics methods have
triggered a scientific revolution with immense potential for extending
biological knowledge. They have also posed an immense challenge: how to make
optimal use of vast quantities of biological data. Without long-term high
quality mechanisms for accessing and analyzing the data, the resources used in
generating the data are in danger of going to waste. It is essential that
databases to house the data, tools and interfaces to provide access to the data,
and curatorial efforts to organize data for maximum utility be established and
supported for the long term. For the model plant Arabidopsis, the successful
effort to sequence the genome and the current effort of the 2010 Functional
Genomics Initiative to understand the function of every Arabidopsis gene have
produced great quantities of valuable data which can only be put to maximal use
if the information is stored, interrelated, updated and made accessible to
researchers for the long term. TAIR (the Arabidopsis Information Resource,
www.arabidopsis.org) has taken up the challenge posed by this flood of data in
its first five years of funding, developing a data structure to house the
diversity of available data along with tools and interfaces needed to access and
analyze it. The aim of the second phase of this project is to maintain the data
and tools currently existing in TAIR and add new efforts in key areas, including
maintaining and improving the genome annotation, extracting phenotype and gene
expression data from the literature, and improving accessibility of TAIR's
resources to all biologists, teachers, students and the general public through
development of tutorials and improved site navigation. TAIR will continue to
develop controlled vocabularies and standardized data exchange mechanisms for
maximal interoperability with other biological databases and will provide data
in explicitly defined and structured formats to facilitate programmatic data
retrieval. TAIR will also continue to play a central role within the 2010
Functional Genomics Initiative as the site where researchers can browse existing
projects, view lists of genes already under investigation by other groups, and
search for genes with no known function. TAIR will incorporate the resulting
functional data and develop a tool that tracks progress toward the 2010 goal of
complete functional annotation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
Transformation of large quantities of data into useful knowledge is one of the
biggest problems in today's post-sequencing era of biological research.
Extraction of experimentally verified information from the corpus of research
literature and encoding of the information using explicitly defined and
computable ontologies representing biological concepts will facilitate the
analysis and interpretation of large-scale data sets. In addition, creation and
population of a data model for the complex relationships between biological
objects will create a comprehensive computational framework for mining,
exploring and retrieving the data. Development of standardized data curation
methods also benefits the whole biological research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The Internet is a widely
accessed source of information for researchers and students. Creation of
interactive, on-line tutorials and user guides for students, plant researchers
with no or little Arabidopsis knowledge and Arabidopsis experts will provide
educational materials that can be used in classrooms, laboratories, workshops
and for self-paced learning. Dissemination of research methods and data through
TAIR will benefit scientists all over the world and foster international
collaboration. Continuous integration and annotation of data by TAIR's curators
will ensure that researchers have access to current, accurate data that would
otherwise require significant time and effort to amass individually. Through
collaborations with educators, college and pre-college students will access
research materials to generate authentic data as they learn about scientific
inquiry and plant biology, which will be disseminated to the research community
through TAIR. &lt;br/&gt;