* 0417838
* NER:     Phonon Enhanced Near Field Infrared Lithography
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Gennady Shvets, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 81,687.00

The objective of this project is to carry out experimental and theoretical
efforts on critical issues related to the development of a "perfect" lens: the
lens whose resolution is not diffraction limited. Specifically, we will
demonstrate a new approach to nanolithography: Phonon Enhanced Near-Field
Infrared Lithography(PENFIL). While the resolution of standard techniques of
optical lithography and material patterning is limited by the wavelength of
radiation responsible for the lithographic process, our approach is not
diffraction limited due to its near-field nature. Specifically, the goals are:
(i) To demonstrate the property of an ultra-thin (sub-micron) film of SiC to
focus the electromagnetic radiation produced by a tunable CO2 laser to a
spotsize smaller than 100 nm; (ii) To investigate the critical issues related to
manufacturing of an ultra-thin "perfect" SiC lens: optimal film deposition
technique, substrate material, imaging wavelength, film thickness, and operation
temperature; (iii) To investigate the relative advantages and disadvantages of
two types of "perfect" lenses: free-standing (vacuum-SiC-vacuum) lens and the
attached substrate-SiC-substrate) lens; and (iv) To develop a roadmap towards
utilizing perfect lensing as a practical tool for nanolithography and
electromagnetic sensing of nanometer-sized biological and chemical
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main intellectual significance of the proposed
project is the experimental demonstration of the perfect lensing in the infrared
frequency range, which is likely to lead to significant advances in several
areas of nanotechnology: nanoscale manufacturing, nanoimaging, and nanoscale
biology. For example, innovative approaches to nanofabrication involving
nanolithography using infrared light could be envisioned. The availability of
high-power short pulse sources in the infrared frequency range make such
prospects very appealing. Potential broader impacts include the imaging and
manipulation of individual cells and sections of long biological molecules (such
as proteins or DNA) using laser light at the frequencies most appropriate for
those biological objects. Individual fingerprinting of various bacterial spores
of sub-micron size by exciting their vibrational modes with infrared radiation
can also be envisioned. In addition, this research will expose students to a
broad range of areas from material growth to lens fabrication to optical
testing, involving several universities and Brookhaven National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;