* 0417242
* The Role of Zic1 in Neural Patterning and in  Mid-/hindbrain Boundary Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Christa Merzdorf, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 06/30/2008
* USD 369,398.00

Christa Merzdorf&lt;br/&gt;Montana State University&lt;br/&gt;Project
summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1) Intellectual merit: The correct formation of
the nervous system is critical to the development of any viable multicelular
organism. The initial formation of the neural tube, followed by its
differentiation into the various compartments of the central nervous system, is
a highly orchestrated process. This process is directed at the molecular level
by complex and dynamic patterns of gene expression. These genes are expressed
very early in development, when the cells that will form the nervous system are
just being set aside. The resulting gene expression patterns specify the
different parts of the brain, such as forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. The
junction between the midbrain and the hindbrain, the midbrain/hindbrain boundary
(MHB), is critical for providing the signals that allow correct development of
the midbrain (optic tectum) and the anterior hindbrain (cerebellum). When these
MHB signals are misexpressed in a different region of the embryo (for example
the spinal cord region), they direct their new surroundings change fate to
midbrain/hindbrain character. The MHB begins to form during gastrula stages and
an increasingly complex gene regulatory network is found to regulate its
formation. One gene that is active very early in the development of the nervous
system is the transcription factor zic1. zic1 contributes to early molecular
patterning of the neural plate and preliminary data indicate that it
participates in formation of the MHB. Thus, the goals of this proposal are
twofold: first, to determine whether zic1 expression is required for early
neural development, and, second, to determine whether zic1 functions as an
upstream regulator of midbrain/hindbrain boundary formation. These studies will
be conducted in Xenopus, since its early development is highly accessible to
experimentation. Various dominant interfering constructs will be expressed in
Xenopus embryos to ablate normal zic1 function. These experiments will determine
wether zic1 is required for neural patterning, whether it functions as an
activator and/or repressor of transcription, and what role it plays in MHB
formation. In order to dissect further the molecular interactions that give rise
to the MHB and the involvement of zic1 in these interactions, gene expression in
ectodermal explants (animal cap assays) will be used. These explants will mimic
aspects of MHB formation in a more easily controlled tissue away from the
various signals during normal development. Together, the data from these
experiments will significantly enhance our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms that drive establishment of the different parts of the developing
nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;2) Broader impact: The proposed research activities
will increase our understanding of how the brain develops and how zic1
contributes to MHB formation. zic1 performs other functions in development as
well and is highly conserved among organisms. Thus, knowledge of how zic1 fits
into the molecular interactions that give rise to the MHB in Xenopus will allow
comparison of shared and divergent regulatory pathways with respect to other
developmental functions of zic1 and with respect to evolutionary conservation in
other organisms. In addition, the proposed research activities will be integral
part of the P.I.'s educational activities. The work will be performed by two
Ph.D. students. Multiple smaller projects will allow the involvement of several
undergraduate students with independent projects. The P.I. is committed to the
education of Native American students and has two Native American students
involved in research in her laboratory. One of these Native American students
will be participating in this project and her work in the P.I.'s laboratory was
recognized for outstanding poster at the national SACNES conference last summer.
It is likely that other Native American undergraduate students will be involved
in the proposed research. Further, discussion of this research will be part of
undergraduate and graduate lecture and laboratory courses taught by the P.I.
Finally, this research will be performed at Montana State Universiry, which is
an EPSCoR institution, and will provide critical research experience to a number
of excellent undergraduate students who might otherwise not have the opportunity
to be involved in discovery-based research.&lt;br/&gt;