* 0417078
* Evolutionary Origins and Novel Roles of Anaphylatoxins and their Receptors in Innate Immune Reactions of Teleost Fish
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Oriol Sunyer, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

The complement system is comprised by more than 35 molecules that play a crucial
role in eliminating pathogenic microorganisms in many invertebrate and
vertebrate species. In mammals, activation of the complement system by microbes
results in the activation of the C3 and C5 components of complement, leading to
the respective release of the C3a and C5a anaphylatoxins. These molecules are
viewed as endogenous danger signals that induce the recruitment of leukocytes to
the site of infection, and trigger the activation of several key innate immune
processes that are responsible for the destruction of various types of microbes.
Virtually nothing is known about the evolutionary aspects of the structure and
function of anaphylatoxins and their receptors in primitive vertebrates,
including fish. Recent research carried out in the principal investigator's
laboratory has shown that the study of these molecules in rainbow trout has
revealed not only conserved structural domains and biological roles of
anaphylatoxins and their receptors, but also unique features related to key
structural elements and novel functions not seen in mammals. This project will
investigate these unique structural and functional aspects of the anaphylatoxin
system of teleost fish. More specifically, this project will address: 1) The
molecular characterization of rainbow trout anaphylatoxin receptors and their
evolutionary relationships; 2) The ligand specificities, cell distribution and
regulation of these receptors, and; 3) The in vivo roles of trout anaphylatoxins
in various innate immune processes.

Broader Impact: These studies will expand knowledge of the molecular evolution,
structure and function of the anaphylatoxin system and will, at the same time,
provide insights into novel complement-related mechanisms of recognition and
defense that are essential to animal and human health. In addition, the
completion of this project will have a broader impact in several important
areas: 1) Execution of this research will result in the training of a graduate
student and a post-doctoral researcher in the area of fish immunology, and it
will expose veterinary students (University of Pennsylvania -Vet. School) to
this new emerging area of research. 2) On a broader level, the results derived
from this project will benefit society by contributing to the aquaculture
industry since a better knowledge of the fish immune system is essential to the
development of the aquatic animal health sector.