* 0417689
* SGER: Development of Minimally Invasive Optical Technique for Early Detection of Pancreatic Cancer
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Hemant Roy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2005
* USD 155,000.00

0417689&lt;br/&gt;Backman&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the proposed
exploratory study is to develop a novel high resolution spectroscopic imaging
technique that utilizes light, elastically scattered from epithelial tissues in
near backward direction, to extract information about macroscopic tissue
composition as well as tissue structure at the cellular and sub-cellular scale.
85% of all cancers begin in epithelial tissue, the tissue that lines most of the
internal organs in the body. Despite the significant effort that has been
expended to find means to identify early precancerous pancreatic lesions, none
of the currently available approaches has shown the capability to detect
pancreatic neoplasms sufficiently early to allow effective
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical merit: This application addresses the
development of a minimally invasive optical technique that may enable early
detection of pancreatic carcinogenesis in situ. It is hypothesized that
comprehensive measurement of elastic light scattering including its spectral,
angular, and polarization properties will enable detection of precancerous
lesions in the pancreas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The technique
developed in this project may potentially enable, for the first time, screening
of patients for pancreatic cancer and, thus, significantly reduce the mortality
from this disease.&lt;br/&gt;