* 0417555
* Collaborative Research: CMG: Toward Understanding the Transfer of Genetic Information in Subsurface Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* John Cushman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2006
* USD 213,917.00

Horizontal gene transfer among microorganisms is a critical process that impacts
bacterial evolution over long time horizons as well as the spread of traits such
as antibiotic resistance on short time scales. Recently there has been
heightened public concern about the risk of gene transfer from genetically
engineered organisms to indigenous organisms and its consequences. Many
environmental microorganisms spend a large part of their viable life cycle in
the porous medium of the natural subsurface, such as soils and aquifer
materials. Because it is a natural filter for water the subsurface also provides
a mixing zone for different strains of bacteria, that each partition between the
aqueous and solid phases. Thus to understand the ramifications of horizontal
gene transfer in the natural environment, it is important to study the
interactions between different species as they undergo fate and transport in
porous media. The primary goal of this project is to evaluate the kinetics of
microbial attachment-detachment to porous media solid surfaces, and the coupled
kinetics of horizontal gene transfer in porous media via conjugation. The green
fluorescent protein (GFP) gene expression system will be used with known hosts
and recipients originally isolated from soils to quantify rates of conjugative
gene transfer in controlled micromodel experiments. The gene transfer is
expected to be limited by the paired residence time of host and recipient cells
together on solid surfaces, and so the distributions of these paired residence
times and the distribution of gene transfer times will be compiled from the
micromodel experiments. The model for these data will be crafted by combining a
biased Levy motion with drift for the bacterial transport in the porous media,
with an alpha-stable random variable for residence time attached to surfaces,
with a non-Markovian reaction kinetic model for the gene transfer from host to
recipient. The intellectual merit of this project arises from the coordinated
collaboration of people with expertise in hydrology, microbiology, molecular
biology, applied mathematics, and physics, to (1) adapt new tools in genetic
analysis and microscopy to study microbial activity and gene exchange at a
molecular level in micro flow chambers, and (2) use mathematics to extrapolate
the findings to understand processes at higher scales in the subsurface. By
combining experiment with theory we may be able to determine the major
requirements for successful gene transfer. The broader impacts of this project
arise from the wide applicability of the results to many areas including human
health, disease propagation, medicine, contaminant remediation, and evolutionary
biology. All of these phenomena involve the processes studied here, many in
porous media (subsurface or biotic). Educationally the project provides the
venue by which results from the collaborative study can be incorporated into the
PI's undergraduate and graduate courses in microbiology, engineering, and
mathematics. The PI's also have a solid record in involving minorities and women
in research, via the MARC/AIM program at Purdue, and the Women In Engineering
(nee' Women Engineering Link) program at UC Davis, and this habit will be
continued in this project.