* 0417142
* Structure and Function of Supercomplexes of Photosystem I with its Peripheral Antenna Systems in Green Algae and Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2011
* Petra Fromme, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2011
* USD 1,648,043.00

Photosynthesis is the main process on Earth that converts light energy from the
sun into chemical energy accessible for living organisms. The products of
photosynthesis ultimately provide all higher life on earth with energy and
produce all oxygen in the atmosphere. The aim of this project is to unravel the
structure and function of the large molecular solar energy converter Photosystem
I (PSI) and to determine the interaction of its peripheral antenna systems in
eukaryotes (plants and green algae) and prokaryotes (cyanobacteria). The
photosystem I complex consists of 12-14 proteins to which more than 120
cofactors (chlorophylls and carotenoids) are bound. Furthermore, photosystem I
is dynamically coupled to additional peripheral antenna systems to further
increase the efficiency of light capturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to unravel the structure and function of both the plant-type photosystem I
in a supercomplex with the light harvesting complex I and the cyanobacterial
photosystem I in its supercomplex with 18 IsiA proteins. The overall goal of the
project is the determination of the structure of both photosystem I-antenna
supercomplexes in plant-type and cyanobacterial photosystem I. The experimental
setup includes crystallization and structure-determination by X-ray structure
analysis, the design of structurally and functionally improved complexes by
mutagenesis and functional investigations by time-resolved spectroscopy. The
project will lead to detailed insights into the structural organization of the
photosynthetic system in prokaryotes and eukaryotes and will unravel the
functional coupling of the external antenna complexes to the core units of
photosynthesis. Furthermore the project will provide new insights into protein
assembly during the formation of large supercomplexes of membrane proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the atomic details
of the structure of giant Photosystem I supercomplexes will boost our
understanding of the mechanisms of basic processes of bio-solar energy
conversion. Moreover, this will help to elucidate structure-functional
relationships between the photosynthetic reaction centers and their peripheral
antennas in the supercomplexes that determine a higher efficiency and
flexibility of the energy conversion in the bio-solar systems than in man-made
systems. The project will thereby provide broad impacts for the development of
new concepts for solar energy converters that mimic nature. Furthermore,
fundamental understanding of the photosynthetic processes could lead to the
development of plants with enhanced photosynthetic ability and increased
tolerance to many kinds of environmental stress. One of the aims of the project
is to use gained knowledge for boosting students' interest in revealing the
secrets of natural energy conversion and enhancing their motivation in studying
science. The project will also give an opportunity to inform the public on
recent discoveries in this exciting area.&lt;br/&gt;