* 0417466
* CMG Collabortative Research: The Oceanic Internal Wave Energy Spectrum - Synthesis of Theory and Observations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Kurt Polzin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 218,407.00

The proposed effort is a synthesis of theory and observations of
the&lt;br/&gt;oceanic internal wavefield. The work proposed is a
truly&lt;br/&gt;collaborative effort: the analysis of oceanic observations to
ground&lt;br/&gt;truth new theoretical descriptions of internal wave dynamics.
The&lt;br/&gt;theoretical work proposed involves the use of a novel
Hamiltonian&lt;br/&gt;formalism for the internal wave field, recently developed
by the&lt;br/&gt;PI's. This has already been shown to include the high--
frequency&lt;br/&gt;component of the celebrated Garret--Munk spectrum as an
exact&lt;br/&gt;statistically stationary solution, as well as to account for
much of&lt;br/&gt;the observed spectral variability. It is proposed to develop
a&lt;br/&gt;selection principle, based on a combination of wave turbulence
and&lt;br/&gt;asymptotic analysis, to determine how each oceanic realization of
this&lt;br/&gt;variability is tied to the local nature of the forcing
and&lt;br/&gt;dissipation, as well as to the latitude dependence of the Coriolis
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water in the ocean abyss is denser than water at
the surface. This&lt;br/&gt;density stratification permits a class of waves
within the ocean&lt;br/&gt;interior, called internal waves. These waves are
apparent as the&lt;br/&gt;distortion of density surfaces, and their wave-like
properties are due&lt;br/&gt;to the restoring force of gravity. Internal waves
are one of the&lt;br/&gt;major player in ocean dynamics, as they can propagate
over big&lt;br/&gt;distances, interact with each other and other major players
in the&lt;br/&gt;ocean, like vorticity and currents, internal waves break and
mix&lt;br/&gt;water. While involved in this complex dynamics, internal
waves&lt;br/&gt;redistribute mass, momentum, energy and tracers in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;Understanding internal waves is a key element to understanding
climate&lt;br/&gt;variability, especially over long time periods. The most
difficult&lt;br/&gt;piece of this puzzle is the interaction of internal waves.
The investigators&lt;br/&gt;have already contributed significantly to the
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear internal wave interactions by demonstrating
the existence of&lt;br/&gt;an infinite family of statistically stationary
solutions for the&lt;br/&gt;internal wave spectrum, of which the celebrated
Garrett and Munk&lt;br/&gt;spectrum is a member. Now they propose to investigate
whether&lt;br/&gt;particular members of this infinite family are more likely
than&lt;br/&gt;others, as well as quantify the effects of interaction of
internal&lt;br/&gt;waves with other key players in the ocean. This research will
be&lt;br/&gt;aided by the ongoing analysis of oceanic data sets and will
contribute&lt;br/&gt;crucial missing components to the theory of ocean mixing,
weather and,&lt;br/&gt;ultimately, climate.&lt;br/&gt;