* 0418129
* National Party Committees, Competitive Elections, and State Autonomy Before and After the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Robert Lowry, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2007
* USD 86,370.00

&lt;br/&gt;The role of political parties in the United States in raising and
spending money for&lt;br/&gt;federal elections underwent a fundamental change in
recent years, as national party&lt;br/&gt;committees raised and redistributed
rapidly increasing amounts of both hard and soft money. This role promises to
change again, now that the Supreme Court has upheld the most important
challenged provisions of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002. However, we
lack a comprehensive understanding of the sources, uses and effects of campaign
money raised and redistributed by national party committees during the years
immediately before, as well as after, these reforms. The PI will analyze these
issues using data for the 1994-2004 election cycles. The specific objectives for
this proposal are: (1) Identify the factors specific to congressional districts
that influence the amount of hard money raised by national party committees
during the 1994-2002 elections cycles; (2) Identify the determinants and effects
of party support for congressional candidates; (3) Identify factors that have
influenced the reallocation of hard and soft money by national party committees
to state and local party committees; (4) Identify the key consequences of net
transfers of funds to state and local party committees; (5) Conduct comparable
analyses of data for the 2004 election cycle as they become
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described in this project will
constitute the first comprehensive analysis of the sources, redistribution and
consequences of campaign money raised and redistributed by national party
committees before and after the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002. At the
completion of this project, we will have a better understanding of how the
particular objectives of national party committees and their ability to raise
funds and redistribute them nationwide affect the competitiveness of both
federal and nonfederal elections, as well as the ability of states to maintain
autonomy for state and local elections in a federal system. Insights provided
from these analyses will allow a more precise evaluation of campaign finance
regulations that affect the extent to which money is channeled through national
party committees rather than other intermediaries, and will provide a basis for
assessing future proposed changes to campaign finance
regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this proposal can
be expected to generate significant&lt;br/&gt;benefits to society by providing a
comprehensive study of a timely and important issue in American politics, namely
the role of the national political party committees in campaign finance and
elections. In order to facilitate broad dissemination of the results that will
accrue from this research, the PI will write a book-length manuscript that will
be accessible to both academic and non-academic audiences. In addition, data on
national party committee fundraising, spending, and transfers to state and local
committees will be made available to other scholars through the Inter-University
Consortium for Political and Social Research at the University of Michigan.
Finally, the results from this proposal will broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups by funding faculty at a non-Ph.D.-granting department of
political science. &lt;br/&gt;