* 0418086
* The Gettysburg College Dialect Project: Regional Linguistic Variation among African American and European American English Speakers in the Lower Susquehanna Valley
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Jennifer Bloomquist, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2006
* USD 37,390.00

The Gettysburg College Dialect Project: Regional linguistic variation among
African American and European American English speakers in the Lower Susquehanna
Valley" &lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Jennifer
Bloomquist will investigate the linguistic patterns that characterize the
regional dialect spoken in Pennsylvania's Lower Susquehanna Valley (LSV).
Although the rural, European-American Pennsylvania German speaking population of
the LSV region has been studied extensively by linguists, Pennsylvania
Germanisms do not account for the patterns found in the language of LSV African-
American speakers, nor do they fully contribute to the types of regionalisms
that have developed in the area's urban centers. In order to address this
lacuna, the project team will conduct one-on-one sociolinguistic interviews with
lifelong residents of the Lower Susquehanna Valley in general, and with urban
and African- American speakers in particular. In addition, a project website
that includes an interactive survey will be developed so that a wide variety of
participants will be able to contribute to the data set that will define the
dialect and its boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gettysburg Dialect project
contributes to the field of dialectology in that it focuses on an area of
dialect study that has been long neglected in terms of race and geographical
location (rural vs. urban). Not only is the project valuable to dialectology,
but the research is also important to the field of linguistics in general
because it investigates linguistic patterns among northern African-American
speakers who speak both the regional variety and African-American English in
varying degrees, depending on sociohistorical and sociocultural factors such as
community cohesion or geographic isolation. Since the vast majority of work done
previously on the development of African-American English has focused on urban
and southern speakers, this project will contribute a wealth of information to
the ways in which African-American Englishes have evolved in isolated
communities in the midland dialect region. It is this aspect of the research
that will complement projects currently underway on African-American English in
other regions of the United States. Because the research will also contribute to
the construction of a dialect survey website, there will be an online
educational resource for anyone interested in learning about the Lower
Susquehanna Valley, its residents, or the dialect(s) that they speak.&lt;br/&gt;