* 0418651
* Collaborative Research:  Antiquity of Life in Salt Deposits?  A Rb-Sr Age-Dating Study
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Lee Riciputi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 07/31/2008
* USD 80,000.00

Riciputi 0418651 This project seeks to verify geological evidence that
microorganisms can survive inside the brine-filled inclusions of halite crystals
for periods of 10^8 years. The goal of the research is to obtain absolute
radiometric ages of brine inclusions from two ancient halites from which
microorganisms have been previously cultured: crystals from the Permian Salado
Formation, New Mexico and "chevrons" from the Cretaceous Muribeca evaporites of
Brazil. Such dating will remove doubts about the ages of the fluid inclusions
from which the purported Permian and Cretaceous microorganisms were extracted.
Obtaining absolute ages of brine inclusions in halite has profound implications
for long-term bacterial survival on Earth and for astrobiology, and may
contribute techniques to future exploration for life on Mars and other parts of
the solar system.

The purported world's oldest living organism, the spore-forming bacterium
Virgibacillus sp. Permian strain 2-9-3, was cultured from a brine inclusion in
halite cement of the 250 Ma Permian Salado Formation. Rb-Sr dating of individual
brine inclusions from these samples will establish unequivocally whether
Virgibacillus sp. 2-9-3 was trapped in a fluid inclusion at the time of
deposition of the Salado salts. Archaeal strains have been cultured from brine
inclusions from primary chevron halite of the Cretaceous Muribeca Formation.
Dating brine inclusions in these Cretaceous halites by Rb-Sr methods will
ascertain with certainty whether the brine inclusions that yielded the newly
discovered halophilic Archaea are >100 Ma in age.

The information obtained from this grant is disseminated to the research
community as presentations at national meetings and as journal articles. The
results are illustrated in a geobiology seminar offered each year to
graduate/undergraduate students at Binghamton, and in an analytical geochemistry
course co-taught at UT. The Principal Investigator participates in a summer
enrichment program for K-12 students with field and laboratory work on
microorganisms in the environment, including microscope and Environmental
Scanning Electron Microscope viewing of an assortment of samples including brine
inclusions in salt. A website on microbial life and preservation in brine
inclusions features current research from this project.

(Collaborative research with Lowenstein/0418758/SUNY Binghamton)