* 0418581
* The Historical Syntax of Medieval South Slavic
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Roumyana Pancheva, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

How does the syntax of a language change over time? What kinds of innovations
are possible, how are they triggered, and how are they constrained? Issues of
historical change have increasingly been of interest to researchers in
theoretical syntax, providing a new perspective to the scientific investigation
into the principles of language design. Historical data, when properly
interpreted through the prism of modern syntactic theory, can reveal the
workings of the highly complex, richly structured grammatical system, by
allowing the study of minimal variation and the clustering of grammatical
properties, often not possible in comparisons of even closely related languages.
With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Roumyana Pancheva will
address the theoretical implications of syntactic change, focusing on Medieval
South Slavic. The project will concentrate on historical developments in two
domains, the grammar of clitics and the syntax of verbal inflection, as well as
on the way in which the changes in the two domains interact. An electronic
corpus of texts, with added morphological and syntactic information, will be
created in the course of the investigation, to facilitate grammatical analysis.
The corpus will cover the manuscripts and inscriptions of Old Church Slavonic -
the oldest recorded Slavic language - as well as texts from regional varieties
of Old and Middle South Slavic. The wide linguistic coverage will allow for
comprehensive comparative research - both diachronic, between historical stages
of Medieval South Slavic, and synchronic, between the various regional
dialects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both the practical and the theoretical aspects of
the proposal are novel in scope. The syntactic study will reveal the fundamental
structure of the Medieval South Slavic clause and the developments it undergoes
over time, providing the basis for any future research on Slavic diachronic
syntax. It will investigate foundational issues in the grammar of cliticization,
a peculiar phenomenon of natural language and a long-standing challenge to
linguistic analysis. In particular, it is expected to document the rise of a
second-position clitic system - the first such change to be described for any
language. A detailed analysis of the change will contribute crucial information
to our understanding of this clitic type and of the linguistic factors that make
it possible. Also of interest is the origin of the second-position clitic
system, which goes against the usual direction of historical change. Cross-
linguistically, pronominal clitics tend to become verbal affixes. The earliest
South Slavic clitics are verbal associates, yet they become syntactically
independent of the verb and move to the second-position in the clause. The study
will thus address the issue of whether diachronic laws that determine the
direction of historical change exist independently of grammar. On the practical
side, the project will provide the scholarly community with the first
grammatically annotated, electronically available, chronological database of
Medieval South Slavic texts. The corpus will facilitate the study of the
historical and comparative grammar of the Slavic languages by allowing searches
based on structural characteristics, and by making possible the application of
statistical methods to linguistic analysis. More generally, it will be of
interest to philologists, historians, religion scholars, and literature
scholars. &lt;br/&gt;