* 0418108
* Activation of the Mu Middle Promoter by Mor Protein - A Model System
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Martha Howe, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 06/30/2008
* USD 437,825.00

Regulation of an organism's gene expression is essential for both normal
development and response to environmental change. Transcription, the process of
gene expression, is catalyzed by RNA polymerase (RNAP), which must bind to
specific promoter DNA sequences to initiate transcription. Some genes are
regulated by requiring binding of an activator protein before RNAP can bind. The
scientific goal of this research is to define from a molecular, mechanistic, and
structural perspective how the Mor protein, a member of a novel regulatory
protein family, activates transcription of genes expressed during the middle
phase of development of phage Mu. The experimental approach will include (i) the
use of X-ray crystallography to determine the three dimensional structure of Mor
protein in complexes with DNA and individual subunits of RNAP, (ii) biochemical
identification of interacting regions of Mor, RNAP, and promoter DNA by cleavage
with tethered Fe-BABE reagents, and (iii) determination of the effects of
mutations in Mor, RNAP and promoter DNA on Mor binding, RNAP recruitment,
formation of a specific promoter DNA distortion, and transcription activation. A
second goal is to provide the graduate students conducting these experiments,
and undergraduate and K-12 students who participate in them or hear them
described, with (i) an understanding of multiple biological research
technologies, (ii) training in experimental design and interpretation (iii)
experience in obtaining and applying information from the scientific literature,
and (iv) the excitement of making new scientific discoveries.