* 0418540
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of U.S. Family Planning Policy on Women's Economic Advancement and Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Robert Margo, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2005
* USD 11,350.00

Examining the importance of fertility control is fundamental for understanding
the origins of recent social and labor market changes. An analysis the federal
government's involvement in local family planning projects places current
experience in historical context and, in this manner, informs the present policy
debate. Though the federal government has played a pivotal role in subsidizing
family planning since the War on Poverty, the impact of these policies on
women's participation and economic equality have been under-researched. Instead,
research in economics has focused on the effects of abortion, which was
legalized at least ten years after the introduction of the first family planning
programs. Comparatively little systematic, econometric research seeks to
identify the effect of birth control and birth control policy on women's rapid
integration into the workforce and, by extension, the impact of this transition
on labor markets, household structures and children's outcomes. As a result, the
true impact of these programs on the evolution of the economy remains an open
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves collecting all of the
variables from existing surveys, matching the surveys by county across years,
and creating a computerized database of this information. These data will then
be used to estimate the importance of Title X in promoting the economic
advancement of women and specifically the convergence in economic outcomes
between African American and white women. Future research with this data will
address the importance of family planning services in changing child outcomes,
family structures, as well as the consequences of women's growing participation
for U.S. labor markets.&lt;br/&gt;