* 0418931
* URC Planning Grant:    University of Wisconsin System Undergraduate Research Center
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Robin Tanke, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Randall Christnert
* 05/31/2007
* USD 49,990.00

The award from the Chemistry Division supports an Undergraduate Research Center
(URC) planning grant. The PI is Marcus McEllistrem. The co-PIs are Kimberly
Kostka, Aaron Monte, Robin Tanke and senior investigator Asif Habib. This
collaborative program initially involves the University of Wisconsin
comprehensive universities at Eau Claire, LaCrosse, Platteville, River Falls and
Stevens Point, and UW- Colleges (two year institutions) at Sheboygan, Manitowoc,
Rock County, Waukesha County and Washington County. The URC will eventually
include all of the comprehensive and 2-year campuses within the University of
Wisconsin system. The URC will incorporate curricular reform in the first and
second year experience using research and inquiry methods, and build research
programs at participating institutions, outreach to regional secondary students
and faculty, and improve connections between two-and four-year colleges. The
planning grant will develop the consortium, its administrative structure and
begin pilot projects. Planning funds will be used to develop web-based databases
on effective methods for providing research experiences for undergrads and for
faculty meetings. The pilot projects involve several campuses developing lab and
research course materials.