* 0418547
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Divided over Diversity: The Politics of Affirmative Action at University of Michigan
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Wendy Griswold, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 07/31/2006
* USD 9,900.00

This research project is an ethnographic study of political, legal, and
administrative activities related to recent U.S. Supreme Court cases about
affirmative action at the University of Michigan (UM) (Grutter v. Bollinger et
al and Gratz et al v. Bollinger et al). With these Court cases, the concept of
"diversity" has received intense public scrutiny. The existing scholarly
literature on the diversity concept relies on macro-level, quantitative, legal,
or text analyses, overlooking people's interpretations of diversity in their
everyday practices. The project helps to fill in this gap by using a cultural
analysis of the legal and non-legal meanings of diversity at UM. It examines a
pair of socio-legal paradoxes concerning the discursive meanings and practical
uses of diversity, asking (1) how do UM administrators, activists, the media,
legal professionals, and political leaders involved in the lawsuits talk about
the different, potentially contradictory legal and popular meanings of
diversity, and (2) how do these groups mobilize these discourses to advance
their shared or competing interests. More generally, it addresses how ideas
related to law acquire constituencies and shape efforts to redress social
inequalities. The project has 2 phases of fieldwork. The first phase focused on
the political mobilization and legal activities around the Court cases. Research
for the second phase (in progress) studies the impact of the Court's decision on
the undergraduate admissions office and the broader organization of UM diversity
programs, as well as the content of these programs, through observation of
activities in the admissions office and events hosted by major campus diversity
programs, conducting interviews, and collecting archival data.