* 0418183
* Collaborative Research: The Mixed-Race Household in Residential Space: Neighborhood Context, Segregation, and Multiracial Identities, 1990-2000
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Richard Wright, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2007
* USD 83,539.00

Marriage across racial lines, excluding unions between Latinos and non-Latinos
of the same race, nationally accounted for 2.2 percent of marriages in 1992, up
from 0.4 percent in 1960. Rates more than doubled in the remaining years of the
1990s to 5.2 percent in 2000. Against this backdrop, this project investigates
the neighborhood geographies of mixed-race couples. The extensive literature on
US urban residential segregation that investigates issues of neighborhood choice
and constraint for members of racial and ethnic groups has yet to examine,
theoretically or empirically, the residential choices of mixed-race partners.
This project seeks to answer a number of basic theoretical and empirical
questions. Do the processes that generate and sustain segregation, as we
currently understand them, apply to mixed-race households? Do mixed-race
families live in segregated or diverse neighborhoods? Do they live in
neighborhoods dominated by a particular race/ethnic group? Does this depend on
the race of the male partner or the female partner? Do the social class
positions of the partners affect the couple's residential choices? These initial
steps in the investigation of the residential geography of mixed-race households
set the stage for us to address two derivative questions. How does the increase
in mixed-race partnering affect levels of residential segregation in
neighborhoods? It may be that the rise in mixed-race partnerships due to
interracial contact outside neighborhoods (such as at college or work) drives
down levels of residential segregation within neighborhoods. Do the residential
choices of mixed-race couples have implications for the way they
racially/ethnically identify their multiracial children? Residence in a
neighborhood dominated by a single racial/ethnic group may encourage mixed-race
couples to identify their children as members of that group. This project will
investigate the racial/ethnic identification choices that mixed-race couples
make for their multiracial children across an array of racially identified
places.

This project will provide the first glimpse of the neighborhood geographies of
mixed-race households in both 1990 and 2000. The ability to investigate these
geographies has been limited to date because publicly available census data
provide no information on household structure at neighborhood scales. Recently
released restricted access data from the long forms of the 1990 and 2000
Censuses provide such data, allowing us to advance significantly our
understanding of racial segregation, urban social geographies, and the
construction of racial identity in mixed-race families.