* 0418758
* Collaborative Research:  Antiquity of Life in Salt Deposits? A Rb-Sr Age-Dating Study
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Tim Lowenstein, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 07/31/2008
* USD 70,041.00

Lowenstein&lt;br/&gt;0418758&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to verify geological
evidence that microorganisms can survive inside the brine-filled inclusions of
halite crystals for periods of 10^8 years. The goal of the research is to obtain
absolute radiometric ages of brine inclusions from two ancient halites from
which microorganisms have been previously cultured: crystals from the Permian
Salado Formation, New Mexico and "chevrons" from the Cretaceous Muribeca
evaporites of Brazil. Such dating will remove doubts about the ages of the fluid
inclusions from which the purported Permian and Cretaceous microorganisms were
extracted. Obtaining absolute ages of brine inclusions in halite has profound
implications for long-term bacterial survival on Earth and for astrobiology, and
may contribute techniques to future exploration for life on Mars and other parts
of the solar system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purported world's oldest living
organism, the spore-forming bacterium Virgibacillus sp. Permian strain 2-9-3,
was cultured from a brine inclusion in halite cement of the 250 Ma Permian
Salado Formation. Rb-Sr dating of individual brine inclusions from these samples
will establish unequivocally whether Virgibacillus sp. 2-9-3 was trapped in a
fluid inclusion at the time of deposition of the Salado salts. Archaeal strains
have been cultured from brine inclusions from primary chevron halite of the
Cretaceous Muribeca Formation. Dating brine inclusions in these Cretaceous
halites by Rb-Sr methods will ascertain with certainty whether the brine
inclusions that yielded the newly discovered halophilic Archaea are &gt;100 Ma
in age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information obtained from this grant is
disseminated to the research community as presentations at national meetings and
as journal articles. The results are illustrated in a geobiology seminar offered
each year to graduate/undergraduate students at Binghamton, and in an analytical
geochemistry course co-taught at UT. The Principal Investigator participates in
a summer enrichment program for K-12 students with field and laboratory work on
microorganisms in the environment, including microscope and Environmental
Scanning Electron Microscope viewing of an assortment of samples including brine
inclusions in salt. A website on microbial life and preservation in brine
inclusions features current research from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(Collaborative research with
Riciputi/0418651/Univ. Tennessee at Knoxville)