* 0418750
* Collaborative Research:     Expanding the Greater Greensboro Consortium:   Building Research Community by Early Recruitment and Research Immersion
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Eugene Grimley, Elon University
* Standard Grant
* Richard D. Foust
* 08/31/2005
* USD 11,263.00

The award from the Chemistry Division supports an Undergraduate Research Centers
(URC) planning grant. The PI is Eugene B. Grimley. The planning grant will
explore developing the Greater Greensboro Consortium (GGC) into an Undergraduate
Research Center. The schools in GGC are University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, North Carolina A&amp;T State University, Bennett College, Elon
University, High Point University, Greensboro College, Guilford College and
Guilford Technical Community College. The consortium will facilitate chemistry
research by sharing resources and capitalizing on existing programs. They will
explore ways to share library and instrumentation resources, and develop methods
for enhancing interactions leading to inter-institutional collaborations. Two
exploratory projects will be undertaken: a summer research program for high
school and community college students, and the development of a research
bachelors degree in chemistry. The planning grant will support a pilot project
starting a summer research program at four of the consortium colleges who are
coupled and funded by a linked collaborative proposal: Guilford College (lead),
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Elon University and North Carolina
A&amp;T State University. Recruiting students from Early and Middle College high
schools for the summer research program will enable the consortium to further
expand and strengthen its relationship with the public school system.