* 0418246
* RUI: Effects of speaking rate on native English speakers' acquisition of Japanese vowel length contrast
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Yukari Hirata, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2007
* USD 112,801.00

&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Yukari Hirata will
investigate the perception of second language (L2) vowel length contrasts in
sentences produced at various speaking rates. The vowel length distinction
(short versus long) is phonemic in Japanese, but is difficult for native English
speakers to acquire. A long vowel is by definition longer in duration than a
short vowel, but a long vowel spoken quickly can actually be shorter than a
short vowel spoken slowly. It is not known how learners of Japanese process such
speaking rate variations and learn to distinguish vowel length accurately.
Studying the vowel length distinction in a sentence context is particularly
important, since previous research has shown that native listeners use sentence
rate for making duration-based distinctions, and that they automatically adjust
their perception of a segment based on the speaking rate. This study will
provide important insights into the ability of "nonnative listeners" to utilize
cues from speaking rate in the perceptual learning process. The project will
investigate the extent to which three types of perceptual training in the
laboratory assist native English speakers in learning to perceive Japanese vowel
length distinction: training with a slow speaking rate, training with a fast
rate, and training with both slow and fast rates. The hypothesis is that
sentences spoken at varied rates (slow and fast) contain more diverse and rich
acoustic cues than sentences spoken only at a slow or a fast rate, and that the
richer cues will aid nonnative listeners in adjusting speaking rate and in
identifying short/long vowels accurately. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will increase our understanding of the relationship between speech input and
perceptual learning, an important issue for theories of L2 acquisition. The
broader impacts of this research are several: First, the research will serve as
a foundation on which practical improvement can be made in L2 pedagogy and
computer-assisted L2 learning. This project has the potential to significantly
improve current methods of language instruction, which is beneficial to society
as a whole, given increasing globalization and the attendant need for
individuals to be able to communicate effectively across cultures. Second, the
project allows for integration of research into the educational experience of
undergraduate students, helping to expose them to the excitement of scientific
inquiry. Third, the development of the infrastructure for this research at
Colgate University will enable undergraduates to participate in additional
phonetics studies even when the current project is concluded. Creating an on-
campus lab for phonetic research will enrich and diversify science education at
an undergraduate institution.&lt;br/&gt;