* 0418068
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Comparing Campaign Strategies for Latinos and non-Latinos in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Jonathan Nagler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,669.00

In U.S. elections, voters rely on campaigns to provide information on
candidates and their issue positions. Of the various advertisement strategies
available to candidates, television advertisements are the most frequently used.
My research examines whether political elites employ different campaign
strategies for Latino voters and non-Latino voters. As the fastest- growing and
largest minority group in the United States, it is important to determine
whether elites are using different strategies towards Latinos, relative to
Anglos, and if so, what the political repercussions are. I contend that the
campaign strategies used by political elites towards Latinos and non- Latinos
differ. The reason for this difference stems from the socioeconomic distinctions
between Anglos and Latinos, where Latinos are more socio-economically
disadvantaged than Anglos. Thus, political elites will design campaign messages
that are easily understood and require little political knowledge, such as
focusing on a candidate's ability to speak Spanish or making cultural
references. In contrast, research indicates that English-language advertisements
primarily focus on candidate's policy positions. Several methodological
techniques are used to test the hypothesis. First, I create a formal theoretical
model to explain how candidates advertise to voters. I will then test the
predictions derived from the model. Next, I use statistical analysis to
determine whether Spanish-language advertisements are more likely to include
non-policy messages, relative to English-language advertisements. I continue
using empirical methods to determine whether these advertisements have an impact
on Latino voting behavior. Intellectual Merit This research project helps to
advance the knowledge and understanding in the field of American campaigns and
elections because this comparative analysis has yet to be analyzed. But since
the data that makes this research possible was released in 2001, this analysis
can now be conducted. Given that Latinos by 2050 will comprise 24.5% of the U.S.
population, determining whether there are systematic differences in the way
political elites behave towards them, when compared to non-Latinos, is critical.
The implications from this research carry serious political and policy
consequences for Latinos. ability to become fully involved in the political
system. We are confident in our ability to carry out this proposed project,
since the co-principle investigator has conducted the same coding process for
advertisements used in Spanish-language races. In addition, the co-principle
investigator will monitor the undergraduate students throughout the entire
project and will be available for any questions or problems that may arise.
Also, since the research will be carried out in the Politics department at NYU,
access to office supplies, computers, software, and administrative support will
be readily available. Broader Impact The research carries several important
implications in the realms of promoting learning and representing ethnic
minorities. First, it encourages training and learning by exposing
undergraduates to a variety of valuable research skills. And since this project
will be carried out for a 12 month period of time, students will gain a deep
understanding of the research process. This research project also enhances the
infrastructure for research by making the completed data available for public
use after the completion of the dissertation. It will also have an impact on
underrepresented minority groups since this research focuses on the largest
ethnic minority group in the United States, Latinos. The findings from this
research may help to identify any discrepancies that exist in elite political
behavior towards Latino and non-Latinos, which may motivate change in elite
behavior, and therefore increase the ability of Latinos to participate in the
U.S. political system.