* 0418499
* Functionalized Biomaterials:    Polyesters, Polyethers, and Polycarbonates from Diene-Based Monomers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Valerie Ashby, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2007
* USD 311,250.00

The need for heteroatom functionalized biomaterials with tunable thermal,
mechanical and solubility properties that also meet biocompatibility and
biodegradation requirements is significant. The utility of functionality in
these materials is evident in a number of applications ranging from drug
delivery to gene therapy where the ability to attach targeting groups, cell
fusion promoters, fluorescent labels, mechanical property-enhancing groups, etc.
would significantly advance performance. While there are a variety of new
materials that have been proposed to address the lack of functionality in
synthetic polymeric biomaterials, many of them fall short because of poor
biocompatibility, poor biodegradability or limited design capability and
control. The development of a methodology to incorporate these needed functional
groups into classes of materials that already meet many of these criteria is a
viable approach. As such, the proposed research effort has three goals:
&lt;br/&gt;1) the design of synthetic routes that yield monomers capable of
being polymerized via step growth reactions,&lt;br/&gt;2) the synthesis of a
variety of functionalized polyester, polyether and polycarbonate homopolymers
and copolymers, and &lt;br/&gt;3) the derivation of the structure-property
relationships for these functionalized polymers, examining thermal, mechanical,
processing, biocompatibility, biodegradation and structure-function
characteristics of the materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
success of these materials will have a significant impact on this area of
advanced biomaterials by providing a method of tailoring chemical functionality
and optimizing physical, mechanical and biological properties. The approach is a
rational one with significant potential as the work will focus on classes of
materials that are FDA approved. Moreover, the starting materials used,
disubstituted dienes, for example, are routinely produced in 85% overall yield
on a 100 gram scale with greater than 99% purity, making them excellent starting
materials for derivatization. While the initial thermal and mechanical property
analysis will be conducted in laboratories at UNC, further analysis of these
materials will be accomplished in collaboration with Professor Robert Langer's
group at MIT. Collaborations with colleagues at MIT and UNC will combine
expertise in polymer synthesis, polymer characterization and biomaterials to
make significant contributions to the field. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This project will advance the understanding of the role of various
functional groups in well-known aliphatic biomaterials, while promoting teaching
and training. Graduate students will learn how to solve problems by starting
with monomer synthesis moving to the polymer synthesis then to the material
properties and applications. Undergraduates and high school student researchers
will be presented with intriguing, relevant problems that can be answered in the
laboratory using organic synthesis and analytical chemistry. The
multidisciplinary interaction will also be an educational opportunity for all
students, as they will be active participants in the collaborative research.
Additionally, it is expected that the research results will be incorporated,
where appropriate, into the teaching of undergraduate organic chemistry and of
graduate polymer chemistry to help students appreciate the utility of basic
concepts. &lt;br/&gt;