* 0418790
* Collaborative research: Robust estimation of biodiversity dynamics: Global versus regional patterns in the end Ordovician mass extinction of graptolites
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2011
* Charles Mitchell, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2011
* USD 480,018.00

Intellectual Merit- Ceratopsians are among the best known of dinosaur clades due
to their relative abundance, and the remarkable diversity of cranial
synapomorphies such as horns and frills that diagnose more derived members of
the clade. Gigantism is a trend in ceratopsian evolution that is accompanied by
the evolution of progressively more complex feeding mechanisms and cranial
display diversity. Heterochrony, and in particular peramorphosis have been
proposed as major influences in ceratopsian evolution to explain the evolution
towards large size and late ontogenetic genesis of the display in advanced
forms. Likewise, the apparent hierarchical complexity of the feeding apparatus
suggests an evolution of character integration through both ontogeny and
phylogeny. All of these evolutionary hypotheses require detailed knowledge of
both the development and phylogeny of ceratopsian dinosaurs, but so far age
estimates have been poorly constrained and non-quantified and rigorous reliance
on detailed phylogenies limited. In this study, an innovative approach to
developmentally staging fossils based on histological sectioning and
Developmental Mass extrapolation is combined with novel tree-based methods
toward studying heterochrony and integration using a well- established phylogeny
of Ceratopsia. Based on well-sampled growth series of seven -backbone taxa
representing the diversity of the clade, and a detailed phylogeny of
ceratopsians, we will examine whether there are correlated shifts in
developmental timing of synapomorphies (heterochrony) relative to growth
strategies, and also if blocks of characters represent integrated modules that
fulfill criteria for being phylogenetically and ontogenetically constrained.
These quantitative studies will allow us to evaluate previous hypotheses on the
role heterochrony and integration have played in ceratopsian evolution. By
providing a quantified understanding of when in ontogeny synapomorpies are
expressed this research will help to resolve several taxonomic quandaries
related to the validity of species based on juvenile holotypes and provide a
more accurate understanding of ceratopsian diversity. Broader Impact: This
research represents a new integrative exploration of evolutionary processes in a
well-known group of dinosaurs. The novel methods and the results of this
research promise to be widely applicable to fields as diverse as population
biology, developmental biology, macroevolution and evo-devo, and will be
disseminated through peer -reviewed journals, presentations at professional
meetings and professional web- sites. Two graduate and two undergraduate
students will be trained through this project, and aspects of the research will
be incorporated into university courses taught by both PIs. Both PIs are
involved with developing exhibits for natural history museum, and parts of this
research will be incorporated into two ongoing exhibit projects, and associated
educational web-sites and programming. Given the media interest in dinosaur
research, many opportunities to disseminate results of this work to the public
will no doubt arise.