* 0418901
* Taphonomy and Paleoecology of Ediacaran Assemblages (Flinders Ranges, South Australia):  Do we Have a Census?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Mary Droser, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2008
* USD 145,000.00

The terminal Proterozoic Ediacaran biota remains one of the great controversies
in&lt;br/&gt;modern paleontology. Its temporal position, preceding the so-called
Cambrian explosion,&lt;br/&gt;suggests that it should provide key information on
the early evolution of animals. Studies of the&lt;br/&gt;Ediacaran biota have
traditionally focussed on the description and interpretation of
individual&lt;br/&gt;taxa and more recently on the stratigraphic distribution
and paleogeography. A major&lt;br/&gt;shortcoming in the study of the Ediacaran
biota is the paucity of studies of the community&lt;br/&gt;structure and other
aspects of synecology. There is no a priori reason why late
Proterozoic&lt;br/&gt;assemblages should not be examined by the same means as
Phanerozoic communities.&lt;br/&gt;Particularly as models for the preservation
of Ediacaran fossils (Gehling 1999) predict that they&lt;br/&gt;potentially
should yield census communities. The proposed research project will be the
first&lt;br/&gt;detailed systematic field analysis of a high-diversity Ediacaran
assemblage (including all body&lt;br/&gt;and trace fossils, problematic
structures and inorganic surfacesls) by the study of
selected&lt;br/&gt;localities in South Australia in which large sequential
bedding planes (over hundreds of square&lt;br/&gt;meters) can be
excavated.&lt;br/&gt;The fieldwork protocol involves excavation and re-assembly
of beds that have been&lt;br/&gt;carefully logged in stratigraphic succession.
These bedding-planes will be examined in detail and&lt;br/&gt;all body and trace
fossils and sedimentary structures recorded and categorized with respect
to&lt;br/&gt;properties and nature of preservation. The distribution of fossils
is then analysed by standard&lt;br/&gt;statistical methods. Preliminary
examination suggests that there is an unexpected high difference&lt;br/&gt;in
fossils and the nature of bedding planes between beds in immediate stratigraphic
succession.&lt;br/&gt;An important aim of the project is to explain these
observations; to what extent do these&lt;br/&gt;differences represent
preservational biases or complex communities?&lt;br/&gt;An important part of
this project is to document in detail trace fossils as well as
the&lt;br/&gt;numerous problematic structures of both inorganic and organic
origin. Previously there has been&lt;br/&gt;no detailed examination of the
distribution of late Proterozoic trace fossils with respect to
body&lt;br/&gt;fossils and the nature of the beds on which the traces occur. The
record of late Proterozoic trace&lt;br/&gt;fossils is problematic because of
numerous misidentifications with problematic structures.
These&lt;br/&gt;problematic structures have largely been ignored in studies
focussed on discrete body fossils, but&lt;br/&gt;they hold important information
on the nature of these communities. It is only by examination of&lt;br/&gt;large
bedding plane surfaces that the nature of these objects can be understood and we
can&lt;br/&gt;ultimately understand the taphonomic overprint on Ediacaran
assemblages and thus, unravel&lt;br/&gt;Ediacaran ecology.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Ediacaran assemblages are the oldest diverse macroscopic fossil
assemblages on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;As such, they are of considerable interest to a
wide range of geologists and biologists. Bedding&lt;br/&gt;planes that will be
excavated for this study will be reassembled in a manner that allows for
the&lt;br/&gt;development of a site for students and other interested parties to
visit (as previously arranged&lt;br/&gt;with the landowner).&lt;br/&gt;This
project is ideally suited for undergraduate participation and monies are
budgeted for&lt;br/&gt;2 undergraduates to travel to Australia and work in the
field. Local Australians will also be&lt;br/&gt;involved with the excavation and
related activities. In this way, the significance of this deposit&lt;br/&gt;and
others like it can be conveyed. This project will develop and protect a world
class fossil&lt;br/&gt;locality the full potential of which has remained
untapped.