* 0418066
* SGER:  Public Information, Development Scenarios, and Public Deliberation in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Policy
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Patrick Hamlett, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 01/31/2006
* USD 135,124.00

Public participation in technology policy decision-making is controversial, and
that is especially true in the case of nanoscience and technology (NS&T).
Productive citizen participation may integrate public concerns early in the
technical specifications of nanotechnology development, contributing to a less
contentious, more socially acceptable deployment and integration of the
technology, but participation methods supported by rigorous research have only
recently emerged. If we are to achieve a reasoned public dialogue on NS&T before
the technologies are well developed, we need to know soon the best practices for
a productive dialogue. Scientific advances in NS&T are made every day and
products are already on the market. Enthusiasts are actively promoting scenarios
such as nano-enhanced human biology while opponents hypothesize the worst-case
scenarios. Learning how to effectively incorporate public participation is also
urgent because NS&T policy is national-level policy with potentially enormous
public impacts. While millions of citizens cannot reason together
simultaneously, informed, reasoned consensus building requires reasoning
together. Group interaction processes are inherently at the center of citizen
deliberation. These processes must point toward problem solving rather than only
expressing opinion. This SGER project would build on the research team's former
and current NSF funding, adding new knowledge that would lead to immediate
improvements in participation practices involving nanotechnology.

The proposed research will begin immediately, building towards two pilot "best
practices" Citizens Technology Forums, and incorporating new research outcomes
of the team's past research. The project will use experimental issue groups, a
national survey, and two CTFs to discover citizen perceptions of and content
knowledge of nanotechnology using experimental issue groups (a focus group
variant) and a national survey; discover effects of different risk frames in
uninformed, moderately informed, and fully informed conditions, using both
survey and dialogue data; learn citizen reactions to basic informational
materials, and design those to maximize knowledge; respond to unanticipated
citizen informational or focus needs (i.e., particular questions that might
encourage the most productive dialogue) that can inform material design and
conduct of participation processes on nanotechnology and avoid increasing
citizen polarization; develop and carry out a best-practices nanotechnology
consensus conference process design, with two representative groups of citizens;
and identify additional process design changes needed in the future CTFs.

The proposed project will produce the first random sample national survey of
citizen perceptions and policy preferences on nanotechnology, and test an
innovative means to conduct national-scale technology policy participation
processes. The national survey, Experimental Issue Groups, and Citizens'
Technology Forums will ensure representative participation by gender, age, SES,
racial group, and educational status. The project will involve graduate and
undergraduate students in collecting and analyzing data and in developing the
briefing materials. The students may also be asked to contribute literature
reviews.

