* 0418511
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Assessing the Impact of Violence Against Women Policy on the Safety and Welfare of Battered Immigrant Women
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Rupaleem Bhuyan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 02/28/2006
* USD 7,795.00

This dissertation research examines the impact of changes in federal legislation
intended to deter intimate partner violence against immigrant women. Through
provisions of the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) of 1996 and 2000, some
immigrant women are now able to leave their abusive spouses, without fear of
deportation. The research will use a mixed-ethnographic approach to examine how
VAWA provisions influence decision-making and safety planning for immigrant
women who are victims/survivors of interpersonal violence. The main questions
asked in this proposed study are: How do service providers/advocates assist
their immigrant clients in navigating through their options for safety planning,
including VAWA provisions? How do immigrant women negotiate their options in
finding relief from their abusers and what role do VAWA provisions play in their
decision-making? Broader implications for this research include: to assess how
congressional intent to provide relief to battered immigrant women is working
and inform policy development, to broaden understanding of interpersonal
violence by addressing intersectionality of gender, race, ethnicity, class, and
immigration, to hear from women themselves if the VAWA provisions are helpful in
securing safety from violence, and to provide insight that will help service
providers and social workers to better advocate for their immigrant clients.