* 0418431
* New Approaches to Infant Learning and Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Amanda Woodward, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 15,189.00

This grant will support an integrative conference bringing together researchers
from diverse areas in the study of infant learning and cognition to move toward
a more general understanding of the role of learning at the earliest points in
cognitive development. Much of the work on infant cognition has focused on
infants' knowledge in core domains, but has not thoroughly investigated the
factors that contribute to the growth of this knowledge. Recent research
elucidating rich learning processes in infants offers a vantage point from which
to address this gap, and thereby address a number of unresolved issues
concerning the nature of the infant mind.&lt;br/&gt;The focal presentations will
be given by 10 to 12 high-profile investigators selected because (1) their
research directly investigates infant learning, and/or (2) they engage with
theoretical issues relevant to higher order cognition in infants. These speakers
will represent cutting edge investigations of infants' learning and cognition as
it pertains to objects, language, categories and social partners, as well as
studies of the basic processes that support learning. Within each of these
areas, speakers who represent different perspectives on key issues will be
invited. These talks will be integrated and synthesized by a group of senior
discussants, chosen for their broad perspectives on learning and cognition
across the lifespan. The discussants will elucidate the general issues and
principles, and place the infant findings in a broader developmental context. In
addition, junior investigators will be invited to participate in the general
discussion and to present their work.&lt;br/&gt;By bringing together converging
perspectives on infant learning and cognition, this meeting will help to forge
new ways of understanding the infant mind. More broadly, this meeting will
impact understanding of the mind well beyond infancy. Considering the role of
learning at the dawn of cognitive development will shed light on the aspects of
cognition that may be flexible across contexts or societies, and the aspects
that are strongly determined, either by innate constraints on learning or by the
robustness of environmental supports for learning. Moreover, understanding these
issues will provide important insights into developmental disorders, ranging
from mental retardation, to autism, to motor and sensory impairments.&lt;br/&gt;