* 0418350
* Productivity Change in Brazilian Agriculture, 1760-1888
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* William Summerhill, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2008
* USD 89,990.00

This project provides a long-term perspective on agricultural productivity in
Brazil. The primary task of the project is to establish the pace of productivity
change by constructing indices of partial-factor productivity and multi-factor
productivity (MFP) in agriculture at five-year intervals for two distinct
regions of Brazil, from 1760 to 1888. The indices of MFP serve to answer three
questions: 1) did Brazil's agricultural productivity performance truly conform
to the "axiom of stagnation" that is expected of a backward economy, and
attributed to Brazil? 2) were there large regional agricultural productivity
disparities within Brazil? 3) did domestic-use agriculture suffer from
differentially low levels of productivity, yet higher rates of technical change?
These questions are answered by examining the trend in the MFP indices over
time, by comparing the rates of change of the indices between regions, and by
carefully considering the relative weight of domestic-use products in the
regional indices to make inferences about comparative productivity in foodstuff
cultivation and export activities. The project's second task is to test three
preliminary hypotheses regarding the likely sources of productivity change
within the respective regions. The three factors initially examined are the
scale of production, as indicated by farm size and total farm value; distance
from market and access to transport; and increasing mechanization in on-farm
processing.

The results derived from these two tasks allow Brazilian agricultural
productivity to be placed in a comparative context, illuminating key
similarities and differences between Brazil and the better known cases of the
U.S., U.K, and France, with respect to the pace of productivity change and its
proximate determinants. They also inform the literature on farm productivity in
underdeveloped twentieth-century economies, many of which confront conditions
similar to those of nineteenth-century Brazil.