* 0418869
* Undergraduate Exploration of Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Jeanne Pemberton, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 12/31/2005
* USD 49,971.00

The award from the Chemistry Division supports an Undergraduate Research Centers
(URC) planning grant. The PI is Jani C. Ingram. The co-PIs are Mansel A. Nelson
of Northern Arizona University, Jeanne E. Pemberton of the University of Arizona
and Paul E. Smolenyak of Yavapai College. This award will develop a
comprehensive strategy for creating an undergraduate research center in Arizona
to enhance chemistry-related educational opportunities for early college
students. It will involve a partnership among a research-centered institution
(University of Arizona), a predominantly undergraduate institution (Northern
Arizona University), community colleges (Yavapai College and Coconino Community
College), and an educational outreach program (Environmental Education Outreach
Program/Institute of Tribal Environmental Professional). There will be an
initiative to recruit high school students to choose scientific careers. Other
objectives are to improve discovery-base learning aspects in the freshman
chemistry curriculum, develop research projects that involve activities at the
individual institutions as well as interactions between institutions, pilot
informational sessions for freshman students about lives of chemists that have
degrees in chemistry but have taken varying career paths, and explore adding
other community colleges to the center. The research opportunities for the
students will be concentrated on environmental science providing the students
with a multidisciplinary exposure to research.