* 0418042
* Macroevolution and geochemistry of Cenozoic giant sharks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Douglas Jones, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2010
* USD 315,085.00

ABSTRACT Fossil sharks of the Family Lamnidae have a rich Cenozoic global
history and are represented today by species such as the great white
(Carcharodon carcharias). During the Miocene, the extinct lamnid shark C.
megalodon attained truly enormous proportions. With a mean estimated body size
of ~40 tons, this extinct species rivals some dinosaurs and whales as one of the
largest animals that ever lived. The fundamental question that we seek to answer
is .how did large body size evolve within lamnid sharks like C. megalodon?.
Relative to its smaller ancestor, individuals of C. megalodon could have
attained very large body size by growing faster (increased rate), for a longer
time (increased longevity), or a combination of these two. These growth modes
will be determined within the lamnid clade using seven extinct and modern
species of Carcharodon and its sister-taxon Isurus compared to the extinct
outgroup Otodus obliquus. Macroevolution is the study of evolutionary patterns
and processes observed within closely related groups of species (clades). In
order to understand lamnid body size macroevolution, two key features need to be
determined for any given individual: (1) How many years old was it when it died?
This will be done by studying chemical signatures preserved in vertebral centra;
(2) How large was it? This will be determined from associated teeth, whose
dimensions are highly correlated to body size. Shark skeletons are composed
mostly of cartilage, which is not prone to fossilization. Nevertheless, the two
elements needed for this study are exceptions to this rule: (1) vertebral
centra, which during life replace cartilage with bone; and (2) durable teeth.
Although incremental growth rings preserved in centra are oftentimes annular,
they sometimes are not. A simple counting of the rings, therefore, could
potentially lead to erroneous individual age determinations. To circumvent this
problem, proxy seasonal and annual cycles represented by the oxygen isotopic
signatures preserved in centra will be used to calibrate the individual age of
each specimen. This will be done after centra are analyzed geochemically to
determine, relative modern lamnids, the extent of diagenesis (alteration during
fossilization) and how this process affected oxygen isotopic signatures archived
in fossil centra. These analyses will include = determination of physical and
chemical characteristics such as crystallinity, carbonate content, trace, minor,
and rare earth elemental concentrations, and oxygen isotopes. Our pilot studies
indicate that: (1) oxygen isotopic signatures can remain in centra even when
highly altered; and (2) certain elements and compounds known to occur in
unaltered bone can be used as tracers to model diagenesis in fossil bone.
Intellectual Merit.--This project will integrate concepts, methods, and data
from paleobiology and geochemistry. Body size macroevolution is of fundamental
interest to scientists, e.g., how it might relate to the concept of Cope's "Law"
(evolution of increased body size within clades). This study will provide a case
study using a clade that evolved what may be the largest body size ever. The
related geochemical part of this project will quantify diagenesis in bone and
calibrate incremental growth in fossil sharks. These results will facilitate
more informed interpretations of the isotopic signatures used for
paleobiological interpretations in other extinct vertebrates. Broader Impacts.
One graduate student will use part of this project for her Ph.D. research. An
undergraduate student research assistant will be recruited. This research will
be presented to UF students in graduate seminars and to other
colleagues/students at national meetings and invited seminars. K-12 teachers
will be involved in summer research experiences. Shark teeth are highly prized
by fossil collectors and inmegalodonlt evokes much public interest. This
research will be disseminated to the public through general lectures, fossil
festivals, field trips, newsletters, and exhibits at the Florida Museum of
Natural History. The public outreach will be promoted on our website
(www.flmnh.ufl.edu), which receives 7.2 million cybervisits (>60 million
iihitsls) per year.

