* 0418314
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Public Support and Democracy: Identifying Causal Mechanisms for Erosion of Democracy in Latin America
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Frances Hagopian, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2005
* USD 13,000.00

What creates a space for antidemocratic elements to gain control over democratic
institutions? To what extent does public opinion contribute to the emergence of
antidemocratic movements by creating an atmosphere that is conducive to the rise
of antiparty politicians with a tenuous commitment to democracy? By addressing
these questions, the proposed research seeks to advance existing knowledge vis-
a-vis the relationship between public opinion and the stability of democratic
regimes. The research challenges one of the major consensuses in the study of
democracy and democratization: the centrality of political elites in the
breakdown of democracy. It attempts to do so by exploring links between the two
levels of analysis: the macro-level of the regime and the micro-level of
attitudes and behavior.

Specifically, it examines how democratic performance shapes mass attitudes
concerning democracy and democratic institutions, or political parties in
particular, and how these affect the stability of democratic regimes via
elections. The proposed research would contribute to existing knowledge of what
sustains democracy and, consequently, its stability that affects people.s daily
lives, at the same time as it attends to important theoretical concerns. The
proposed research project tests three competing hypotheses with respect to why
citizens lose confidence in political parties and turn to antiparty politicians.
It focuses on the constituent elements of trust in political parties, and
introduces an original concept, the linkage-type hypothesis, to explain why some
citizens in some countries lose faith in parties while others do not. In order
to test these competing hypotheses concerning the constituent elements of trust
in political parties, the project works with two units of analysis, individuals
and countries. It also combines multiple methods of analysis. NSF funding is
requested to commission original surveys of 55-58 questions with a sample size
of 600 in the major metropolitan areas of Caracas, Venezuela and Lima-Callao,
Peru. The larger project, which draws from other current and pending support,
will include a similar survey of metropolitan Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Quantitative analyses of the surveys will be combined with findings from focus
group interviews, ethnographic research, and comparative historical analysis.
Focus group interviews and ethnographic research have been, and will be, used to
pretest the survey questions developed by the Co-PI. Comparative historical
analysis will allow the Co-PI to engage in the comparison of the national
contexts in which individuals are, or were, placed. This, in turn, is expected
to assist the interpretation of survey responses and the exploration of links
between regime performance and stability, on the one hand, and mass attitudes
and behavior, on the other. The proposed research project will have substantial
intellectual merit. It is expected to yield a number of journal articles,
culminating in a dissertation and a book that employ original data to answer a
question of great contemporary significance concerning the stability of
democratic regimes: why do Latin American citizens support antiparty politicians
with a tenuous commitment to democracy? The primary data gathered in this
project will be made available to others upon request, following the publication
of the book. Although the proposed research focuses its attention on the rise of
antiparty politicians in Latin America, its findings can be applied to other
regions and cases around the world, including Central and Eastern Europe, where
such politicians are also ascendant. Because the proposed study deals with the
sources of instability that could develop into violent conflict as it did in
Venezuela, it also has implications for both the prevention of violent conflict
and the reconstruction of stable democratic regimes in post-conflict societies.

Besides advancing knowledge and understanding, the proposed research also is
expected to have broader impacts on society. It will broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups in society by hiring women and minorities to
administer surveys in Peru and Venezuela and to decode the data at the
University of Notre Dame in a later stage of the project. Finally, the study
findings will be integrated into a course that the Co-PI is required to teach
about Andean politics and political economy, following her return from the
fieldwork at the University of Notre Dame, in accordance with an agreement with
the Kellogg Institute Fulbright Educational Partnerships Program.