* 0418174
* Identification in Macroeconomics
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Roger Farmer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 150,084.00

The research described in this proposal has three parts. The first concerns the
fragility of identifying assumptions that are typically made to identify
structural rational expectations models. The investigator focuses on new
Keynesian models of the monetary transmission mechanism but the issues he raises
apply more broadly to a large class of structural linear rational expectations
models. Building on his critical survey of existing approaches to
identification, in the second part of the proposal, he suggests a practical
alternative to standard identification methods that relies on the use of natural
experiments. Finally, he uses the input from estimated models, identified by
their suggested approach, to analyze the structure of optimal policy rules.

Broader Impact: Recent work in monetary economics seeks to identify
characteristics of monetary policy rules that are optimal in the sense of
minimizing a central bank objective function. In the presence of model
uncertainty, John Taylor [1999] has argued that we should seek rules that work
well in a broad class of theoretical environments. A good deal of the
theoretical work in this area begins by specifying a representative agent
maximizing model and deriving an implied set of linear functional equations that
must be obeyed by a rational expectations equilibrium. One of the key results in
this literature is the "Taylor principle" which asserts that monetary policy
should be active in the sense that the policy maker is advised to raise the
interest rate by more than 1% in response to a 1% increase in expected
inflation. The Taylor principle, and similar rules of thumb, are judged to be
"good" because in a large class of new Keynesian models he lead to a unique
rational expectations equilibrium. In contrast, rules that do not obey the
Taylor principle may be associated with indeterminacy and the possibility of
equilibria that are driven by extraneous "sunspot" fluctuations. The Taylor
principle has become a widely accepted rule-of-thumb for policy makers. The
investigator's proposed research implies that confidence in this principle may
be overstated and that policy advice based on simple structural models may rest
very heavily on non-verifiable identifying assumptions. His work implies that
existing researchers should test the implications of their identifying
assumptions by checking implications of these assumptions for parameter
constancy. Although part of their message is a criticism of existing approaches,
the investigator is able to suggest workable alternatives that can act as an
informed guide to future policy actions. His suggestion is to develop models
that exploit past changes in regime to uncover identification assumptions that
rely on natural experiments rather than on arbitrary assumptions that are
difficult to justify based on primitive economic theories. This approach is
widely applicable to a range of structural models and it can potentially provide
a guide to policy makers that may enable the development of more robust rules of
thumb that can act as guides to the conduct of monetary and fiscal policy.