* 0418434
* Political Economy of Land Reforms and Decentralized Governance in West Bengal 1978-98
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Pranab Bardhan, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 264,543.00

Understanding the relationship between politics and economic policy is central
to understanding the development process in low-income countries. This research
will study the experience of the state of West Bengal, India, which embarked on
a set of institutional reforms based on land reform and decentralized governance
in the agrarian sector for the past quarter century. Besides their agrarian
focus, these reforms differ from "Washington consensus"-style policy reforms
occurring in many developing countries during this period in that they were
explicitly aimed at reducing poverty: their principal thrust was to redistribute
assets and improve delivery of public services to the poor. The reforms were
accompanied by faster growth of agricultural output, diffusion of high yielding
varieties of rice, and diversification by farmers into cash crops. The research
will be based on detailed micro data already collected for a sample of 89 West
Bengal villages covering land reform, activities of elected local government,
evolution of demographics, land distribution, education, occupations and caste,
and production on farms of varying size. The first question addressed by the
research concerns the main political motives for land reform. Were they driven
by political ideology of the Left party in power, or by pressures of electoral
competition, or reduced power of landed elites to block such reforms? It will
also evaluate the effect of the land reform in changing the distribution of
landownership within these villages, relative to the effects of market
transactions and family fragmentation. The second component of the research will
assess the pro-poor targeting of various farm inputs and development programs
implemented by local governments, to infer the extent they were politically
accountable to the poor. Combined with the first part of the research, it will
try to empirically assess the importance of the land reform in ensuring the
antipoverty success of the decentralization program. The third and final part of
the research will assess the impact of these institutional reforms on the
dynamics of farm productivity. It will measure growth in farm productivity in
these villages, the extent to which such growth in different size categories was
driven by diffusion of high yielding rice varieties, diversification into cash
crops, changes in landownership, tenancy or sharecropper status, supplies of
credit, fertilizer, seeds, irrigation by local governments, after controlling
for changes in rainfall and other environmental factors. The direct and indirect
effect of the land reform and supply of farm inputs on farm productivity and
rural wages can then be evaluated, after controlling for alternative potential
explanations for agricultural growth such as changing prices or patterns of
social learning. This research will provide a better understanding of the link
between politics, decentralized decision making, agricultural productivity
growth, and poverty eradication in low-income countries.

