* 0418703
* ID-TIMS U-Pb ZIRCON RADIOMETRIC AGES FOR THE PENNSYLVANIAN-CISURALIAN TIME SCALE: IMPLICATIONS FOR GLOBAL CORRELATION AND RATES OF PROCESSES
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Vladimir Davydov, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul E Filmer
* 06/30/2009
* USD 364,009.00

Schmitz 0418703

The Late Pennsylvanian through Early Permian was an important interval in
Earth's history. Significant events of this age include the final assembly and
early evolution of Pangea, major eustatic changes in sea level, and global
climate change from the Pennsylvanian 'ice house' to the Permian 'hot house.'
Unfortunately, the poor temporal resolution of the geologic time scale during
this interval substantially limits our ability to clarify and correlate many
aspects of late Paleozoic geologic history. Commonly cited time scales differ by
as much as 14 Ma in the estimated age of the Pennsylvanian- Permian boundary,
and vary by 500% in the inferred duration of various stages. Significant
uncertainties in this part of the time scale arise because numerical ages
assigned to period and stage boundaries are based on linear interpolation
between relatively sparse control points. Moreover, the existing control points
were obtained from geographically disparate stratigraphic sections, assigned
positions in the time scale using several different taxa, and dated by several
different radiometric techniques. Because much fundamental research depends
directly on the accuracy and precision of the geologic time scale, improving its
age calibration is critical, and requires a robust, well-constrained, and
internally-consistent framework of biostratigraphic and geochronologic data for
the Late Carboniferous to Early Permian.

This is a three-year multidisciplinary research effort to calibrate this
interval of the time scale using the type sections and principal reference
sections in the southern Ural foreland of Russia- Kazakhstan. Three aspects of
the southern Urals make this an excellent laboratory for age calibration: first,
the internationally accepted definition of the chronostratigraphic scale for
Early Permian (Cisuralian) comes from this region, and it is a principal
reference area for the Late Pennsylvanian as well; second, late-Paleozoic marine
fauna (including small foraminifera, fusulinids, conodonts, and ammonoids) are
numerous and well preserved, allowing precise biostratigraphic control; and
third, interstratified volcanic ashes are common, making precise radiometric age
control achievable. The proposed study will have truly global significance.
Researchers worldwide working on a broad range of Late Paleozoic problems will
benefit directly and measurably from the results.