* 0418268
* Inference in Models With Weakly-Identified Parameters or Nearly-Integrated Variables
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Marcelo Moreira, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 181,153.00

There are many situations, such as when parameters are weakly identified or
regressors are nearly integrated, where standard asymptotic theory provides poor
approximations in econometric analysis. Obtaining reliable econometric methods
to deal with these increasingly important situations is a high priority need for
the economics profession. This research will develop methods to conduct
inference in linear models with weakly identified parameters or nearly
integrated series. The research has many potential impacts on academic fields
and on policy making and implementation. For example, educational reformers need
accurate statistical methods to judge alternative schooling policies; financial
institutions want to predict stock returns accurately; and those who decide on
monetary policy would like to assess structural changes in macroeconomic
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In practice, policy decisions are often based on
inferences that use certain asymptotic approximations. However, these
approximations are not satisfactory in many cases because they impose
restrictive assumptions that may not hold in practice. This research will
improve upon standard approximations methods using three related projects---weak
identification, highly persistent variables, and structural breaks. Each project
seeks to provide econometric procedures useful in different areas. The first
one, on weak identification, is particularly useful to applied researchers in
labor economics and macroeconomics who use non-experimental data. The research
on highly persistent variables can help financial economists to predict changes
in the stock market, while the third project on structural breaks is useful in
determining changes in time series data, which is prevalent in macroeconomics.
Besides its contribution to econometric theory, these methods could help improve
policy decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;