* 0418206
* Attention, Demographics, and the Stock Market
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Stefano DellaVigna, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 197,497.00

According to the theory of efficient financial markets, stock prices should
reflect all available information. However, evidence on post-earnings
announcement drift and momentum effects suggests that stock prices do not fully
adjust to new information. This project explores a novel model of investor
attention and some preliminary evidence on a test of the model. In addition, it
suggests further empirical tests.

The intellectual merit of this proposal is that it outlines a straightforward
model of the allocation of attention and suggests a test of its implications for
demographic variables. The hypothesis is that individuals neglect information
about long-term outcomes, even when these outcomes can be forecast. For example,
investors may neglect long-term determinants of earnings. This project considers
a prominent example of a variable that can be forecast years in advance, and
therefore may be partially neglected - demographics. In a model with attentive
investors, forecastable fluctuations in cohort size should not generate
predictability of stock returns, because stock prices react immediately to the
demographic information. Under the alternative hypothesis of inattention,
current demographic information should forecast future stock returns.
Preliminary evidence from the US stock market over the period 1936-2002 supports
the hypothesis of inattention. It also suggests two additional tests of the
hypothesis of inattention to long-term demographic information. The first
additional test is a cross-country study of the response of industry stock
returns to demographic variables. The analysis of markets of countries such as
France, Japan, and United Kingdom would add substantially to the available
evidence, which is currently limited to the United States. The second empirical
test focuses on prominent media articles on demographic trends. On days when
such articles appear, inattentive investors respond by correcting their previous
under-reaction to information regarding demographic variables. Lastly, the
proposal describes a third project on the corporate response to anticipated
demand shifts induced by demographics. The decisions studied include entry,
exit, and investment. Of particular interest is whether companies react in
advance of the forecastable demand shifts.

The broader impacts of this proposal are twofold. First, this proposal improves
the understanding of the economic consequences of demographic changes. Given the
large demographic changes looming for American and European societies, a better
understanding of the impact of demographic variables is a first-order task.
Second, this proposal adds to the interdisciplinary work in behavioral finance
and in behavioral economics. This project takes a simple insight about attention
allocation - long-term events may be neglected - and examines its relevance in
markets.