* 0418946
* Arabidopsis 2010: Analysis of Four Families of Receptor Protein Kinases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Frans Tax, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,747,735.00

The receptor-like protein kinases (RLKs) are the largest class of Arabidopsis
protein kinases. This class, which based on phylogenetic analysis contains both
transmembrane and cytoplasmic protein kinases, consists of at least 610 members
and thus represents about 2.5% of the protein encoding genes in Arabidopsis .
417 of the RLK genes contain a putative ligand binding domain, a single
transmembrane domain and a predicted cytoplasmic protein kinase domain, and thus
are predicted to function as receptors. These 417 genes can be classified into
21 different types based on the sequences found in their extracellular domains.
However, there is currently functional information on fewer than a dozen of the
transmembrane RLKs. This research will focus on 61 of the 216 RLK genes that
contain extracellular leucine-rich repeats (LRRs). Six well characterized RLK
mutants in Arabidopsis thaliana :erecta, clavata1, brassinosteroid insensitive1,
excess microsporocytes1, vascular highway1, and haesa belong to the LRR VII, X,
XI and XII families. Based on what is known about the functions of these six
well characterized LRR RLKs it is reasonable to hypothesize that many of the
uncharacterized LRR VII, X, XI and XIII genes are likely to play interesting and
important roles in plant growth and development. Two emerging themes are: that
receptor kinases are part of a cellular network of regulatory proteins that
includes physical interactions with other RLKs, and that some receptor kinases
are involved in similar or overlapping processes. Using existing tools and
technologies, the biological functions of each gene will be determined by
isolation and characterization of both loss-of-function and gain-of-function
mutations and examination of expression of the LRR VII, X, XI and XIII genes.
The regulatory networks that mediate signaling by these protein kinases will
also be defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network of genes: The figure on the URL
:http://www.mcb.arizona.edu/tax/login.cfm, shows a phylogenetic tree of the LRR
RLKs in this project and a short description of the project. This will be linked
to Frans Tax 's website. There will be links to this from TAIR, PlantsP and the
websites from the other participants in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Definition of determining the function: The
function of these RLKs will be determined through the analysis of the phenotypes
of single and multiple mutants and by analysis of the networks these RLKs
participate in through results from the yeast two-hybrid system. Additional
information to test for phenotypes will come from analysis of the expression
patterns and from the analysis by others on RLK activity under specific
environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What,how,when and where results
will be shared: When single or multiple insertion or TILLING mutants are
verified, they will be added to the project website and seeds sent to the stock
center. The results of phenotypic screens using Gantlet protocols will be
displayed on the website,as well photographs of the promoter:GUS expression
patterns. These results will also be linked to PlantsP. All seed, strains and
molecular reagents generated by this project will be deposited in the ABRC with
a full description. Results from these experiments will also be presented at
meetings and submitted for publication in a timely
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 2010 project targets a unique set of plant
genes of unknown function that are expected to have fundamental roles in the
control of plant growth and development. Although a great deal is known about
signaling networks in other organisms with completed genomes, relatively little
is known about the mechanisms by which plant cells perceive and transduce
developmental and environmental signals. The availability of several recently
developed tools and technologies provides the means to rapidly advance the
understanding of the biological functions of the LRR RLKs
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
project include the partnership with high school teachers to adapt the research
materials for high school students participating in the Partnership for Research
and Education in Plants (PREP), as well as the development of training workshops
for teachers and scientists to prepare them to participate in PREP. This project
also provides specific mentoring and training for undergraduate students that
are members of underrepresented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;