* 0418071
* Reading and Speaking Words in Two Languages: A Psycholinguistic Approach to Bilingualism
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Judith Kroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2008
* USD 282,814.00

Biliterate bilinguals can both read and speak in two languages. However, in most
circumstances, they use one language only. What is the fate of the unused
language when a bilingual is reading or speaking in one language alone? Past
studies suggest that both languages are active even when bilinguals intend to
use only one language. If bilinguals cannot function as monolinguals, then how
do they control the use of the intended language? With National Science
Foundation support, Dr. Judith Kroll will investigate the conditions that allow
literate bilinguals to achieve the exquisite cognitive control that they appear
to have when using language. The specific aims of the planned research are to
determine what cues bilinguals use to attend to the desired language and how
their language experience, including the timing and context of acquisition of
the second language, functions to modulate potential competition across the two
languages. This research project will use the experience of bilinguals as a
means to better understand the mechanisms of cognitive control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research will contribute important foundational
knowledge about multilingualism that will inform educational issues in a society
in which many learners are faced with the task of acquiring a second language
past the earliest stages of childhood. The research will also contribute to the
training of an increasingly diverse group of cognitive scientists by including
both undergraduate and graduate students, many of whom are themselves bilingual,
and will foster international scientific collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Original Project
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits. Although proficient bilinguals rarely make the error of speaking words
in the wrong language or thinking that they are reading text in a language other
than the one intended, recent cognitive research on lexical access in word
recognition and in spoken production suggests that information about both
languages is active, at least briefly, in even highly skilled tasks such as
reading and speaking. The absence of a simple mechanism to switch off one of the
two languages when using the other makes the problem more complicated from the
perspective of bilingual performance, but also more interesting from the
perspective of elucidating cognitive mechanisms. For this reason, bilingualism
has become an important tool for psychologists who wish to model developing
systems, the competition between them, and the consequences for executive
control. The general goal of the proposed research is to identify factors that
permit cross-language competition to be resolved. The specific aims of the
planned studies are to determine what cues bilingual use to attend to the
intended language, whether there are learning contexts that facilitate
acquisition of these cues, and whether the language experience of the bilingual
affects the ability to modulate cross-language competition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Until recently, cognitive science
virtually ignored the fact that most people of the world, and an increasing
number of people in the US, are bilingual. In the past ten years this situation
has changed markedly. There is now an appreciation that learning and using more
than one language is a natural circumstance of cognition. Not only does research
on second language learning and bilingualism provide crucial evidence regarding
the universality of cognitive principles, but it also provides an important tool
for revealing constraints within the cognitive architecture. The proposed
research will contribute important foundational knowledge about multilingualism
that will inform educational issues in an increasingly diverse society in which
many learners are faced with the task of acquiring a second language past the
earliest stages of childhood. The research will more specifically contribute to
the infrastructure of science by training a more diverse group of students than
is typical in cognitive psychology and by fostering international scientific
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;