* 0418851
* Collaborative Research: The Contribution of Specialist Pollinators to Generalist Plants: When Do Specialists Matter?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* T'ai Roulston, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2009
* USD 163,697.00

Interactions among species remain an understudied part of biodiversity that is
crucial to predicting the structure of natural communities and how they will
sustain themselves in a changing world. Pollination by bees stands out as a key
interaction on which most plants in natural systems and agriculture depend. In
this collaborative project, researchers and students from two U.S. universities,
a women's college, and Mexico will investigate the roles played by different
native bees in the pollination of desert plants and how their roles change
depending on the types of other plants and pollinators in the natural community.
Bees are an unusual pollinator group because many species are very selective in
the plants they visit (these are known as "specialized" pollinators), while
others are generalized, visiting a wide variety of plants. Historically, it was
assumed that specialized pollinators would pollinate only plants with elaborate
flowers that were difficult for other pollinators to use. Surprisingly, the
investigators of this project have found that specialist bees most often go to
plants with simple flowers that are also visited by many generalized
pollinators. In such cases, the contributions of specialists to their favored
plant may be overwhelmed by those of the numerous generalists. Using a set of
focal plants, we address the questions: Are these specialized bee species truly
important to their host plants? And, if so, does their importance change in
concert with the blooming periods of different groups of flowering plants and
generalist pollinators? We will assess the importance of specialists and
generalist pollinators by measuring the numbers of visits that each bee species
makes to the plant and the number of pollen grains transferred during these
visits. These data will help reveal not simply how the identities of species
change in response to others in the community, but how their functional roles
change and what mechanisms underlie these shifts. The answers are central to
understanding the structure of pollinator-plant interactions and how they vary
in the face of changing environments.