* 0418632
* Collaborative Research: Estimation and Testing for Associations with Multiple-Response Categorical Variables from Complex Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Christopher Bilder, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2007
* USD 42,594.00

When two or more categorical variables are measured, questions naturally arise
regarding the associations among them. Well-established methods, such as Pearson
chi-square tests for independence and loglinear models, have been developed to
assess the association structure between "single-response" categorical
variables. When one of these categorical variables arises from a survey question
which asks respondents to "choose all that apply," the analysis is not as
straightforward because survey respondents may respond positively to more than
one item from the list and the responses are likely to be correlated, creating a
"multiple-response" categorical variable. Furthermore, when the survey data
arises from a complex survey design, there currently are no statistical analysis
methods available to analyze association structures involving multiple-response
categorical variables. This research project will develop a new set of
statistical analysis procedures for testing and estimating associations and
modeling multiple-response categorical variables arising through complex survey
sampling. The research will build upon recently developed methods for multiple-
response categorical variables in the simple random sample case. Rao-Scott
adjustments, common in the analysis of associations among ordinary single-
response categorical variables from complex survey sampling, will be extended to
develop Pearson-type tests of associations involving multiple-response
categorical variables. Odds-ratio-based measures of association and
corresponding linearization-based standard errors will be derived to measure
level of association. Marginal generalized loglinear models will be developed
that allow the association structure to be described in terms of main effects
and interactions due to the factors represented by the multiple-response
categorical variables. Model-based tests for goodness-of-fit and estimates of
odds ratios will be developed using asymptotic techniques. Adequacy of all
methods developed will be examined by means of
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society is inundated with surveys, many of
which include questions that invite respondents to "choose all that apply" from
a series of items. This research will provide survey analysts with an essential
set of statistical analysis tools for analyzing data from questions of this
type, for which there currently is no good alternative. It also will lay the
groundwork for future research including extensions to more varied data
structures and the handling of missing data. Because surveys are such an
integral part of our society's information-gathering and exchange system, the
impact can be expected to be far-reaching, affecting areas such as public
health, political science, criminology, sociology, demography, business, and
technology. Any institution that uses statistically-designed surveys and
includes "choose all that apply" questions stands to benefit from the tools
provided by this research. The research is supported by the Methodology,
Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
agencies as part of a joint activity to support research on survey and
statistical methodology.&lt;br/&gt;