* 0418410
* The Grammar of Surmiran Rumantsch
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Stephen Anderson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2008
* USD 150,181.00

What is lost when a language dies? Languages are becoming extinct at a
&lt;br/&gt;much higher rate than biological species, and each time this happens,
&lt;br/&gt;the connection of a people with their history, traditional knowledge
&lt;br/&gt;and cultural heritage is severed. Each language is a unique
&lt;br/&gt;combination of the possibilities offered by the human language
faculty, &lt;br/&gt;and each language that dies reduces the evidence available
for the &lt;br/&gt;nature of that faculty. Many of the world's endangered
languages are &lt;br/&gt;those of tribal peoples in remote places, but many more
are spoken &lt;br/&gt;right alongside what we think of as major languages.
Indeed, this very &lt;br/&gt;proximity is a major reason, in many cases, for the
endangered status &lt;br/&gt;of local or minority languages. With support from
the National Science &lt;br/&gt;Foundation, Dr. Stephen Anderson will carry out
field studies of &lt;br/&gt;Surmiran, one of five major forms of Rumantsch in
Switzerland. Intense &lt;br/&gt;linguistic pressure from speakers of Italian and
especially German &lt;br/&gt;makes it extremely difficult for the 3,000 or so
speakers of this &lt;br/&gt;language to maintain their Rumantsch identity. The
language has a &lt;br/&gt;number of features that make it quite important,
though, both for the &lt;br/&gt;study of Romance languages and for linguistic
theory more generally. &lt;br/&gt;For example, Rumantsch is the only modern
Romance language that &lt;br/&gt;consistently requires the verb of the sentence
to appear in second &lt;br/&gt;position, in a way similar to (but subtly
different from) German. &lt;br/&gt;Surmiran has a system of weak (or "clitic")
pronouns that appear &lt;br/&gt;together with a full expression referring to the
subject under complex &lt;br/&gt;conditions related to a number of other
grammatical properties. The &lt;br/&gt;language also has sound types that are
quite unusual both in themselves &lt;br/&gt;and in the ways they form groups (or
clusters). In every area of its &lt;br/&gt;grammar, Surmiran Rumantsch has
something to show us about the range of &lt;br/&gt;possibilities for human
language that we might well never know if the &lt;br/&gt;language disappeared
before it could be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
documentation of the features of the language &lt;br/&gt;at several levels. For
linguists, technical analyses of its &lt;br/&gt;peculiarities and their
relevance to important theoretical issues will &lt;br/&gt;bring a new set of
data into discussion in the field. For speakers of &lt;br/&gt;the language, a
grammatical description will be provided which can play &lt;br/&gt;a role in
language courses in the educational system, as well as &lt;br/&gt;providing a
convenient reference. It is often the case that the mere &lt;br/&gt;fact of
devoting scientific attention to an endangered language can &lt;br/&gt;have the
effect of awakening pride and interest in the community, as &lt;br/&gt;they
realize that their language is not simply a marginal "dialect" but &lt;br/&gt;a
special and valuable kind of knowledge, structurally as rich and
&lt;br/&gt;varied as those with more prestige, and especially valuable to them
as &lt;br/&gt;the vehicle in which their own culture is expressed. In addition
to &lt;br/&gt;providing resources to these two communities, linguists on the one
hand &lt;br/&gt;and Surmiran speakers on the other, this project will also
provide &lt;br/&gt;opportunities for graduate students to participate directly
in research &lt;br/&gt;with both a basic and an applied
character.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;