* 0418653
* Regulation of seedling de-etiolation by light
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Enamul Huq, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 12/31/2008
* USD 499,239.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The phytochrome (phy)
family of sensory photoreceptors in Arabidopsis consists of five members (phyA
to phyE) that control many developmental responses to the ambient light
environment. Significant progress has been made on characterization of
photosensory and biochemical functions and in the identification and functional
characterization of signaling intermediates. However, the biochemical mechanism
of phy signaling is still not clear. To examine early phy signaling events, phy
interacting factors such as PIF1 have been isolated and characterized. PIF1 is a
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor that interacts strongly with
the biologically active form of phyA and phyB, as well as another bHLH factor,
PIF3. PIF1 binds to a G-box (CACGTG) DNA sequence motif commonly found in many
light regulated promoters. PIF1 has also been shown to activate transcription in
a transient assay, and the transcriptional activation activity was downregulated
by far-red and red light in a phyA- and phyB-dependent manner, respectively.
PIF1 overexpressors and pif1 T-DNA insertional mutants showed defective seedling
de-etiolation, including aberrant hypocotyl elongation and developmentally
regulated loss of greening. These results suggest that PIF1 is a key regulator
of the phy-mediated control of the seedling de-etiolation process. The proposed
study will investigate the molecular mechanism by which PIF1 controls seedling
de-etiolation using molecular genetic, biochemical and functional genomic
approaches. Specifically, the PIF1 target genes will be identified and
functionally characterized, and the molecular function of PIF1 will be
investigated to examine whether it acts as a transcriptional activator or
repressor from a native target gene promoter. In addition, the biological
significance of physical interactions between PIF1-phy and PIF1-PIF3 will be
investigated in vivo. Since PIF1 is a primary phy-signaling partner whose
activity is regulated by phy, the results from this study will provide
fundamental information on the mechanism of phy signaling.&lt;br/&gt;Expected
Broader Impacts: Light is arguably one of the most important environmental
factors controlling plant growth and development, including many agronomically
important traits such as seed germination, seedling establishment and survival,
plant height, leaf area, flowering time and plantation density. Understanding
the mechanism of light-regulated plant growth and development will provide
excellent tools to apply in agricultural biotechnology for increased crop
production using reduced amount of fertilizers. This proposal is also ideally
suited for training of the next generation of scientists, including
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students. Their training in light
signaling will give them a unique opportunity to make significant contributions
to the field of photobiology and biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;