* 0418024
* Doctoral Dissertation Research : Institutional Resilience and Decentralized Resource Management in a Changing World
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Margaret McKean, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2006
* USD 15,400.00

This research explores the mechanisms, and associated factors, by which local
institutions for the management of natural resources successfully adapt to
changes in important features of the external environment, namely, demographic
change, market integration, technological progress, shifts in state policies,
and political competition. Existing theoretical understanding of common property
institutions, particularly at the local level, has been preoccupied with
internal features of the institutions that are associated with cooperative
behavior, largely ignoring the larger context or holding it constant. This
project contributes to theory development by expanding the scope of the theory
of institutions to include changes in the external environment over time.
&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual merit: The interaction between local institutions and
the external environment over a long period of time has never been studied
systematically before. The impact of population and markets have been explored
to some extent, but analysis of the role of technology and state policies has
been restricted to their influence on the resources, without explicit reference
to local institutional arrangements. Political competition has not been
considered to be an important factor in the performance of local institutions
for natural resource management till now. This project is the first attempt to
explore changes in all the relevant features of the external environment
simultaneously, within a unified analytical framework. In another theoretical
contribution, it seeks to empirically clarify and theoretically engage the
concept of institutional resilience . the ability of institutions to adapt to
changes in the external environment. The research design combines qualitative
and inductive analysis of contextual factors with quantitative and time-series
analysis of institutions, providing greater theoretical leverage over causal
inference. The project will create a framework for the comparative analysis of
institutions for the management of different resource types . forests and
irrigation . that would be exportable to other locations and contexts, and
create a dataset for over 100 institutions for future reference. &lt;br/&gt;
Broader impacts: More than sixty developing countries have initiated
decentralization policies in the 1990s that devolve management authority to
local/village institutions over multiple domains, including drinking water,
primary education, public health, and small infrastructure development, besides
forests, fisheries, and irrigation. Inevitably, the external environment in
which these institutions are expected to perform is changing steadily, whereas
social scientists and policymakers do not have the theoretical tools and
operational instruments to equip institutions to adapt to these changes. Better
appreciation of the factors that contribute to institutional resilience has the
potential to enhance the quality of policy- making and implementation. Much of
the literature on democratization in developing countries has ignored
environmental issues, just as the literature on environmental politics has
almost totally neglected democratic politics. By incorporating the influence of
democratic competition on the functioning of local institutions for natural
resource management, this research project initiates the building of a bridge
between the two literatures, leading to a better appreciation of the challenges
in environmental management in new and broadening democracies. The theoretical
lessons from this research would also be applicable to similar questions in
other domains, such as public goods provision, political decentralization, and
fiscal federalism. &lt;br/&gt;