* 0418351
* Preserving and Enhancing Accessiblility of Gosiute/Shoshoni Materials in the Wick R. Miller Collection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Mauricio Mixco, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2007
* USD 307,452.00

With National Science Foundation support, Professors Mauricio J. Mixco and
Marianna Di Paolo will head four teams in transcribing and translating materials
from the Wick R. Miller Collection (WRMC) at the University of Utah. The teams,
which include Shoshoni native-speakers, will will preserve and enhance the
accessibility of the 148 tape recordings and associated manuscripts in Great
Basin languages now vulnerable to deterioration, including 119 untranscribed and
untranslated tapes in the Shoshoni/Gosiute language, a member of the Central
Numic branch of Numic, a the Uto-Aztecan language family spoken in the Great
Basin regions of Nevada, Utah, Idaho and Wyoming. With roughly 2,000 to 3,000
native speakers, Shoshoni/Gosiute is &lt;br/&gt;highly endangered as most
speakers are above 60 years old and it is &lt;br/&gt;not being passed on to the
youngest generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bulk of the recordings and
manuscripts at risk contain invaluable &lt;br/&gt;linguistic, cultural, and
historical data collected over 30 years by &lt;br/&gt;the late Numic expert,
Wick R. Miller, primarily by and about the &lt;br/&gt;Great Basin Shoshoni and
Gosiute tribes, whose cultural heritage is &lt;br/&gt;contained in Miller's
recordings and manuscripts. The original tape &lt;br/&gt;recordings will be re-
mastered onto archival quality reel-to-reel &lt;br/&gt;tapes and DAT tapes to
serve as digital masters from which to produce &lt;br/&gt;working files for
transcription and downloading to more portable &lt;br/&gt;compact disk or
cassette formats. Linguistics student assistants &lt;br/&gt;will scan and/or
type into a computer database the Miller notebooks &lt;br/&gt;and binders
containing field notes from elicitation sessions along &lt;br/&gt;with the few
existing transcripts of the tapes. This will produce a &lt;br/&gt;searchable
electronic copy of the notebooks and binders. Tribal &lt;br/&gt;members and
scholars will have ready access to the materials through &lt;br/&gt;the
University of Utah Marriott Library and on a website, especially &lt;br/&gt;in
support of current and future language maintenance and &lt;br/&gt;revitalization
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A projected reference grammar, dictionary and text
collection will &lt;br/&gt;also draw on previous studies of Shoshoni/Gosiute
sentence structure, &lt;br/&gt;supplementing these materials with original
analyses of its syntax &lt;br/&gt;and semantics to fill in gaps in the earlier
research. The proposed &lt;br/&gt;reference grammar will cover the structure,
meaning, and use of all &lt;br/&gt;known Shoshoni/Gosiute simple and complex
sentence types and other &lt;br/&gt;discourse structures. Entries in the grammar
and bilingual &lt;br/&gt;Shoshoni-English dictionary will be streamlined, with
generalizations &lt;br/&gt;stated early and with complications and exceptions
added later. A &lt;br/&gt;wide range of examples and additional cultural notes
that can be &lt;br/&gt;ignored by readers seeking a quick overview will be
included. The reference grammar, dictionary and text collection will aid
community efforts to strengthen the use of Shoshoni/Gosiute and maintain its
rich linguistic and literary tradition. They will also be a resource for
linguists to test analyses of grammatical phenomena and to further describe how
Shoshoni/Gosiute fits into the spectrum of human languages.&lt;br/&gt;