* 0418902
* Undergraduate Research Center-Center for Authentic Science Practice in Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2012
* Donald Wink, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2012
* USD 2,988,043.00

&lt;br/&gt;The award from the Chemistry Division supports the establishment of
an Undergraduate Research Center (URC) as a collaborative effort involving
Purdue University, the University of Illinois-Chicago, Ball State University,
Northeastern Illinois University, Olive Harvey College, Harold Washington
College, Moraine Valley College, College of DuPage and Chicago State University.
The PI is Gabriela Weaver with coPIs, Fred Lytle, Robert Morris, Pratibha Varma-
Nelson and Donald Wink. This collaboration, called the Center for Authentic
Science Practice in Education (CASPiE), has as its main objective to create
laboratory modules for first and second year chemistry courses that will provide
students with learning experiences from 2-3 research based projects each
semester. The projects will utilize advanced instrumentation and engage
initially up to 500 students per semester in a process that parallels authentic
research practice. The experiments will teach fundamental chemistry skills and
concepts but will be interdisciplinary, involving authentic research projects
developed by faculty in Chemistry, Biochemistry, Chemical Biology, Medicinal
Chemistry, Food Science and Chemical Engineering. Teams of research faculty from
Purdue and the other partner institutions working with faculty from community
colleges and other primarily undergraduate institutions where these lab modules
will be used will develop the research modules for these lab courses. The Peer-
Led Team Learning (PLTL) model will be incorporated into the laboratory program
utilizing undergraduates who have recently completed the course to facilitate
learning skills such as literature searches, approaches to analyze data, and
presentation of findings in poster and oral formats. The center will establish
an online instrumentation resource that will provide students with remote access
to automated, research level instrumentation. This network of instruments will
be available to students in all the Center institutions. Besides its use in the
laboratory modules, it will help PUI faculty participants develop research
projects so their own research capacity is enhanced and the students at these
institutions can participate in research. This award will advance discovery
through the chemical research that is conducted by the students while promoting
their learning of chemistry. The CASPiE collaborative is intended to develop an
educational model that will be engaging and welcoming for women and ethnic
minorities who are underrepresented in science. Qualitative and quantitative
tools will be employed to provide summative and formative evaluation of project
goals. William Boone from Indiana University will direct the assessment. The
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, Directorate of Mathematics and Physical
Sciences cofunds this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;