* 0418897
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Presaging Paleoproterozoic Global Change: Geobiology of the Late Archean Eon
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Roger Buick, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2008
* USD 79,930.00

Project will integrate geological, paleobiological and geochemical examination
of a freshly-collected Archean sediment drill-core that will be obtained in the
summer of 2004. This continuous core, ~ 1000 m in length, will sample the last ~
250 million years of Archean stratigraphy in the Hamersley Basin of the Pilbara
Craton, Western Australia. Sampled lithologies will include basalt, carbonate,
chert and several kerogenous pyritic shale units.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is
possible because of an unprecedented opportunity for collaboration with the
Astrobiology Drilling Program (ADP) of the NASA Astrobiology Institute. The ADP
will fund acquisition of this core. The NSF funds will be used for initial
characterization of core materials to include a detailed study of paleoecology
and paleoenvironment in kerogenous sediments. Importantly, core recovery will be
over-seen by PI Buick and is geared specifically toward the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The general motivation of the proposed
research is to characterize the nature of life and its environment in the late
Archean, shortly before the rise of atmospheric oxygen. Many workers are
examining the timing of this redox transition and its relationship to
contemporaneous climatic oscillations that may include global ice ages. The
team's interest, somewhat different but complementary, is to understand how the
Archean biosphere set the stage for this singular environmental transformation.
Specifically, a major goal of this project is to characterize the relative
importance of different types of microbes in late Archean marine environments
and, through lithofacies relationships, to study the envi-ronmental controls on
their distributions. This goal will be achieved through integrated examination
of hydrocarbon molecular biomarkers, redox indicators and biogeochemical cycling
in kerogenous sediments.&lt;br/&gt;Clean drilling methods, immediate sampling
and prompt analysis will allow us to unambiguously deter-mine if taxonomically
diagnostic sterane and triterpenoid hydrocarbons are indigenous to these rocks.
These compounds are abundant in existing, poorly-preserved Hamersley Basin drill
core and, if not contaminants, constitute the earliest biomarkers of eukaryotes
and cyanobacteria. Further, analysis of the new core should permit us to examine
the relative abundances and isotopic compositions of such compounds in an
environmental context, yielding information about ecological relationships.
Additional goals are to characterize the status of major biogeochemical cycles
in the late Archean and generate a robust baseline for future investigations by
conducting sedimentological and biogeochemical reconnaissance of the entire
core. Collectively, this work will test the hypothesis that oxygen-generating
cyanobacteria and aerobic microorganisms were present in Archean ecosystems and
that the environmental imprints of these me-tabolisms remained muted for
hundreds of millions of years after their origins.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
There are three areas of broader impact. First, ~ 6 graduate students will
participate in an unusually integrative and multi-disciplinary research project
spanning six major research universities. While each will be rooted in a single
aspect of the program, these students will have substantive opportunities to
bridge across subdisciplines and institutions. Second, because the planned drill
core will ultimately be openly available in accordance with the ADP charter,
this work will provide a lithological and chemostratigraphic framework of
benefit to the wider research community. Third, it is hoped that this NSF-NASA
collaboration will provide a positive precedent for future efforts by other
investigators that might ultimately evolve into a broader inter-agency "Deep
Time Drilling Program".&lt;br/&gt;