* 0418450
* An Experimental Economics Examination of Behavioral Anomalies, Group Decision Making and the Provision of Public Goods
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* William Schulze, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2006
* USD 220,534.00

The proposed research undertakes a systematic examination of the impact of
behavioral anomalies on the demand for and provision of public goods. Since the
joint application of psychology and economics to the study of public goods is a
relatively new area of inquiry, the research focuses on a preliminary list of
major anomalies that are likely to show substantive biases in public decision-
making. Similarly, there are a large number of public good mechanisms that could
be utilized, ranging from purely voluntary, such as those typical of fund
drives, to those that are coercive in nature, such as public referenda. The four
public good mechanisms explored in the research were chosen because of their
real world applicability and include: (1) the voluntary contributions mechanism
(VCM) which is commonly used for charitable giving; (2) Voting, the most
utilized mechanism for government provision of public goods; (3) the Provision
Point Mechanism (PPM) which is the second most common mechanism for private
funding of public goods and utilizes a threshold to partially overcome free
riding; and (4) the Proportional Contribution Mechanism (PCM) which is a form of
matching grants to encourage voluntary contributions.

The anomalies explored in the research include status quo bias and other
manifestations of the value function of prospect theory (reluctance to trade,
loss aversion, etc.); framing of choices including the number and order of
choices; risk and uncertainty in the provision of public goods such as group
insurance or provision of a group lottery (potential anomalies include
overweighting, risk dismissal, and ambiguity); and discounting of public versus
private goods where hyperbolic discounting may arise and public rates may be
lower than private rates). The research will hopefully show that voluntary
mechanisms (forms of charitable giving), that are an increasingly important form
of support for environmental and social programs, may be amenable to
improvements by using insights from psychology and behavioral economics. The
possibility also exists that the research may yield an improved understanding of
voting behavior under conditions of risk and uncertainty which may help with
decisions regarding hazardous facilities, nuclear power, climate change,
homeland security, etc. Similarly, a better understanding of behavioral
anomalies in inter-temporal choice regarding issues, such as budget deficits,
the failure to reform social security, and other social programs that are in
difficulty may help public decision-making. Also, a better understanding of the
effects of order and context in voting wherein, for example, substantial funding
is easily voted for the first major program passed by a legislative body, but
following programs get progressively more poorly funded. Behavioral anomalies in
public good values may also have implications for benefit cost analysis (BCA).
BCA has been required for Federal regulations since issuance of Executive Order
12291 in 1980.