* 0418110
* Health, Education, and Economic Development
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Edward Miguel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 240,680.00

Researchers in developed countries have long known of the link between health
and education and labor market outcomes. There has also recently been a growing
awareness of the important role that health, and in particular tropical disease,
may play in perpetuating poverty in less developed countries. However, research
progress has been slowed by difficulties in disentangling the causal
relationships between health, education, and income partly because of lack of
suitable data to investigate the relationship. This research relies on credible
methods and original data collection to address these issues, through three
inter-related projects.

The first project examines the long-run impact of a school-based health program
in rural Kenya. Free medical treatment for intestinal helminthes (worms) was
provided starting in 1998. Intestinal worms infect over 90 percent of primary
school children in this area. Medical treatment was randomly "phased in" to the
schools during 1998-2001, and this prospective project design helps overcome the
problem of establishing the direction of causality between health gains and
later outcomes. The research builds on an existing database of educational and
health outcomes for these school children, and the resulting dataset will
contain unique longitudinal educational, labor market, demographic, and health
information over ten years. If there are strong links between child health gains
from de-worming and adult poverty, the results may justify increased public
investments in child health and nutrition programs.

The second project also examines the link between child health and education
using a prospective research design, but in the urban slums of Delhi, India.
This study evaluates the impact of a project, which delivered Iron
supplementation and de-worming drugs to 2-6 year old children through an
existing pre-school network. The third project focuses on the related, but
distinct, issue of how individuals learn about new health technologies, and make
adoption decisions, in this case for de-worming drugs in Kenya. A novel
experimental methodology is used to estimate "peer effects" in drug adoption,
and we interpret the empirical results using a new model of social learning.
This research will greatly contribute to our understanding of the causal link
between health and educational and labor market outcomes in Less Developed
Countries.