* 0418390
* CAREER: An Information-Theoretic Approach to Computational Learning with Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Javed Aslam, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 173,737.00

Information theory is the science of quantifying, encoding, and extracting
information. The research proposed in this career development plan consists of
work designed to strengthen the theoretical foundations and empirical
applicability of computational learning through the development of a rigorous,
information-theoretic framework for investigating this discipline. Specifically,
an information-theoretic framework, based on communication theory, is proposed
for investigating the probably approximately correct (PAC) model of machine
learning. This framework is shown to be robust and extensible; new learning
algorithms, general measures of performance, and analysis techniques are all
proposed and demonstrated.

In addition to providing a means for strengthening the theoretical foundations
of computational learning, this framework also provides a mechanism for
developing and rigorously analyzing new learning algorithms. New algorithms for
hypothesis boosting, document classification, document filtering, and meta-
search are all proposed. The proposed applications work has both theoretical and
experimental components: all new algorithms are to be analyzed, implemented and
tested using benchmark data.

Teaching and education are an integral part of this career development plan.
Both graduate and undergraduate students are introduced to topical research,
both theoretical and applied, through the projects proposed. New courses on
learning and information retrieval, accessible to both graduate and
undergraduate students, are also proposed.