* 0418663
* Acquisition of new paleomagnetic lab equipment for Bryn Mawr College, Pennsylvania
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Arlo Weil, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2007
* USD 114,447.00

0418663&lt;br/&gt;Weil&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports acquisition of
new paleomagnetic equipment by Bryn Mawr College (BMC) for the purposes of (1)
supporting research into fold-thrust belt kinematics, global tectonics,
paleogeography, and fundamental aspects of paleomagnetism and its applications,
(2) supporting new creative initiatives in interdisciplinary faculty and student
research in fields such as environmental magnetism, geoarcheology, marine
geology and paleoclimateology, and (3) enhancing undergraduate research and the
curriculum at BMC. Equipment to be purchased includes: 1) a spinner magnetometer
and related accessories to measure remanent magnetizations in sediment and rock
samples, 2) demagnetization instruments (including thermal and alternating field
demagnetizers) to progressively remove remanent magnetizations under controlled
laboratory conditions, 3) a magnetically shielded space in which to perform the
paleomagnetic analysis, and 4) basic rock magnetic equipment for
characterization of magnetic mineralogy. The capabilities of this equipment will
enhance a broad base of innovative structural geology and tectonic research at
BMC, and will greatly enhance the college's new interdisciplinary efforts. These
new facilities will be available for use by researchers at other educational
institutions throughout the greater Philadelphia area. Finally, the acquisition
of these new facilities will be incorporated into college courses, and
undergraduate students will be actively involved in all research projects that
will utilize the requested equipment. Because all undergraduate students at BMC
are women, the equipment will serve to train underrepresented students in the
geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;