* 0418709
* Arabidopsis 2010: Bimolecular Fluorescence Complementation (BMFC) to Investigate Protein-protein Interactions in Planta
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Stanton Gelvin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,000,001.00

This project will provide research tools and resources for the plant science
community to determine the in planta interactions of proteins. The research will
develop Bimolecular Fluorescence Complementation (BMFC) methodology to
investigate protein-protein interactions in planta. BMFC involves tagging
proteins with complementary half-YFP molecules, neither of which fluoresces on
its own. When half-YFP molecules are brought together as fusions with
interacting proteins, fluorescence is restored. The BMFC design is a novel in
planta "two hybrid" system. BMFC can also be utilized to identify the
subcellular location of interacting proteins. The project will develop BMFC
vectors to express half-YFP-tagged proteins for use both in transient
transformation experiments, and for Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. The
vectors will incorporate Gateway technology for high-throughput mobilization of
amplified genes and cDNA libraries among the various vectors. Several
Arabidopsis cDNA-coding regions will be cloned into the BMFC vectors; these
genes are representative of large families of cytoskeleton, importin, chromatin,
and F-box proteins. The project will also provide several Arabidopsis cDNA
expression libraries in these vectors, which will be useful for comprehensive
screens for protein interactions. As proof of concept, the project will test
these tagged plant proteins for interaction with tagged Agrobacterium Virulence
proteins in both transient and stable transformation assays. The tagged
Virulence proteins include VirE2, VirD2, and VirF, as well as the Arabidopsis
protein VIP1. The test Arabidopsis proteins will be selected based upon prior
genetic and biochemical information. The limits of sensitivity of expression of
the tagged proteins will be determined using both high-level constitutive as
well as native promoters. All data derived from this project will be posted on
the project web site:
http://www.bio.purdue.edu/about/faculty/gelvin/gelvinweb/gelvin.html

Broader Impacts: This project will develop the first broad-based technology to
investigate protein-protein interactions in planta, and will additionally
identify plant proteins whose expression may be manipulated to increase the
frequency of Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of recalcitrant plant
species. This project also contains a substantial training component. In
addition to training postdoctoral research scientists and technicians, the
project will include a vigorous outreach program with local colleges to identify
undergraduate students from under-represented minority groups and introduce
them, through summer and academic year collaborations with our research groups,
to the conduct of scientific research. Multi-year training of these students to
solidify their interest in pursuing a career in science will be encouraged. When
they return to their home institutions, the students will expose additional
students to the techniques learned in our laboratories. The under-represented
minority students trained in the project during the summer will continue their
research at their home institutions, thus broadening the number of their peers
who will come into contact with scientific research. We expect that these
efforts will encourage undergraduate students to select a career in science.