* 0418423
* Language Acquisition in Internationally Adopted Children
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Jesse Snedeker, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2007
* USD 246,000.00

Every year thousands of children are internationally adopted into American
families. Like infants these children must learn a language by listening,
playing and watching what happens around them. However, these children differ
from infants in one critical respect-they are much older and presumably more
cognitively mature. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Jesse Snedeker
will compare how adopted children and infants learn English by collecting
parental reports and analyzing samples of the children's speech. When infants
learn to speak, they go through a predictable series of stages. For example,
they usually produce single words for months before they begin combining words.
The scientific goal of this project is to find out whether adopted preschoolers
go through the same stages. This will help us understand the role of cognitive
development and maturation in shaping early language
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have three kinds of broader
impacts. First, it will provide research opportunities and training for
undergraduate and graduate students. Second, this project will give parents and
clinicians a clearer picture of the typical course of language development in
internationally-adopted children, which may reduce unnecessary anxiety and aid
in the early identification of language disorders. Finally, examining the
conditions in which language is learned in this population may help us to
understand and foster second-language learning in other groups of children
&lt;br/&gt;