* 0418417
* TISLR 8:  Enabling Full Access for Deaf &amp; Hearing Americans and Increasing Representation of Deaf Americans
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Richard Meier, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2005
* USD 32,500.00

Linguistic research has demonstrated that there are two major classes of human
languages: spoken languages and the naturally-evolved signed languages of Deaf
communities. The TISLR ("Theoretical Issues in Sign Language Research")
conferences have been the most important international venue for discussion and
presentation of results on the linguistics and psycholinguistics of signed
languages. The increasingly international focus of the TISLR meetings-
specifically, the focus on crosslinguistic, crosscultural work-is crucial in the
study of signed languages. With National Science Foundation support, complete
American Sign Language (ASL)-to-English and English-to-ASL interpretation will
be provided at the TISLR conference in Barcelona (September 29-October 2, 2004),
the 8th in a series of meetings that stretches back to the first TISLR
conference held at the University of Rochester in 1986. This project seeks to
ensure that the linguistic research reported at the Barcelona TISLR meeting is
fully accessible to American researchers who are themselves Deaf signers. This
project will also enable adequate interpretation into English of scholarly
presentations by Deaf scholars from the U.S. and much of Canada, and will foster
informal interactions between Deaf scholars and hearing scholars who do not know
ASL. Lastly, this project will provide travel support for up to 8 Deaf graduate
and undergraduate students to attend the TISLR meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
providing interpretation into ASL, this project provides necessary
infrastructure for the American scientific community that is exploring
linguistics of signed languages. This project will also grow that scientific
community by creating new opportunities for the participation of Deaf students
at an international research conference. The Deaf are a historically
underrepresented group in American science. By enabling the participation at
TISLR of Deaf students in linguistic and psycholinguistic research, the
participation of native and near-native signers of ASL in linguistic research
will be fostered. Lastly, linguistic research on signed languages and on how
they are acquired by children makes a fundamental contribution to practice in
deaf education. In this instance, scientific research and educational practice
are closely linked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;