* 0418542
* PASI:  Balancing Hydropower Development and Biodiversity: Is Sustainability in an Adaptive Management Framework Achievable?;  Concepcion, Chile, January 2005
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Klaus Jorde, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/2005
* USD 99,370.00

0418542&lt;br/&gt;Jorde&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced Studies
Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department of
Energy (DOE), will take place at the University of Concepcion in southern Chile
on the topic of "Balancing Hydropower Development and Biodiversity." Organized
by Dr. Klaus Jorde of the University of Idaho, the institute will involve 11
lecturers and over 40 students from North and South America. The purpose of the
institute is to explore the boundaries of sustainability of aquatic systems
through adaptive management. The long-term goal is to promote collaborative
research and education programs in this important area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PASI will explore how closely the conservation of
biodiversity can co-exist alongside water resource development, with specific
emphasis on hydropower projects. Two meetings will be hosted to present the
current state of understanding in the Americas and to coordinate current
research activities and student exchanges at participating institutions. A
scientific framework considering adaptive management will be developed in order
to learn from observed ecological consequences of hydropower projects and
improve criteria for designing future projects and selecting river systems that
should be protected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;