* 0418994
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant: The Use of Deictic Markers in Narratives by Children with Williams Syndrome
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Susan Curtiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Susan Curtiss, Ms. Nancy Jones will conduct research
on the genetic disorder Williams Syndrome for her doctoral dissertation,
studying how children with this disorder use grammar in storytelling.
Individuals with Williams Syndrome have garnered interest because their
linguistic abilities are well-preserved despite other cognitive deficits. Recent
research strongly suggests, however, that while the language of Williams
Syndrome individuals is strong, it is not normal; that is, there are strengths
and deficits in their linguistic performance. Narrative is one genre suitable
for examining the interaction of grammatical competence and expressive language
abilities, including pragmatic competence. Earlier studies have looked at
grammatical accuracy and complexity in narratives, but have not examined how
grammatical features are used to create and develop the narrative itself. This
study examines how children with Williams Syndrome use referential devices
(pronouns and determiners, the, a) and cohesive devices (tense and connectives
such as and, because, therefore) to develop oral narratives. The relationship
between their language performance and age, age of speech onset, and verbal IQ
will also be explored..

This dissertation project will contribute to a fuller understanding of the
language abilities of Williams Syndrome children, one that goes beyond
standardized language testing or the testing of particular grammatical
structures or vocabulary. Educators, linguists and parents will gain a better
idea of these children's ability to use language in real world situations where
linguistic, social and pragmatic knowledge must be coordinated. This research
will contribute to our understanding of the broader cognitive profile of
individuals with Williams Syndrome by providing insight into the interaction
between language and cognition. Transcripts of the children's stories will be
contributed to the CHILDES database, making this data available to a wide
audience of linguists as well as researchers in such fields as psychology,
education, and communication disorders.