* 0418313
* Undergraduate Research Center of Central Virginia:    Planning Grant Proposal
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* John Beck, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* Richard D. Foust
* 05/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

The award from the Chemistry Division supports an Undergraduate Research Centers
(URC) planning grant. The PI is Robert Granger. The co-PIs are John Beck of
Sweet Briar College, Henry Schreiber of Virginia Military Institute, Herbert
Sipe of Hampton-Sydney College and Erich Uffelman of Washington and Lee
University. In addition to these four institutions, three others will be
involved in establishing a regional Undergraduate Research Center: Lynchburg
College, Randolph-Macon Women's College and Hollins University. Participation of
a community college and a high school is also planned. One of the planning goals
is to develop a detailed management plan of action for obtaining their goals
which include promoting reforms in culture and curriculum at participating
institutions, assessing infrastructure needs, fostering collaborations with
industry, graduate institutions and 2-year institutions, and maintenance of
their collective resources and instrumentation. Undergraduate research
opportunities will be increased for first and second year students by reforms in
curricula to include more inquiry-based learning. The summer research program at
these institutions will grow and partnerships with industry will support summer
internships and cooperative experiences. The project includes a K-12 science
teacher education component, including the participation of both in-service and
pre-service teachers. The URC consortium will disseminate their results and
their pedagogy via publications and presentations at meetings, including the
Journal of Undergraduate Chemistry Research, which is published by VMI.