* 0418798
* Technician Support for Real-Time Hydrologic Sensor Systems within the Penn State Experimental Forest
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2008
* John Helly, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2008
* USD 225,000.00

0418798&lt;br/&gt;Reed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support form this award will
establish a new Information Systems Technician position in support of the Penn
State Institutes of the Environment's (PSIE) Real-Time Hydrologic Monitoring
Network (RTH_Net). RTH_Net is a field facility within the university's
experimental forest supporting research and education focusing on the
interaction among atmospheric, terrestrial, and hydrologic processes. RTH_Net
will support these efforts through the long-term deployment and maintenance of a
real-time network of integrated sensor systems designed to augment the existing
experimental infrastructure within the Penn State Experimental Forest. RTH_Net
will integrate the existing but disparate observing systems within the Penn
State Forest such that surface, groundwater and atmospheric data streams are
coherent and in real time. Deployment and integration of traditional weather
station technology with soil moisture/pressure arrays, groundwater level and
stream stage sensors will allow a more coherent approach to the estimation of
critical fluxes and feedbacks at the hillslope, watershed, and river basin
scales. The network will play a fundamental role in improving forecast models of
extreme events (flood, drought) as well as seasonal and interannual water
resource dynamics. The facility will modernize and expand the current research
infrastructure within the Penn State Experimental Forest. The Information
Systems Technician will deploy physical sensor systems, maintain internet
accessibility (i.e., IP connectivity) for the sensor data, and manage wireless
or landline communication networks. The technician position will help ensure
reliable data access and storage for RTH_Net through the management of combined
onsite and offsite archives. The technician will manage internet-based
publication using specialized software that will enable RTH_Net's datasets to be
easily queried, analyzed, and visualized by researchers and students. These
systems will be made accessible to the more than 30 faculty members within PSIE
that have research interests in water resources. RTH_Net will support a long-
term university-level effort to develop tools for a more holistic approach to
real-time monitoring of water resources.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;