* 0418321
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Impact of Thought on Political Attitude and Preference Formation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Robert Luskin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal aims at exploring the impact of thought on political attitudes.
More precisely, it proposes to show that mere thought helps citizens form
attitudes that are more in line with their underlying values and interests. For
data, I propose a survey-based experiment to examine the impact of thought on
support for federal public spending in Brazil. The design involves five
treatment groups and a control group, all randomly assigned. Each group will be
asked questions measuring both federal spending preferences and political
knowledge, but with differences in wording, ordering, and surrounding script to
manipulate information and thought. &lt;br/&gt;Several decades of empirical
research have shown that most citizens know very little about politics. Most
recent work in the area has focused on the consequences for vote choices and
policy preferences. The emphasis has been on the role played by political
information on attitude and preference formation. However, no attention has been
given to the effect of thought alone. This proposal intends to show that
political information matters, but that mere thought also helps citizens form
attitudes that are more closely related to their own values and interests. To my
knowledge, no other study has yet examined this question. Previous work in
political and social psychology has been criticized for being conducted
exclusively in the United States or at best in other industrialized countries.
This project breaks new grounds by proposing to test for its hypotheses in
Brazil. In sum, this project proposes to study a question left almost unexplored
by political scientists, and also promises to contribute to the nascent field of
comparative political psychology. &lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact The field of
political science, and most generally the social sciences, makes extensive use
of survey research to learn about individuals. attitudes, preferences, and
behaviors. In the past decades, we have learned substantially about various
effects of this methodology on the responses we get and on how to improve it.
However, with a very few exceptions, no other studies have looked at the effects
of thought on survey responses. In that sense, this project might provide new
ways to improve how we ask questions during surveys, and, therefore, benefit all
the disciplines that make use of this research method&lt;br/&gt;