* 0418621
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Understanding Carbon Isotope Excursions in the Paleozoic: An Integrated Chemostratigraphic and Modeling Approach
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Kenneth Foland, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2008
* USD 152,269.00

ABSTRACT The amount of variation in the O2 and CO2 contents of the Phanerozoic
atmosphere remain fundamental but unresolved questions. The global burial rate
of organic carbon, as indicated by the carbon isotopic compositions of marine
carbonates (d13Ccarb), is a critical parameter in modeling atmospheric
compositions. While previous efforts have been largely focused on the redox
significance of long-term, gradual trends (107 yr) in d13Ccarb and their
relationship with d34S, a more volatile record that includes numerous short-term
events, or isotopic excursions lasting a few million years or less, is becoming
apparent. Some of the best evidence for large d13Ccarb excursions and their
relationships to disturbances in the Earth's surface environment (as revealed,
for example, by mass extinctions) can be found in Paleozoic strata. The proposed
research is aimed at the construction of detailed d13Corg, d34Ssulfate, and
87Sr/ 86Sr for two Paleozoic time slices that are characterized by exceptionally
large and well- documented d13Ccarb excursions. These Late Cambrian and Early
Mississippian events have both been hypothesized to reflect global increases in
the rate of organic carbon burial. This project will carry out numerical
experiments using coupled box models of the geochemical cycles of C, S, and Sr
to test multiple working hypotheses and to develop internally consistent
scenarios for changes in the C and S cycles and the implications for atmospheric
CO2 and O2 contents. Our focus on high-resolution data sets will allow us to
critically examine some of the proposed cause-and effect feedback loops that
stabilize the geochemical carbon cycle and thus the CO2 and O2 composition of
the atmosphere. For example, burial of organic matter that is not balanced by
oxidation of pyrite should increase atmospheric O2 levels (inferred from
coupling and phasing of d13Ccarb, d34Ssulfate), which provides a negative
feedback on organic carbon burial through removal of oceanic phosphorus
associated with ferric oxides. In addition, the burial of organic matter should
lower pCO2 (lowering the net difference between d13Ccarb and d13Corg), cool the
climate, and result ultimately in a decrease in continental weathering rates
(reducing 87Sr/ 86Sr). A more complete understanding of these two targeted
Paleozoic time slices will also provide unique insight into the Earth's climate
system at critical geobiological intervals during (1) a worldwide mass
extinction of trilobites in the Late Cambrian and (2) the Early Mississippian
spread of vascular land plants and subsequent growth of glaciers on Gondwana.
Broader Impacts: The research will support graduate and undergraduate student
theses at Ohio State, Missouri and Penn State, including those from
underrepresented groups. Students will receive broad training in field and
laboratory settings using a variety of geochemical, stratigraphic and modeling
techniques. Students at Ohio State and Missouri will spend time with Kump
working with box models at Penn State and join Saltzman in the field, thus
facilitating exchange among student groups and exposure to diverse faculty and
facilities. The researchers will also be involved in outreach activities beyond
the standard dissemination of scientific information at meetings and in peer
review publications. Middle-school students will be involved by coordination of
fieldwork and classes with a 7th grade science teacher. The chemostratigraphic
database assembled will provide key reference sections for the assessment of
carbon cycling during the critical time periods. It will promote a better
understanding of carbon cycling on geological timescales and its relationship
with past climates and ecosystems, which will provide an important societal
perspective in the context of the magnitude and impact of human-induced climate
change.