* 0418665
* Biochemical Studies of a Novel Fungal Protein Toxic to Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Lynda Ciuffetti, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2008
* USD 503,655.00

This project aims to elucidate the basic biochemical mechanisms behind the
toxicity of Pyrenophora tritici-repentis, a fungus that causes tan spot disease
of wheat. It has been shown that a protein, PtrToxA, which is the first
discovered proteinaceous host-selective toxin, is responsible for disease
symptoms on certain cultivars of wheat. Functionally PtrToxA is a remarkable
protein, as it appears to be able to enter plant cells, enter the chloroplast,
and cause cell death. Little is known about how these events occur, but given
recent progress in characterizing and crystallizing the protein, the system is
now poised for a major breakthrough. This collaborative three-year research
program will study the PtrToxA mechanism of action through biochemical
approaches supported by structural studies. Specific aims are to (1) conduct
biochemical investigations of plant partner proteins involved in PtrToxA
toxicity, (2) solve the three-dimensional structures of native PtrToxA and
selected mutants, and (3) design, create, and characterize site-directed mutants
of PtrToxA that probe biochemical mechanisms of action. Historically, toxins
have been incredibly valuable tools for elucidating basic biochemical
mechanisms, and similarly, this work is expected to provide insights into plant
disease, to help establish an invaluable model system for toxin-induced cell
death, and to uncover novel biochemical mechanisms in plants. Also, because the
PtrToxA sequence appears unrelated to any known protein, the structure will
contribute to efforts to map all known protein folds. From a practical
perspective, this project has the potential to lead to effective tools to combat
tan spot.

Broader impact: The personnel involved in the project, from undergraduates
through the principle investigators, will receive unusually broad training due
to the interdisciplinary nature of the project, and efforts will be made to be
sure all participants are exposed to both the biochemical, cell biological, and
biophysical aspects of the project.