* 0418469
* Classroom Social Processes and Children's Behavioral Self-Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Sara Rimm-Kaufman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 08/31/2009
* USD 300,000.00

Children's ability to self-regulate serves as a foundation for their school
success. Even in the earliest years of school, children's ability to stay on
task, attend to learning goals, and participate actively in learning are
critically important skills. Children's ability to self-regulate is multi-
determined: child temperament, family interactions, and classroom experience are
important predictors. Although some research has examined how the former factors
relate to children's ability to self-regulate, surprisingly little is know about
the ways in which teachers' promote this outcome. This basic information is
critical for the development of interventions designed to enhance children's
ability to self-regulate and learn in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
present study examines the development of self-regulatory behaviors in
kindergarten and first grade, with the goal of identifying the ways in which
teachers' choice of activities and the quality of the classroom environments
serve as mechanisms for facilitating children's development of these behaviors.
First, this study examines the relation between teacher quality and children's
behavioral self-regulatory abilities in classroom settings, such as seatwork,
that place high demands on children's ability to self-regulate. Second, this
study will examine growth in children's behavioral self-regulatory abilities in
relation to their classroom experience between kindergarten and first grade.
Third, this study will examine whether high quality classrooms compensate for
children's lack of support for behavioral self-regulation in their home
environment. Fourth, this study will examine whether children's behavioral self-
regulation is an important variable explaining the relationship between
classroom quality and academic achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sara Rimm-
Kaufman and her team, with support from NSF will observe 256 children and their
teachers eight times per year from kindergarten through first grade.
Observations will take place at nine schools selected for their high
concentration of children "at risk" for school failure. Further, questionnaire
data on support for self-regulatory behaviors and children's classroom self-
control will be collected from families and teachers respectively. Children's
growth in achievement will be assessed using a standardized achievement
test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings will contribute to psychological and
educational research that views schools and classrooms as social contexts for
children's growth. This work will provide insight to how teachers create
classroom environments conducive to children's learning of self-regulatory
skills, particularly for children who are "at risk" for low self-regulatory
competency. Further, this research will lead to a clearer understanding of the
way in which schools promote the skills that forecast high performance on
achievement tests and other highly visible indicators of school
success.&lt;br/&gt;