* 0418719
* Space Weather: Reconstruction of the Transverse Solar Wind Profile at 1 AU Using Basic Data Assimilation Techniques
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Jan Merka, L-3 Communications Government Services, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 09/30/2007
* USD 54,469.00

Geomagnetic storms and sudden changes of magnetospheric properties due to sudden
changes in solar wind conditions affect a wide variety of systems on Earth and
in orbit. For example, large geomagnetic storms can interrupt radio
communications; increase pipeline and power grid currents and change high-
altitude atmospheric drag affecting low-altitude satellite orbits.
Interplanetary pressure events, like interplanetary shocks compressing the
magnetosphere, lead to sudden impulses that can have a high enough rate of
ground magnetic field change producing an adverse amount of current in
technological systems. In developing an understanding how to accurately forecast
the state of the Earth's magnetosphere, solar wind plasma and interplanetary
magnetic field measurements serve as the primary input parameters to empirical
and theoretical models. Currently models, predictions and general science take
only single-spacecraft input from the solar wind even though it is known that
the solar wind input can be highly asymmetrical and multiple solar wind monitors
are often available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, the authors propose to use
data from all available solar wind monitors to reconstruct a more representative
solar wind profile across the magnetospheric cross-section using modern, self-
consistent magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) data assimilation techniques. Furthermore,
they propose to compare predictions for real magnetospheric events based on the
thus developed assimilated multi-point measurements and on the currently
employed single-point upstream observations and quantify the improvements. The
proposed assimilation technique will allow the development of better
understanding of the Sun-Earth interactions based on a more complete description
of the solar wind and more accurate space weather predictions. The results (both
method and code will be made publicly available) will have the potential to
improve the accuracy of space weather predictions, and also to assist the
scientific community in solar wind-magnetosphere interaction studies, especially
for the case of asymmetric solar wind/IMF input conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international and multi-institutional collaboration
(NASA/GSFC, NOAA/SEC, and Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic) is
planned for the proposed work.