* 0418400
* Collaborative Proposal: Automated Measurement of Infant Facial Expressions and Human Ratings of Their Emotional Intensity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Daniel Messinger, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2006
* USD 49,999.00

Infant smiles can predict later adaptive functioning, but little is known about
the temporal course of infant smiles or their perceived emotional intensity.
This collaborative project combines computer-based measurements of infant smiles
with parents' ratings of those smiles. The project goals are to understand how
infants smile, and to document the features that make infant smiles appear more
or less joyful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how infants smile, the smile
strength and co-occurring mouth opening of 50 six-month-old infants' smiles will
be measured using computer software (CMU/Pitt Automated Facial Image Analysis,
v. IV). These objective measurements will be used to document how infant smile
form, peak, and dissolve in time. That is, we will create real-time portraits of
smiles to more fully understand positive emotional functioning. Statistical
associations between smile strength and mouth opening will be examined, as will
differences - both between smiles and between infants - in how strongly these
components of smiles are associated. Complementary graphical and statistical
approaches will encourage dynamic accounts of emotional functioning and new
avenues of research on the role of emotion in learning and development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project uses rating studies to document features that
make infant smiles appear more or less joyful. Both parents of infants and
undergraduates will be asked to rate the emotional intensity of both still
images and video clips of smiles. Automated measurements of smile strength and
mouth opening will then be used to predict ratings of positive emotional
intensity. Positive findings would validate automated measurements of specific
features of infant smiles as indices of infant joyful emotional intensity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, leading infant emotion researchers will
collaborate with a cutting-edge automated facial measurement team to investigate
infants' smiles. Infants use positive facial expressions to express emotions and
communicate with others. Basic knowledge of the temporal course of in vivo
infant emotional expressions promises an objective view of normative and
compromised emotional functioning and development. To that end, the acquired
database of digitized facial expressions and their automated measurements will
be made available to requesting investigators. These objective descriptions will
be complemented by parental and naive observers' perceptions of the emotional
intensity of these expressions. This will validate the emotional significance of
the automated measurements, and contribute to the development of a tool for
automated coding that has the potential for broad impact. &lt;br/&gt;