* 0418012
* An Examination of Recent Increases in Great Lake-Effect Snowfall
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Adam Burnett, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2007
* USD 48,086.00

Abstract for Proposal 0418012&lt;br/&gt;Adam W. Burnett&lt;br/&gt;Colgate
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of their thermal capacity and geographic
setting, the Great Lakes generate large quantities of lake-effect snowfall along
their leeward margins during late autumn and winter when cold continental air
masses travel across the ice-free lake surfaces. The physical characteristics
and location of the Great Lakes create a unique setting in which subtle changes
in broader-scale climate, such as that associated with global warming, might
translate into significant changes in local weather. Several studies have shown
that lake-effect snowfall has increased significantly in recent decades, whereas
no significant snowfall changes have occurred in non-lake-effect areas. These
findings suggest a change in one or more of the meteorological or lake thermal
conditions that influence lake-effect precipitation. These conditions might
include the temperature of the air moving across the lake, lake water surface
temperature, lake ice cover, wind direction, and wind speed. This project will
assess the degree to which these factors are associated with the recent
increases in lake-effect snowfall. The analysis will involve a thorough
compilation of all available air temperature and snowfall records for the Great
Lakes region and a spatial examination of the data to determine how snowfall in
different lake-effect regions has varied over time. An analysis of near-surface
wind data over the past 50 years will show the degree to which changes in
atmospheric circulation are contributing to lake-effect snow increases. Finally,
all available records of Great Lake water temperature and ice cover will be
examined as important factors in the snowfall changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study speaks to the question of how broader-scale variations in climate might
manifest themselves at the regional and local scales. The implications (both
positive and negative) for continued snowfall increases in the Great Lakes
region are significant and involve travel hazards, snow removal costs, snow
recreational impacts, regional hydrology and municipal water supplies,
hydroelectric power production, and soil moisture and agriculture. This study
will help to address the causes of recent lake snow increases and to determine
whether such increases are consistent with broader patterns of climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;