* 0418384
* Fluorescence Spectrophotometer to Investigate Nanostructures at Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Lawrence Chasin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2005
* USD 94,836.00

Somasundaran, Ponisseril Columbia University

" Fluorescence Spectrophotometer to Investigate Nanostructures at Interfaces."

This project is for the procurement of a Fluorescence Spectrometer, for the
Langmuir Center for Colloid and Interfaces of Columbia University, New York, for
the research of an interdisciplinary research team, investigating novel
nanostructures and their dynamic behavior at various interfaces. The principal
investigators who will use this instrument include Prof. Chasin (Biology Dept.),
Prof. Gryte (Dept. of Chem. Eng.), Prof. Somasundaran (Earth and Env. Eng.) and
Prof. Turro (Chemistry Dept.). Adsorption of nanoscale surfactants and polymers
is used for the modification of the surface properties of solids and finds
application in many industrial processes such as flocculation/dispersion,
deposition, coatings, enhanced oil recovery and flotation. Efficient use of
adsorption in these cases depends not only on the amount adsorbed but also on
the nano structure of the adsorbed layer in terms of the conformation and
orientation of the adsorbed species. Currently there is very little information
on conformational aspects of the adsorbed species, mainly due to lack of
reliable in-situ techniques. Their earlier work focused on understanding the
physico-chemical mechanisms of adsorption of surfactants, polymers and proteins
by studying adsorption density, zeta potential, wettability and calorimetric
effects. Such investigations have helped in generating a mechanistic picture of
the structure of the adsorbed layers. More recently, Turro, Somasundaran and
Gryte have collaborated in using fluorescence spectroscopy along with electron
spin resonance spectroscopy (ESR) to probe adsorbed surfactant and polymer
layers on particles, liposomes, implants etc. These studies have demonstrated
the potential of fluorescence spectroscopy to investigate the nano-structure of
adsorbed layers. With this new fluorescence instrumentation available, there is
an unprecedented opportunity to investigate the conformational aspects of
species at interfaces on a sub molecular level (nanoscale). Broader Technical
Impact: This instrument will be used to develop a full understanding of the
interactions of surfactants and polymers / proteins, particularly the nano-
structures of adsorbed layers and colloidal aggregates and the effects of
different parameters on the structure. Knowledge about the conformation of the
dissolved and adsorbed species and their dynamic behavior will prove useful for
developing smart materials responsive to the presence of contaminants, bioagents
and perturbations in parameters such as pH, temperature and ionic strength. The
instrument will be used ton a multitude of projects, most of which are aimed at
improving our understanding of molecularly assembled systems and are important
to basic science and advance in technologies. Because the instrument is being
shared among several researchers and will be used on several independent
projects in different disciplines, it is likely that the spectrophotometer will
be used by a large number of students and postdoctoral fellows. The instruments
will also offer training opportunities for undergraduates.

