* 0418857
* Space Weather: Dynamics of Regional and Local High-Latitude Geomagnetic Disturbances
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Dimitrios Vassiliadis, Universities Space Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 01/31/2006
* USD 179,020.00

This project will further develop a model originally funded with earlier NSF
support to a space weather model for the fluctuations of ground magnetic field.
The current model is a linear dynamical model trained on historic measurements
taken by the Finnish magnetometer array, IMAGE, the geomagnetic PC index, and
the recent history of the solar wind inputs. These elements represent the state
of geomagnetic activity and of the global magnetosphere, and a measure of the
energy available through dayside magnetic reconnection. The model produces an
estimate of the horizontal (2D) field at latitudes 55-90 degrees. The dynamics
of the field are approximated as oscillation and growth/decay and they are
driven by the PC index and solar wind inputs. The proposed model will be trained
to predict the full 3D ground magnetic field. A similar model will be separately
developed to predict the field fluctuations in terms of the time derivatives of
the magnetic field. Time derivatives are of particular importance because
geomagnetically induced currents, which can effect the electric power
distribution grid, are driven by sudden changes in the magnetic field. The
models will be nonlinear, meaning that their coefficients will be parameterized
by the geomagnetic activity level. The transition from linear to nonlinear
dynamics will increase the prediction accuracy. The effects of the solar wind
and interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) inputs on prediction accuracy will be
examined. The solar wind-magnetosphere coupling process depends on local time as
well as on latitude. Each location of the model can be driven by a distinct
solar wind/IMF input function. The proposed model can dynamically adapt to
changing solar wind conditions, but it is important that it be regularly
corrected by the correct present state of geomagnetic conditions. Data
assimilation will be used to ingest real-time geomagnetic measurements. Because
the model can be written as a filter for the local field (or its fluctuations),
it will be extended to include a Kalman filter. The Kalman component will adjust
the state of the model so that it rapidly converges on realistic conditions at
the points of measurement. A dynamic model for the ground magnetic field has
several important applications. First, understanding the geomagnetic response
and its dependence on solar wind input and the magnetospheric configuration is
an important question in magnetospheric plasma physics. The model can be used as
a tool to quantify this complex coupling as a function of interplanetary
conditions and the magnetospheric state. In addition, some aspects of the model
can be used as part of student training on magnetospheric and ionospheric plasma
physics.