* 0418019
* Workshop on the Cultural Politics of Globalization and Community in East Central Europe
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Genevieve Zubrzycki, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 79,872.00

How are the values, identities, and representations of communities facing
globalization shaped by attempts to influence the course of social change, and
how do these cultural politics affect the fates of different strata, groups, and
peoples? These are among the questions to be addressed by social scientists at a
workshop focusing on East Central Europe (ECE), a region of extraordinary
changes occasioned by communism's end, wars on its periphery, and entry to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, European Union, and other transnational
organizations. Workshop participants from the US and ECE will consider how
globalization is understood and represented in different communities of varying
scale, looking in particular at globalization's various articulations in this
region with diversity, inequality, and peace. By addressing the practice of
globalization's cultural politics in social relations among men and women,
ethnic communities and religious groups, political parties and classes, and
nations themselves, we expect to understand better the conditions under which
agents of change develop a sense of responsibility for, and engagement with,
global transformations frequently perceived to be beyond anyone's control. The
broader impacts of this research include the following. The planned workshop
will facilitate development of a new network of social science collaboration
around this subject by assembling scholars, especially younger but also some
more senior scholars, and linking researchers across national boundaries and
across cohorts. Beyond benefits to participants, it is hoped that on-line
publicity preceding and following the workshop will help generate a new area of
social scientific inquiry. The workshop's focus on globalization and culture
will provide a different framework (beyond political economy) for policymakers
and publics to think about how individuals and groups can shape the trajectories
of global social change.