* 0418823
* Intrasite Organization and Interregional Interaction:   Archaeological Investigations at Chacalilla, Nayarit, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Michael Ohnersorgen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 163,192.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Ohnersorgen will conduct
two seasons of archaeological research on the western coast of Nayarit, Mexico.
The research focuses on the archaeological site of Chacalilla, a regional center
that flourished during the Early and Middle Postclassic periods (A.D. 900-1350)
in Mesoamerica. The project seeks to clarify social and economic relationships
that contributed to the Aztatlan tradition in Postclassic West Mexico, a widely
shared ideological and material culture complex that included polychrome pottery
with complex iconographic designs, figurines, copper ornaments, shell jewelry,
shared burial practices, and other elements. The Aztatlan tradition is
manifested across much of West and Northwest Mexico, and it may be related to
socio-economic networks that linked those areas with cultures in central Mexico
and the US Southwest. Prior research has suggested several models of economic
and political interaction to account for the wide distribution of the Aztatlan
tradition, but these models remain untested and the nature of interactions among
Aztatlan participants is largely speculative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at
Chacalilla will examine community socio-political and economic organization
through a study of settlement arrangement, the spatial distribution of Aztatlan-
associated artifacts, and an assessment of evidence for craft production and
exchange. Examination of the types and spatial associations of Aztatlan
artifacts will reveal which segments of society were involved in various kinds
of interactions, permitting an assessment of theoretical models of Aztatlan
interaction that posit elite versus commoner involvement. Specific tasks are 1)
systematically survey and map Chacalilla and create a GIS database for data
analysis 2) collect a sample of artifacts from the surfaces of archaeological
features, 3) conduct excavations within a sample of structures that represent
the range of social and economic variability among Chacalilla's population, 4)
analyze all archaeological materials recovered, 5) conduct chemical
compositional analyses of ceramic and obsidian artifacts from Chacalilla and
other sites to reconstruct networks of economic production and exchange.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study provides one of the first systematic
examinations of social and economic organization in Aztatlan communities. The
Aztatlan tradition is an example of heightened interregional cultural
connectivity, a phenomenon observed in other parts of the world where ancient
civilizations emerged. Resolution of the mechanisms behind such phenomena is
critical at various junctures for Mesoamerica, especially for the Postclassic
period, which is characterized by several related traditions. Because of its
long-term involvement in interregional exchange and interaction, West Mexico is
a crucial area to examine issues related to episodes of interregional cultural
connectivity among ancient polities. Ohnersorgen's research provides a critical
nexus between community organization and regional scale phenomena, allowing
archaeologist to determine for one Aztatlan center who was interacting and what
items were involved in exchange. Through its focus on household and community
organization, the research will also broaden the understanding of cultural
variability and the range of social formations in West Mexico, an area
underrepresented in Mesoamerican studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, the
research fosters international institutional cooperation through its partnership
with Mexico's Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia (INAH), and provides
research opportunities to American and Mexican graduate and undergraduate
students. A pilot project at Chacalilla by Ohnersorgen in 2003 generated much
local community interest, and Ohnersorgen is working with INAH and an ecological
group in Nayarit to develop plans for a community museum and educational exhibit
for local schools, promoting awareness and protection of archaeological
heritage.&lt;br/&gt;