* 0418518
* Workshop:    Constructing a Kinetics Database; April 19-21, 2004; Gaithersburg, MD
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2006
* David Stanbury, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 09/30/2006
* USD 36,980.00

This award in the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences and in the Division of
Chemical and Transport Systems in the Directorate of Engineering supports a
Workshop on Constructing a Kinetics Database organized by David M. Stanbury of
Auburn University to be held at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) on April 19-21, 2004. The Workshop will address 16 questions
posed to determine whether existing databases are adequate for accumulating
essential kinetic data in gas phase, solution, biochemical and solid state
reactions. The answers to these questions are likely to mandate the creation of
a new kinetics database. Implementation of this mandate is expected to require
the formation of a committee, which could be established during the Workshop, to
develop standards for the database and to ensure its creation. The Workshop
would provide the committee with guidance as to identifying and defining the
organizational structure for creating the database. After establishing the
database project, it is expected that the committee would continue in an
advisory and oversight capacity. Possible specific goals to be reached within
one year after the Workshop under the committee's auspices are: 1) Securing
funds for the committee's operation. 2) Rendering an opinion as to whether the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) or some other organization
would provide the site, project leader, and resources for establishing and
maintaining the database. 3) Determining specifications for an overall
architecture for the database. 4) Developing a road map to secure funds to
initiate the design and creation of the software for data collection and
storage. 5) Negotiating model agreements with appropriate journals that would
cause the journals or their contributing authors to submit their kinetic data to
the database in a standard format. 6) Suggesting mechanisms as to how the data
might best be mined by users in academia, industry and government.