* 0418960
* Technician support for geoscience research in transmission electron microscopy
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Peter Buseck, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

EAR-0418960&lt;br/&gt;Buseck&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Phase II proposal is to
support a full-time specialist in electron microscopy to help us take maximum
geological, mineralogical, and geochemical advantage of two new state-of-the-art
TEMs that were recently installed at Arizona State University. They will allow
coupled elemental, crystal-chemical, and structural information to be obtained
at the nanoscale. Biosphere-geosphere interactions either influence or lie at
the heart of many fundamental questions confronting modern society. These
include the origins of life, the habitability of planets, environmental
degradation and remediation, climate change, and the geochemical cycling of
elements. Carbon is, of course, central to biogeochemistry, and knowledge of the
structure and physical-chemical properties of organic C-bearing materials in
nature is basic for a mechanistic understanding of biogeochemical processes and
other terrestrial and extraterrestrial interactions of C at low to moderate
temperatures. These properties are both complex and heterogeneous at extremely
short length scales. Characterization of C-bearing materials in terms of
external form and internal structure, compositional variability, and bonding
properties is not only well-suited to, but in many cases demands, study by TEM
and associated spectroscopic techniques able to probe at the nanometer spatial
scale. The major focus during Phase II will be on the characterization of
carbonaceous materials in three areas of importance to biogeochemistry and
C-cycle research: organic matter and other forms of C associated with clays in
sedimentary rocks, carbonaceous atmospheric particles, and C in the fine grained
matrices of primitive meteorites. In addition, we propose to develop TEM-based
techniques for semi-quantitative analysis of H in organic materials on the
nanometer scale. A wide range of ongoing projects on high-resolution microscopy
of minerals, natural and generated aerosol particles, and controlled
environmental TEM studies will also be facilitated through the availability of
the senior technician to be provided via the requested
grant.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;