* 0418136
* Topics on time series resampling and subsampling
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Dimitris Politis, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 136,450.00

The statistical analysis of time series is of central importance in
econometrics. Existing methods for inference in time series analysis, however,
often rely on unrealistic and sometimes unverifiable assumptions. This research
continues the principal investigator's on-going research in the development of
methods of inference for time series analysis that do not rely on unrealistic or
unverifiable model assumptions. Resampling and subsampling methods offer viable
approaches to obtaining valid distributional approximations while assuming very
little about the stochastic mechanism generating time series data, in contrast
to existing methods that make unrealistic distributional assumptions about the
data. Many important questions still need to be addressed in order for these
modern approaches to be applied safely and accurately.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates four main issues: (a) kernel
design in accurate residual bootstrap and local block bootstrap schemes as well
as the problem of optimal bandwidth/block size choice; (b) resampling schemes
for nonstandard/nonstationary situations; (c) methods for conducting powerful
bootstrap hypothesis testing as well as accurate resampling inference-such as
confidence intervals-under the set-up of a possibly integrated univariate time
series; and (d) appropriate resampling mechanisms for multivariate time series
with applications to cointegration testing and spurious
regressions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results will contribute to
several areas of time series analysis, including the use of fat-top kernels both
in the context of residual bootstrap and in pilot estimators for most accurate
bandwidth/block size choice and the development of two different bootstrap
schemes, one based on a local blocking technique and the other on residuals, to
address data from locally (but not globally) stationary series. (The research
will also identify a way to conduct most powerful bootstrap hypothesis tests in
linear regressions and consistent/ powerful bootstrap unit root tests are
devised in addition to a subsampling procedure that works regardless of the
presence of a unit root. Finally, the research also defines a Continuous-Path
Block Bootstrap for multivariate data, and its validity in approximating the
distribution of several statistics of interest is shown.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide important results for
effectively analyzing time series data with minimal assumptions about the data
generating process. The results of this research will have practical
applications in several areas, such as the analysis of exchange rates, stock
market returns, and interest rates variability.&lt;br/&gt;