* 0418289
* Collaborative Research: Genomic Approaches to Metabolic Engineering of Solventogenic Clostridia
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Neil Welker, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Theresa Good
* 08/31/2009
* USD 412,001.00

Papoutsakis&lt;br/&gt;0418289&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this proposal are
to use DNA arrays and a "systems biology" approach for the analysis and
generation of asporogenous, solvent producing strains suitable for continuous or
fed-batch bioprocessing, and for studying large cellular programs (sporulation)
and phenotypes (solventogenesis and degeneration). Genomic-scale DNA arrays will
be used to capture the global picture of cellular transcriptional programs.
These studies will be complemented by fermentation and microscopic studies to
capture the differentiation process of the various strains. An important aim of
both fundamental and practical significance is to determine the gene or genes on
the pSOL1-megaplasmid responsible for inhibiting sporulation upon pSOL1 loss. An
independent strategy will be also pursued in order to generate asporogenous but
solventogenic strains. A third aim is to develop a critical genetic tool for
both metabolic engineering (ME) synthesis and functional-genomic analysis,
namely that of an efficient recombination system for chromosomal integration and
gene deletion based on advanced genetic mechanisms such as the group II intron
technology. A fourth aim is to develop strains with new and desirable
characteristics in terms of solvent production and efficient bioprocessing, by
employing several genetic and ME tools. This project provides unique
opportunities for student education and training in the fast growing fields of
genomics and ME in an advanced interdisciplinary research environment.
&lt;br/&gt;