* 0418175
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Individual differences in Chinese second language acquisition: The relationships among aptitude, memory, and strategies for learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Jeff Connor-Linton, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,910.00

Do native English speakers with different memory skills use different learning
strategies to learn Chinese as a foreign language? Do traditional tests of
foreign language aptitude adequately predict who will be successful in learning
Chinese, or can we improve the tests' predictability by including a measure of
memory? Or could it be that traditional measures of a student's aptitude for
learning Chinese do not take into account his or her ability to effectively use
strategies, which may heavily influence the student's ability to learn Chinese?
While much linguistic research has explored the learning processes of native
English speakers studying commonly-taught languages such as Spanish, French, and
German, there has been little research into how English speakers learn Chinese,
a language with a logographic writing system. Logographic systems, in which a
word is represented as a whole in one pictogram, are learned mostly through
memorization and are difficult for native English speakers to acquire. With
funding from the National Science Foundation, Ms. Winke will conduct research
aimed at understanding what strategies students use to learn Chinese and how
students' choices in strategies may be affected by memory abilities. This
project also investigates learners' motivations for taking Chinese, which also
influence learning outcomes. Participants come from two institutions
representing different purposes, curricula, and student populations: 60
undergraduates enrolled in beginning Chinese at Georgetown University and 200
military personnel at the Defense Language Institute. The research will be
conducted by administering standardized tests of foreign language aptitude, two
working memory tests, and motivation and strategy questionnaires. All
participants will take part in focus-group interviews to provide additional
insights into their strategies and motivations. A factorial (2-way) analysis of
variance will be used to analyze the memory scores to group learners into four
categories of memory ability. Memory, aptitude, and strategy and motivation
profiles, along with Chinese proficiency test scores, will further be analyzed
through correlations and multiple regressions to determine (a) if students with
different memory abilities and motivations use strategies differently to learn
Chinese, and (b) if memory test scores can improve Chinese aptitude testing. The
research will demonstrate how differences in students' approaches to learning
Chinese are influenced by their memory capacities and their reasons and
motivations for learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will
inform teaching methods in second language acquisition and yield insights into
the effects of working memory on foreign language learning, particularly for the
learning of Chinese. Chinese is a language of national importance; however, it
is considered to be difficult for native English speakers to acquire, and
Chinese programs at universities tend to have low enrollments and high attrition
rates. This project will inform educators on how to evaluate and diagnose
students' difficulties in learning Chinese to aid in the retention of students
and to improve learning. In addition, this project will assist Chinese
curriculum developers in designing appropriate homework and classroom activities
to promote the use of particular strategies by students with varying memory
abilities. &lt;br/&gt;