* 0418787
* International Conference on "Nanoparticles from the Vapor Phase Synthesis with Chemical and Biochemical Applications"
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Mohamed Samy El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 06/30/2005
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0418787&lt;br/&gt;M. El-Shall, Virginia Commonwealth
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this proposal is to request
support to hold an international cross-disciplinary conference on Nanoparticles
from the Vapor Phase Synthesis with Chemical and Biochemical Applications in
Davos, Switzerland from August 8-13, 2004, www.engconfintl.org/4ba.html. This
international conference will be held under the organizational sponsorship of
the Engineering Conferences International (ECI). The conference title reflects
both prior conferences that have focused exclusively on vapor phase synthesis,
and the emphasis of this new conference on the chemical and biochemical
applications of nanoparticles and nanostructures. The conference will deal with
the fundamental science and technology of the vapor phase synthesis of
nanoparticles and the assembly of nanostructures, composite nanoparticles and
thin films. While the field of nanoparticles in physical sciences has been
actively pursued over the past decade, the chemical and biochemical applications
have received little attention. A major focus of this conference will be
directed toward chemical and biochemical applications of nanoparticles and
nanostructures. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the conference are to
have in-depth discussions on the fundamental science dealing with the nucleation
and growth in the vapor phase, the utilization of state of the art of technology
in research in the vapor phase synthesis and the characterization of
nanoparticles and nanostructured materials. The conference aims to assess the
current status of the field, to identify future directions and to stimulate new
research on nanoparticles design, synthesis, engineering aspects and
applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is an interdisciplinary conference
drawing participants and speakers from Chemistry, Physics, Materials Science,
Engineering, and biological and drug delivery fields. It is meant to attract
individuals working on synthesis and characterization plus those working on new
chemical and biochemical applications. It is this interaction in a broad range
of areas that is novel about the planned conference. This proposal therefore
requests support that will be used to offset attendance costs for young
scientists and senior invited speakers from the United States. Funds will be
used to support ten young scientists (within the first ten years of their
academic careers), postdoctoral fellows and graduate students. In addition,
funds are requested to support seven senior invited speakers. Particular effort
will be directed to identifying members of minority groups to participate in
this conference. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
workshop will advance the scientific and technological aspects of nanoparticle
research. It will address new opportunities for research; discovery and
invention based on the applications of vapor phase techniques to the synthesis,
characterization, and chemical and biochemical applications of nanoparticles and
nanocomposites. This is expected to enhance the scientific knowledge in these
and other related fields, and it may lead to new exciting technologies.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed workshop will allow young
scientists and graduate students from the United States to exchange ideas,
experiences and information, and to build collaborations with the international
scientists working on nanoparticles. This will promote nanotechnology for the
benefit of the public and private sectors in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division of Chemical and
Transport Sytems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;