* 0418993
* Copper Delivery In Plant Plastids
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Marinus Pilon, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 08/31/2009
* USD 605,307.00

Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Copper Delivery in Plant plastids&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Marinus Pilon&lt;br/&gt;Biology department, Colorado State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life as we know it is made possible by the
process of photosynthesis, which is responsible for carbon fixation and thus
biomass production. Photosynthesis in the green parts of plants takes place in
specialized sub-cellular structures called chloroplasts. Chloroplasts contain
the molecular machinery to use the energy of sunlight to drive a series of
chemical reactions that include the production of carbohydrates (sugars) from
water taken up by the plant roots and carbon dioxide from the air. To carry out
its tasks the chloroplast needs specific redox active metal ions, particularly
copper, iron and manganese. These ions are taken up from the soil and must be
delivered to the chloroplasts. Copper delivery is the topic of this proposal.
Although present in only very small amounts, copper is a very important metal
ion for photosynthesis, and when its delivery to plastids is disturbed the
plants can no longer grow. Copper ions are needed in two processes in
photosynthesis: electron transport and photoprotection. When paired with the
protein plastocyanin, copper is used in the conversion of light energy into
chemical energy by means of electron transport. The enzyme superoxide dismutase
is involved in photo-protection: it uses copper as a cofactor to protect the
chloroplast from dangerous reactive oxygen species, which are formed as a by-
product of photosynthetic electron transport, and thus indirectly the result of
the action of plastocyanin. Thus, for optimal photosynthesis both plastocyanin
and superoxide dismutase must obtain copper, yet both proteins compete for
copper when the supply is limited, creating an interesting dilemma for how
copper should be utilized. A set of proteins, including two chloroplast
localized membrane transporters called PAA1 and PAA2, orchestrate the delivery
of copper to chloroplasts. Exactly how this delivery machinery works and how it
is regulated to allow the delivery of copper under varying conditions of copper
supply is the topic of this project. The biochemical properties of copper
delivery proteins will be analyzed, the effects of mutations in the genes
encoding these proteins on growth and photosynthesis will be studied and their
expression analyzed as a function of varying copper supply and demand. Models
for the regulation of copper delivery will be tested by generating double
mutations. Copper is a necessary component of the photosynthetic machinery and
correct delivery is a prerequisite for enhanced crop yield and quality. Metal
ions are also important for human health and nutrition. A better understanding
of plant mechanisms involved in metal uptake, transport and homeostasis may lead
to the development of crops with enhanced nutritional value. Apart from the
significance to our understanding of biological processes this project will
provide training and intellectual development opportunities for students both in
the research lab and in the classroom. A postdoctoral researcher, two graduate
students and several undergraduate students will take part in the proposed
research project. The project involves collaboration with labs in the US and
abroad, including personnel exchange and training opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;