* 0418311
* The Russian Genitive of Negation: Integration of Lexical and Compositional Semantics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Barbara Partee, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2008
* USD 225,932.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara H. Partee and Dr. Vladimir
Borschev will conduct three years of research with the collaboration of three
Russian scholars on one of the most extensively studied problems in the grammar
of Russian. The puzzling phenomenon of "Genitive of Negation" involves the
alternation of genitive with nominative or accusative case in negative
sentences. After decades of progress by leading scholars, major open issues
concern the semantics of the construction(s) and the theoretical analysis of its
"optionality" in both subject and object case alternations. This project focuses
on the interactions of grammar, lexical semantics, and compositional
(constructional) semantics, and on the relation between Western accounts that
center on "the scope of negation" and Russian accounts that center on shifts in
the lexical semantics of the verbs when they govern different cases ("diathesis
alternations"). Russian and Western linguists have had different approaches to
these issues; the investigators believe that these approaches can be integrated
and built upon to achieve insights into the construction and related theoretical
issues involving the integration of lexical and compositional semantics. Drs.
Partee and Borschev will spend half of each year in Russia conducting research
seminars with their Russian consultants, leaders in the fields of Russian syntax
and semantics (Drs. Elena Paducheva, Ekaterina Rakhilina, and Yakov Testelets).
A Research Assistant based for most of the year at the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst will help to find and search additional corpora and
data bases to supplement published statistical studies, as well as carrying out
original research on aspects of the problem area. The consultants will help to
explore existing and new hypotheses about the interaction of syntactic, semantic
and pragmatic factors that have been argued to play a role in the
construction(s), including Borschev and Partee's hypothesized "Perspectival
Structure".

The project will advance our understanding of the special properties of negative
sentences, and of the interactions among word meaning, constructional meaning,
information structure, and cognitive choices in how we structure and schematize
the situations we describe with language. The significance of the project lies
in its bringing together two rich but long-separated linguistic traditions of
semantic research, the Moscow school of lexical semantics and the Western
tradition of model-theoretic ('formal') semantics, and showing by application to
an important problem how their strengths can be effectively combined to make
progress on basic issues in the interaction of formal and lexical semantics with
each other and with syntax and context. The broader impacts of the project
include bringing Russian and Western linguistics into closer and better contact,
and providing advanced training for Western graduate students and young Russian
scholars.