* 0418905
* Technical Support for a New ICP-MS Laboratory for Earth and Ocean Science Research at the University of Florida
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* David Hodell, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2009
* USD 217,901.00

EAR-0418905&lt;br/&gt;Mueller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks support
for the appointment of a Ph.D. scientist to act as laboratory manager for a new
ICP-based analytical facility at the University of Florida for an initial 3-year
period. The University of Florida will assume 100% financial responsibility for
this position on a permanent basis subsequent to this initial period. The
construction of the ICP laboratory and the acquisition of two new ICP mass
spectrometers (Finnegan-MAT Element-2 and Nu Plasma multicollector) are part of
the recent relocation into &gt;10,000 sq. ft. of new geochemical laboratories as
part of an overall relocation of our Department into greatly expanded and
renovated facilities (Williamson Hall). These instruments have been interfaced
with newly acquired Excimer (193 nm) and Nd-YAG (213 nm) lasers, as well as a
desolvating nebulizer and autosamplers. Financial support for both laboratory
renovation and instrument acquisition involved cost sharing between the
University of Florida and the NSF. The primary responsibilities of this person
will include: 1) contribute to method development and participate in
collaborative and independent research, 2) maintain quality control of the
facility, which will be a challenge in light of the large number of users; 3)
oversee and administer day-to-day activities such as maintenance and scheduling,
in order for the facility to efficiently produce the highest quality data; and
4) make the instruments capabilities known to and accessible to a wide range of
users inside and outside of the department, including students. In addition, the
laboratory manager will be the primary instructor for students exposed to
elemental and isotopic methods both in courses and via individual research
projects at the graduate and undergraduate levels. Without an experienced
laboratory manager, access to this facility for these students and other users
will be very limited. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;