* 0418340
* CNS Special Projects:     Scholarship and Travel Grants for the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing 2004; October 6-9, 2004; Chicago, IL
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Telle Whitney, Anita Borg Institute for Women and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2005
* USD 64,500.00

Title: Scholarship and Travel Grants for the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women
in Computing 2004&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Special Project award provides
funding for approximately seventy-five undergraduate and graduate students to
attend the 2004 Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing. The fourth Grace
Hopper Celebration will be held on October 6-9, 2004 in
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
access to the many technical presentations and researchers at the conference. In
addition, students have the opportunity to participate in poster sessions and
receive feedback from discipline specialists. The Grace Hopper Celebration
provides a unique, supportive environment for intellectual discourse that is
particularly appealing for women and other under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project deal with providing
resources and support to students that will help them persist in their programs
as well as access to avenues to continue through the IT workforce pipeline.
Students who attend the Grace Hopper Celebration will be exposed to women who
are creating, improving, and studying computer and information technologies who
serve as role models and mentors. This travel scholarship support provides a
unique opportunity to directly affect the careers of future computer scientists
and increase the representation of women in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;