* 0418061
* A Parsed Historical Corpus of Modern English
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2011
* Anthony Kroch, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2011
* USD 162,249.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Anthony Kroch and Dr. Beatrice
Santorini will create a one million word syntactically-annotated electronic
corpus of Modern English texts and text samples, covering the years from 1700 to
1900 C. E. This corpus is the fourth in a series created over the past decade by
researchers at Penn and at the University of York, England. The three existing
corpora cover 900 years of the history of English (ca. 800 C. E. to 1700 C. E.)
and comprise more than 4.5 million words of running text, tagged for part of
speech and annotated for syntactic structure. The corpora support studies that
combine grammatical analysis with the statistical tracking of changes across
time, at a level of detail and precision never before possible. As a result,
they have been used in the study of many changes that the English language has
undergone over the centuries. However, the linguistic changes that distinguish
Modern English from the language of earlier periods only go to completion in the
18th and 19th centuries, so that the new corpus is needed for temporally
complete investigations of the rise of Modern English. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new corpus will reinforce in several ways the growing influence of electronic
corpora on the language sciences. First, the study of language change is being
revolutionized, because corpora provide, in manageable form, the data needed for
large-scale and precise investigations. Because the corpora are publicly
available, common data resources, different analyses can be compared with a
confidence and precision not previously possible. Second, the corpora permit
historical work to interact more effectively with other areas of linguistics.
Thus, recent discussions of the long-assumed connection between language change
and language acquisition have been stimulated by corpus-based studies of the
time course of language change. In addition, applied mathematicians have begun
to use the detailed data that the parsed historical corpora provide to test
dynamical systems models of how language change diffuses through a population.
Third, in computational linguistics, the corpora are beginning to prove useful
as test beds for automatic processors, especially syntactic parsers. Crucially,
they include a wide range of genres and levels of syntactic complexity, unlike
the present the standard test bed, the Penn Treebank. Because its syntax differs
very little from Present-Day English, the proposed new corpus of Modern English
will be particularly useful in this regard. Finally, parsed corpora are
beginning to have an impact on undergraduate education in linguistics. They are
used in undergraduate research courses, where learning to use them reinforces
students' understanding of language structure while, at the same time, the
corpora provide datasets for research projects. Because its language poses no
linguistic barriers to understanding, the present corpus will be particularly
useful for this purpose.&lt;br/&gt;