* 0418323
* Acquisition of a MALDI TOF TOF Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Jiaxu Li, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 420,068.00

This award supports the acquisition of a matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization, time-of-flight mass spectrometer (MALDI TOF MS) to be housed in a
core proteomics facility at Mississippi State University (MSU). The core lab
also serves other Mississippi colleges, secondary schools and industries.
Initially, fourteen research projects involving proteomics being conducted at
MSU will utilize the instrumentation. The addition of a MALDI TOF mass
spectrometer to the current proteomic facility will permit a significant
expansion of analytical capabilities in support of these projects. The recent
additions of a robotic spot picker and a robotic digester to the facility have
created a large backlog of samples requiring MS analysis and will optimize the
utility of the equipment. The equipment will not only fulfill a need for more
timely sample analyses but also add to the analytical procedures available and
increase opportunities for additional projects utilizing modern proteomics to
address research questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSU Proteomics Facility is
one of the five major resources in the Mississippi Functional Genomics Network.
The Network fosters collaborative interactions between the five research
universities and the six regional schools in Mississippi. The MSU Proteomics
Facility is the only proteomic facility in the State of Mississippi. Thus, the
proteomic facility is being used as a resource to expand research programs
throughout the Mississippi academic community. &lt;br/&gt;