* 0418519
* Doctoral Dissertation in Political Science: Contesting the Contest: Political Parties and Election Boycotts
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Gary Cox, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2005
* USD 13,404.00

&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research project will explain why political parties
boycott elections. Since this is the first comprehensive treatment of the
subject, covering a total of 626 elections in 168 countries since 1990, several
aspects of election boycotts will be examined. Conditions under which parties
boycott as well as the effects of boycotts will be explored. A case study
comparison of Jamaica and the Dominican Republic will also be included.
&lt;br/&gt;This project is distinct from previous treatments of the subject
because it argues &lt;br/&gt;first and foremost that election boycotts are a
strategic choice on the part of political parties. A decision model is used to
explain how opposition parties navigate particular sets of political
institutions, such as the availability of state party finance and rules of
electoral participation, to determine the value of a boycott. A game theoretic
model will be constructed to understand the choices that face incumbent
governments, as well as opposition parties, where questions of international
election monitoring are concerned, which in turn affect decisions to boycott.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;In addition to the creation of a new
database on elections and election boycotts, &lt;br/&gt;and providing a new
theoretical framework for considering the phenomenon of party election boycotts,
this project will provide an important contribution to the study developing
democracies and non-standard political strategies more generally. The hypotheses
tested in this project will help explain why parties might find strategies other
than classic vote seeking to be beneficial, and what effect these strategies
have on the democratic process. Furthermore, the results of this project will
tell us more about the effects of domestic policies, such as public finance and
electoral procedures, on democratic quality in new democracies. Finally this
study of election boycotts will help us better understand the effects of the
international community, foreign aid, and election &lt;br/&gt;monitoring, on
nascent democracy. &lt;br/&gt;