* 0418029
* Collaborative Research:  Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Giovanni Violante, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2008
* USD 135,935.00

There has been a dramatic increase in wage inequality in the United States over
the past thirty years. This trend has generated a vast amount of research
attempting to identify its causes, and has been accompanied by a vibrant public
debate on the consequences of a more unequal society. However, the effects of
rising wage inequality for the macroeconomy are still not very well understood
by economists. For example, inequality in consumption and hours worked has,
perhaps surprisingly, increased only modestly in recent decades. The goal of
this proposal is to provide a comprehensive quantitative assessment of the
macroeconomic and welfare implications of rising wage inequality for the U.S.
economy.

The project will provide a quantitative answer to four distinct, but strictly
interrelated questions. First, to what extent can changes in the wage structure
account for the observed dynamics of cross-sectional dispersion in hours worked,
earnings, consumption, and wealth in the United States? Second, can a rising
skill-premium coupled with greater wage instability explain the recent surge in
non-participation among prime-aged males? Third, how important for understanding
the dynamics of inequality are the rise in female labor-force participation, the
narrowing of the gender wage gap, and intra-family insurance? Finally, what are
the welfare costs of the observed rise in uninsurable labor market risk for U.S.
households, given incomplete financial and insurance markets?

All these components of the project share a common methodology, which can be
summarized in two stages. First, panel-data statistical techniques are used to
provide an accurate empirical assessment of the changes in the individual (or
joint family) stochastic process for wages. Next, the time-varying wage process
is used as an input into calibrated overlapping-generations incomplete-markets
model economies in order to generate, through numerical simulations, predictions
for the variables of interest. Our approach therefore combines a rigorous
econometric analysis of changing wage dynamics (typical of labor economics) with
state-of-the-art quantitative theory (typical of macroeconomics) in order to
isolate the effects of rising wage inequality on the distribution at the
household level of consumption, savings, labor supply and, ultimately, welfare.

Broader Impacts: Understanding these issues can help economists and policy-
makers decide how much attention they should pay to trends and fluctuations in
cross-sectional inequality relative to the more traditional concerns of
aggregate economic growth and business-cycle fluctuations. Moreover, by
examining the mechanisms via which the level of dispersion in a large set of
economic variables is jointly determined, our study suggests directions in which
policy interventions should be targeted in order to mitigate the costs of rising
wage inequality on society.