* 0418395
* Collaborative Research: Have Ridge Volumes Changed Over the Past 160 Ma?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Christopher Scotese, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2007
* USD 159,988.00

Scotese&lt;br/&gt;0418395&lt;br/&gt;This project describes and quantifies the
long-term pattern of eustatic sea level change during the last 120 million years
using plate tectonic reconstructions of the ocean basins. Estimates of
Cretaceous eustatic sea level as a result of changing ocean ridge volume and the
data on which they were based have been a cornerstone of many studies of
stratigraphy, tectonics and climatology. Recent improvements global databases
and controversy surrounding the older results allow a new, more systematic
assessment and new calculations of ridge volumes through time. This project is
generating plate tectonic reconstructions for 14 time intervals back to 120 Ma.
New age vs. depth relations for seafloor are determined including: 1) Sediment
unloading; 2) Pure age vs. depth relation; and 3) Observed age vs. depth
relation. These anomalous features take up ocean volume and impact sea-level
change. These calculations include estimates of changing area of continents
through stretching of continental crust due to breakup, and of compression and
shortening of continental crust to determine their effect on ocean volume. The
impact of oceanic volcanism in the form of large igneous provinces hot spots is
estimated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
history of eustatic sea level change is fundamental to the study of
stratigraphy, sequence stratigraphy, facies analysis, paleogeography,
hydrocarbon formation and accumulation, global climate change, the evolution of
the cryosphere, the changing composition of the atmosphere and biogeography. The
effects of sea level fluctuations touch nearly every aspect of sedimentary
geology and Earth System evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At least 5 students
(both undergraduate and PhD) are active participants in the research and in
dissemination of the results at regional and national meetings. The
paleogeographic maps are resources for the scientific community both as base
maps for future research and as teaching tools. Data and results compiled for
this study are available to the public through data base storage available on
the world wide web or at cost on CD.&lt;br/&gt;(Collaborative Project with
0418076/Kominz/Western Michigan University)