* 0418177
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: An Experimental Study of Imperfect Information and Buyer Search with Differentiated Products
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Timothy Cason, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/2007
* USD 9,900.00

We use experimental methods to examine the impact of costly information on
firms' pricing strategies in a differentiated goods environment. The basic
underlying feature of this differentiated goods setup is that consumers care
about more than just finding the lowest possible price; they also consider how
well the product attributes match their tastes and therefore search for a
product with the best price-match combination. The experimental design is
structured around Anderson and Renault's (2000) theoretical framework. Their
model yields different price and welfare predictions depending on whether the
information imparted to the consumer relates to price or product attributes. For
instance, providing price information decreases the equilibrium price, while
providing information about product characteristics curtails consumer search and
raises the price. In fact, the price when consumers are match informed is
greater than when they receive no information at all. This is in sharp contrast
to a widely accepted proposition of economic theory that improved information
leads to lower prices, thereby creating a positive externality for the
consumers. Additionally, the timing of information also matters. The price is
greatest when consumers are informed about the match values from both firms
prior to engaging in costly search. This occurs because informed consumers first
visit the firm from which their match value is greater and consequently decrease
the demand inelasticity. This dissertation research project will use economic
experiments to better understand how information about retail prices affects
outcomes in markets where there are only a small number of sellers. The
researcher will conduct duopoly experiments employing the posted offer trading
institution, which closely resembles the conventional retail trading
environments. Four different information environments will be compared. The No-
Information treatment (NI) forms a baseline to which two other sets of
treatments are compared. In the Price Information (PI) and the Match Information
(MI) treatments, after all consumers have searched one of the firms, half of
them become costlessly informed about the price or their match values from the
second firm. Comparing these two treatments provides insight on how the content
of information affects firms' pricing strategies. The impact of the timing of
information is measured by comparing the Match information (MI) treatment with
the pre-search Match information (PMI) treatment, in which half of the consumers
know their match values from both firms before searching. This experimental
design will improve our understanding of the mechanisms at work in retail market
transactions, which are often plagued by informational asymmetries, and thereby
provide a basis for sounder policy choices. For instance, various consumer
protection regulations stipulated by the Federal Trade Commission that are aimed
towards curbing the harms of "imperfect information" should take into account
the nature and market impact of the informational imperfection, and not just its
mere existence.