* 0418503
* Doctoral Dissertation in Political Science:  Evaluating the Determinants of Upper House Assertion
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* William Chandler, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,809.00

All upper chambers possess constitutional standing, suggesting that they should
have influence within the legislative process. The literature on parliaments
until recently has disregarded the role of upper chambers in parliamentary
democracies as practically non-existent. These arguments have centered on both
the composition and the institutional weakness of the upper chamber vis-a- vis
the lower chamber. Recent work in the area of formal modeling has suggested,
however, that policy outcomes are different under bicameral institutions than
under unicameral institutions, despite the variations in bicameral institutional
arrangements. Yet the circumstances under which upper chambers use their
authority, and its ultimate effect on policy outcomes remains understudied, as
current research either, does not test their models against the empirical
record, or relies primarily on one case. This project expands on current
research by examining not only institutional factors which may explain upper
house assertion in the legislative process, but also the impact of party factors
(such as party discipline) and policy preferences of the median legislator in
the upper chamber in four parliamentary democracies (Belgium, Ireland, Germany,
and the United Kingdom). NSF support will be used to travel to each capital for
one month to access parliamentary debate records, archival information, and
interviews where necessary. Investigation based on these sources is essential to
understanding the circumstances under which upper chambers use their authority
to intervene in the policy making process. &lt;br/&gt;The presence of an upper
chamber has been hypothesized to affect not only policy outcomes in stable
democracies, but has also been a significant area of debate within developing
democracies and the literature on how deeply divided societies should be
governed. In addition to their effect on policy outcomes, it has been noted that
even those upper chambers that are viewed as institutionally weak, have recently
become more assertive in dealing with governments in the lower house. In many
cases, this increase in upper chamber assertion has required governments to
amend or drop bills altogether, which suggests that blanket rejections of upper
house influence are misleading. This project expands on current research in
comparative parliamentary studies to examine how institutional effects can shape
the costs of overriding the upper chamber, as well as examine the role of party
discipline and policy preferences of the upper chamber in determining when to
use institutional authority strategically to obtain their desired outcome.
Existing data and newly collected and operationalized data will be used in this
analysis. &lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact NSF funding for this research project will
provide the co-PI the resources to collect and code relevant data on upper
chamber assertion within the legislative process in a more systematic manner and
for a wider range of cases than is currently offered by the literature. Data
collected by this project will be made publicly available for academic,
research, and noncommercial purposes, and will be of useful for scholarship in
the area of comparative legislative studies, as well as the affects of bicameral
institutional structures on parliamentary systems, and institutional engineering
in developing democracies. &lt;br/&gt;