* 0418890
* Regulation of SR160/tBRI1 By Systemin, Brassinosteroids and Ultraviolet-B Radiation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Johannes Stratmann, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 08/31/2008
* USD 329,714.00

Plant cells are well equipped to sense and integrate endogenous and
environmental signals. Signal perception is one of the most basic processes that
enables plants to develop into mature, fertile organisms. One of the most
surprising recent discoveries in plant science was that the SR160 cell surface
receptor for the wound signaling peptide systemin is identical to the tBRI1
receptor for brassinosteroids, steroidal plant hormones that regulate growth and
development. Furthermore, the systemin receptor might be co-opted by
ultraviolet-B radiation. While systemin and brassinosteroids are ligands for the
same receptor, their signal transduction and target genes are known to be
different. On the other hand, UV-B- and systemin-induced signaling and gene
expression overlap. This project is concerned with the regulation of the
membrane-spanning SR160/tBRI1 receptor by systemin, brassinosteroids, and UV-B
at the biochemical and molecular level. It is hypothesized that either the mode
of activation of SR160/tBRI1 or the recruitment of other intracellular signaling
proteins to SR160/tBRI1 differs in a ligand-dependent manner. Using tomato and
tobacco as model plants, the focus will be on the activation by phosphorylation
of the intracellular domain of the receptor, and on the identification and
characterization of interacting proteins. In addition, it will be tested whether
UV-B activates SR160/tBRI1 and recruits the same proteins to the receptor as
systemin. The hypotheses will be tested experimentally by employing
phosphorylation assays, the yeast two-hybrid system to identify SR160/tBRI1
interacting proteins, and a protoplast transient transformation system for in
vivo studies. The project should lead to fundamental insights into stress
perception that will be useful for devising strategies for generating plants
with increased resistance to various stress factors. These plants would reduce
the application of environmentally harmful agrochemicals such as pesticides and
increase the yield of crop plants under unfavorable environmental conditions.
The project will involve a postdoctoral research associate and undergraduate
students who will be trained in state-of-the-art methods in plant molecular
biology. Research related to this project will be incorporated in an upper level
class for undergraduate and graduate students, taught by the PI.
Underrepresented groups will be actively recruited to participate in the
project.