* 0418975
* Collaborative Research: Spatial and temporal evolution of the Panoche-Tumey Hills Paleoseep, western San Joaquin Valley, California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* James Sample, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2009
* USD 118,052.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Project proposes to measure the abundance and carbon-isotopic
composition of lipid biomarkers to help elucidate the origins and effects of
Neoproterozoic low-latitude glacial events (ca. 750-580 Ma), an approach not
previously reported. Multiple hypotheses have been proposed to explain the
unusual geochemical and sedimentological features associated with these
glaciations (negative d13C anomalies, iron-formation, unusual carbonate
lithofacies, etc.). So many hypotheses persist because the existing data,
particularly the d13C record of carbonates, are equivocal in terms of the
environmental changes that they record. Despite the discovery of one methane-
seep-like locality in China (Jiange et al., 2003) and thousands of d13C analyses
from a multitude of localities world-wide, we know little more now about the
biogeochemistry of snowball Earth than when Hoffman et al. (1998) published
their seminal paper. New and different kinds of data are required to move our
understanding of this fascinating event forward. The coincidence of the last
glacial event and the advent and diversification of animal phyla has not escaped
attention, and fuels much of the continuing interest in this time interval. Our
organic geochemical studies of the glaciations may also shed some light on that
important question.&lt;br/&gt;The major snowball hypotheses each predict very
different environmental conditions in the Neoproterozoic oceans leading up to,
during, and immediately after the glacial events. Lipid biomarkers, extracted
from organic-rich rocks of appropriate age, would provide valuable information
about existing biota and metabolic pathways in the oceans at that time. Carbon-
isotopic data will also tell us about the role of methane cycling. These data
should allow us to differentiate between the contending snowball hypotheses and
move the current debate forward. The limitation to collecting such data is not
analytical or procedural, for the laboratory methods are straightforward.
Rather, the issue is finding organic-rich strata (with mg/g concentrations of
organic matter) of appropriate age and stratigraphic position, a problem which
P.I.s believe they have surmounted.&lt;br/&gt;P.I.s have collected a series of
organic rich, well-preserved, thermally-immature, rocks from pre-, syn-,and
post-glacial units in Brazil and China. Their sample set provides an excellent
chance to find lipid biomarkers, test competing hypotheses, and further our
knowledge of the biogeochemisty of Earth leading up to the evolution and
diversification of the metazoa.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project
is as follows. The application of biomarker analyses with respect to snowball
Earth is novel and has not been attempted previously due to the rarity of
appropriate samples. P.I.s have assembled the requisite samples and are equipped
to undertake the analyses. The results will have the potential to distinguish
between the multiple hypotheses for the glaciations, and may also illuminate
some of the environmental changes leading up to the evolution of
animals.&lt;br/&gt;The broad impact is the mentoring of graduate students,
undergraduate students, and international post-doctoral scientists, which forms
the core of the proposal (the majority of the requested funding is for student
support). P.I.s will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups with
this study. In particular, the graduate student RA request from USC will support
Alison Olcott, who received an honorable mention in the NSF graduate student
fellowship competition, thus increasing female presence in the field of Earth
Sciences; currently, most of the undergraduate assistants undertaking their
first research experience at USC are women, as well. If supported, this research
will contribute to a question that has captured much recent public attention
(e.g., Walker, 2003), and will thus serve to bolster public involvement and
support of&lt;br/&gt;science in general, and geoscience in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;