* 0418670
* Dissertation: Gestural Organization of Vowel Sequences and Intervocalic Glottal Stop
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Ellen Broselow, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,787.00

With National Science Foundation support, under the direction of Dr. Ellen
Broselow, Ms. Marianne Boroff will conduct fieldwork in southeastern Mexico on
syllable structure in Yatzachi Zapotec (YZ) for her doctoral dissertation.
Syllables have long been considered a fundamental unit in speech; they organize
speech sounds into larger units, which are themselves organized into words.
Explanations of such phenomena as stress assignment patterns and regular sound
alternations (allophony) depend crucially on the notion of syllable. More
importantly, speakers with no prior linguistic knowledge show themselves to be
aware of the syllable structure of their language; they can count syllables when
asked, and overtly make use of this knowledge in accomplishing certain tasks,
for example in enunciating a word or in some language games. Where does the
information upon which this knowledge is based come from? Phoneticians have
found it difficult to pin down the exact properties of the speech stream that
allow us to determine syllable structure; syllable structure is impossible to
read off of the acoustic output of an utterance. Therefore, syllables must be
considered abstract units of mental representation rather than physical objects
in the speech stream.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research
contributes to the understanding of the notion of the syllable by examining the
patterning of consonants and vowels with respect to syllable structure. Cross-
linguistically, there is a preference for syllables that begin in a consonant
over syllables that begin in a vowel; every language allows CV syllables, and
some languages require an initial consonant. Can we attribute the preference for
vowels to have preceding consonants to factors other than syllable structure? In
YZ, vowel sequences are not allowed, a fact that would traditionally be
explained by the fact that the second vowel belongs to a syllable that doesn't
start with a consonant. However, YZ also does not allow vowels separated by a
glottal stop (the intervocalic sound found in the English word uh-oh), even
though glottal stop is a consonant in the language, and therefore should in
principle fulfill the requirement that all syllables begin with a consonant.
Clearly, something else is at work here that results in the failure of both
vowel sequences and vowel sequences separated by a glottal stop - something
other than syllable structure alone. Furthermore, many languages treat glottal
stops differently from other consonants, allowing vowels to spread across them
or requiring that the vowels on either side of the glottal stop be identical,
and various languages restrict glottal stop to particular positions. In this
study, we attempt to answer these questions: Why must vowels be preceded by a
consonant in the first place? Is there anything special about vowels that make
vowel sequences disfavored (as opposed to single vowels in initial position)? Is
there any particular property of a glottal stop that explains why it should not
be permitted to begin a syllable in some languages? Why should there be a
preference for vowels flanking glottal stop to be identical? This study will not
only help to explain the YZ data, but will also contribute to the debate
concerning the relative contributions of abstract units of organization such as
the syllable vs. constraints on the timing of physical vocal tract gestures in
organizing speech.&lt;br/&gt;