* 0418932
* Dissertation Research, Patterns of Diversity and Host Specificity in the Cestodes of Freshwater Stingrays
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Janine Caira, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 10,940.00

Based on what is currently known, the tapeworms of South American freshwater
stingrays appear to be much less diverse and host specific than their marine
counterparts. However, new data indicate that there may be more species than
previously thought, and that each tapeworm species may be highly specific to its
stingray host species. This project investigates this problem with taxonomic and
systematic tools. The tapeworm specimens that are the basis of the study include
specimens deposited in museums, and specimens from recent field collections.
Specifically two genera, or groups of tapeworm species, will be investigated.
Tapeworms collected in Peru from new localities and stingray hosts will be
studied with methods not previously implemented on the group, specifically
histology and scanning electron microscopy. Characterization of newly described
species will be augmented with DNA sequence data. Museum specimens, including
many that are located at Brazilian institutions, will be studied in conjunction
with Dr. Fernando Marques of the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Tests of
evolutionary relatedness among the tapeworms will serve as an analytical
framework to explore broad evolutionary questions such as coevolution between
host and parasite, geographic patterns, and the origin of the tapeworms of South
American freshwater stingrays. This work will shed light on whether there are
fundamental differences between the freshwater and marine systems of tapeworms
and stingray hosts. This study has the potential to generate information useful
and applicable to future studies focusing on evolutionary biology, systematics,
biogeography, biodiversity, ecology, and conservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basic organismal research on the fauna of South American
countries such as Peru serves to both document biological diversity and make
knowledge of that biodiversity more available within the country of origin.
Specimens are deposited in museums in the country from which they were
collected, and these become available for study and analysis by scientists
throughout the world, as well as beginning students. The collaboration with Dr.
Marques has the potential for reciprocal benefits. Such exchanges in which
expertise of poorly known groups is shared across borders will preserve and
expand taxonomic expertise, as well as result in joint publications of the
results in international, peer-reviewed journals, continued research, and
exchange of ideas and cooperative efforts among one another and among future
students.&lt;br/&gt;