* 0418413
* Prediction and Understanding of Protein Affinity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Steven Cramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Theresa Good
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,577,585.00

Cramer&lt;br/&gt;0418413&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been a long standing goal
in the bioseparations field to connect molecular-level investigations of protein
adsorption to the macroscopic/process scale. This project will focus on the
development of novel methods to enable the a priori prediction of protein
binding affinity to ion-exchange chromatographic systems under a variety of
conditions. High throughput experimentation will be employed to accumulate a
large amount of chromatographic data. A computationally efficient tool will be
developed that incorporates fundamental water-mediated interactions between
individual amino acids and peptides with critical surface sites such as charged
ligands for the prediction of protein-surface interaction free energies. Novel
molecular descriptors will be developed and employed in advanced machine
learning methods to construct models of increasingly complex experimental
systems. Initial experimental and theoretical work will focus on well-defined
surfaces such as self assembled monolayers (SAMs) and polyelectrolyte
multilayers. The techniques and insights developed with these model systems will
then be applied to more complicated ion-exchange chromatographic systems.
Experiments will be carried out to produce a large set of linear and non-linear
chromatographic adsorption data that will form the basis for two kinds of
complementary chromatographic modeling work. The synergy of these methods
provides a unique opportunity to develop powerful predictive tools and methods
of gaining significant insight into the fundamental physics of the protein ion-
exchange process. This will have a major impact on the ability to design
efficient ion-exchange chromatography (IEC) based protein separation processes
and will have applicability beyond chromatography to several fields where
protein adsorption plays an important role such as biomaterials and drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;