* 0418149
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Ideologies of Ethnic Stylization:  Asian/Pacific American Linguistic Practices and Mainstream Participation at a Central Texas High School
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Keith Walters, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2005
* USD 9,706.00

In multiethnic contexts, youths constantly negotiate the use of various
ethnolinguistic styles. Often, they engage in language stylization practices
(Coupland 2001), or the highlighted performance of a linguistic style that
diverges from the unmarked style of the speaker or context. For example, a
Samoan-American who typically speaks a mainstream variety of American English
might employ a mock Chinese accent. With support from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Keith Walters and Ms. Elaine Chun will examine the use of
language styles as a means of constructing specifically Asian-American and
Pacific Islander American youth identities at a public high school in Texas
where these groups make up a sizeable minority of an ethnically diverse student
body. Of particular interest is how Asian/Pacific Americans incorporate
stylization practices into their varied forms of participation in mainstream
activities outside the classroom context. The youths in this study, many of whom
come from multiracial and immigrant families, are particularly well-positioned
to engage in creative stylization practices by drawing from both in-school and
out-of-school linguistic resources. While acknowledging the variability within
and across the study's various Asian/Pacific American groups, the investigators
are also concerned with how members of these groups come to be constructed and
construct themselves as an ethnic minority in the U.S. context. Through
ethnographic methods of data collection, including three semesters of full-time,
daily participant observation, fieldnotes, interviews, and audio- and video-
recordings, this study will illuminate the ways in which micro-level language
practices relate to students' identities and their local ideologies about
language, social identity, and school participation. A discourse-centered
analysis of the recorded and transcribed data will tease apart the complex
ideologies of race, ethnicity, nation, gender, sexuality, and class that are
linked to students' symbolic practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
project will be significant for research in sociolinguistics and Asian/Pacific
American studies. It contributes to linguists' understanding of how and why
individual speakers move between various styles, and sometimes symbolically
across ethnic boundaries, as well as how adolescents learn language ideologies
that link particular styles with particular kinds of people. Asian/Pacific
Americans have rarely been the focus of linguistics research. This research
project will bring attention to a marginalized and particularly complex
Asian/Pacific American community in a Texas military town. The project's broader
social impact derives from its challenge to popular discourses in the U.S. that
perpetuate stereotypical images of Asians and Pacific Islanders. In addition,
the in-depth investigation of students' language practices and beliefs in the
context of mainstream school activities will benefit policymakers and educators
who seek to understand the various ways in which students in immigrant
communities accept, negotiate, and benefit from these activities.&lt;br/&gt;