* 0418166
* Climate and Woodland Expansion in the Western Great Plains, USA
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Stephen Jackson, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory H. Chu
* 06/30/2005
* USD 85,490.00

The boundary between the western Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains is a
prominent biogeographical feature of North America. Over the past century,
woodland expansion into former grasslands has been documented in many areas of
the west-central Great Plains. Current biogeographical and ecological knowledge
indicate that the expansion of woodlands into grasslands can be driven by
climate, human land use, and/or species migration, and none of these factors may
be entirely independent of the others. This study will disentangle the factors
related to this expansion and identify the role of climate. The timing of
expansion will be investigated and how the expansion coincides with climate
variability over the past three to six centuries across a spatial gradient that
extends from western Nebraska to northeastern New Mexico. To do this, areas of
woodland expansion with uniform land-use histories across the spatial gradient
will be selected for study. Dendroecological techniques will be used to
reconstruct the timing of ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) woodland expansion.
Then, climate analyses using modern and reconstructed paleoclimatic data will
examine variations and trends in climate over annual to centennial time scales.
Finally, the study area will be surveyed for woodrat (Neotoma) middens to
investigate possible earlier Holocene expansions in the area. The role of
climate in 19th and 20th century woodland expansion will be investigated by
comparing the timing and location of the expansion to local climate variations
and the onset of widespread human land use. The paleoecological and
paleoclimatological records will be used to determine whether other expansions
have occurred in the past or whether post-1850s vegetation movements are
unprecedented in character.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human impacts on the landscape
over the past century can obscure long-term relationships between vegetation and
climate. This can lead to the assumption that any recent changes in vegetation
dynamics are the result of human activity. Long-term data predating the onset of
wide-spread human activity allow us to identify the long-term relationships
between climate and woodland expansion and to determine if those relationships
have changed over the past century. The results of this project will shed light
on the possible role of climate in other cases of woodland expansion, as well as
elucidating the potential affects of future climate change on woodland expansion
in many regions. An interdisciplinary team will work closely with the U.S.
Department of Agriculture and the Shortgrass Steppe Long-Term Ecological
Research site to identify long-term management goals and research agendas for
woodland areas.&lt;br/&gt;