* 0418342
* PASI:  Model Organisms and Innovative Approaches in Developmental Biology; Guaruja, Brazil, Spring 2005
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Ida Chow, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/2005
* USD 77,250.00

0418342&lt;br/&gt;Lehmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pan-American Advanced
Studies Institutes (PASI) award, jointly supported by the NSF and the Department
of Energy (DOE), will take place in Juquehy, Sao Paulo, Brazil, April 27 - May
4, 2005 on the topic of "Model Organisms and Innovative Approaches in
Developmental Biology." The course will take place shortly before the Second
International Meeting of the Latin American Society of Developmental Biology
(LASDB) at the same site, and participants will be encouraged to take advantage
of the LASDB meeting to establish further ties with researchers. The institute
will be a significant collaborative training event with the participation of 16
distinguished scientists, 15 graduate students from the United States and 15
from Latin America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The course will expose the students to
the fundamental questions and latest research tools used in developmental
biology. The lecturers were selected primarily for the excellence of their
research in their respective fields and willingness to continue collaborative
efforts after the course. In addition, the PASI will feature discussion of
research using Latin American indigenous organisms to promote more collaborative
research and studies of Amazon and Atlantic rainforest biodiversity, and
motivate placing developmental biology in a larger context. &lt;br/&gt;