* 0418404
* Collaborative Research:Universals and Variations in Cross Language Color Naming
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Paul Kay, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2007
* USD 73,612.00

Does our language determine the way we see color or does our perception of color
determine the way we talk about it? This question constitutes a major research
focus of the broader 'linguistic relativity' question of the influence of
language on perception and of perception on language. It has been established by
prior research that the color naming systems of different languages (a) are not
all alike but (b) differ from one another in a constrained fashion. In
particular, there appear to be a few universally privileged or salient percepts
-- ideal black, white, red, yellow, green, blue, and perhaps purple -- around
which almost all the major color terms of almost all the world's languages are
formed. But the boundaries of the color&lt;br/&gt;terms of different languages
can differ dramatically. For example, the color words of most languages of the
world do not draw a boundary between green and blue; that is, green and blue are
included in the reference of a single word. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National
Science Foundation support, Dr. Paul Kay and Dr. Terry Regier will investigate
the degree to which the boundaries of named color categories can be predicted
from the locations of the privileged or 'focal' colors, using existing models of
how categories are generalized from given examples. The research involves (1)
discovering the universal focal colors by analyzing the results of the World
Color Survey, in which the reference and best&lt;br/&gt;examples of the major
color words were collected in the field for 110 unwritten languages, (2)
assessing the boundaries of the named color&lt;br/&gt;categories in the same
sample of languages from the same data base and&lt;br/&gt;(3) applying three
different general models of category formation from the cognitive psychology
literature to see if the data in (2) can be predicted from the data in (1). To
the degree this effort is successful, it will both validate the hypothesis of
universal focal colors and demonstrate the interaction of domain specific
constants (the focal colors) with general cognitive principles (of category
formation). It will also show that variable cognitive behavior need not be
lawless, but may result from the subtle interaction of a variety of
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;