* 0418103
* Origins of Object Concepts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Scott Johnson, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul A. Klaczynski
* 07/31/2006
* USD 340,069.00

When we look around the world, we see objects that are separate from one
another, each of which is defined by a unique size, shape, surface pattern, and
distance. Our ability to perceive coherent objects overcomes incomplete input to
the visual system, which is actually fragmented across space and time. That is,
most objects we see are partly occluded by other, nearer objects, and may go in
and out of sight as they move or as we move. Commonsense notions of "object
permanence," the knowledge that objects persist when away from direct perceptual
contact, are central to this experience. Origins of object concepts in children
have long been a source of interest among philosophers and researchers. Most
notably, the pioneering studies of the eminent child psychologist Piaget
provided evidence that object concepts develop only after months of experience
handling and reaching for objects.

More recently, some researchers have challenged Piaget's account on the grounds
that it relies too much on reaching as an index of object concepts. Reaching may
be difficult for infants, and may underestimate "true" object knowledge.
Infants' object concepts, instead, have been proposed to be rooted in innate
knowledge structures, such as "object continuity," the understanding that an
object, seen to have become occluded, maintains its existence and location or
trajectory when out of sight. Such concepts are claimed to be revealed when
looking time methods are employed, and an event is presented to an infant that
violates some expectation of object permanence (this attracts longer looking
than would be expected normally). Such accounts, however, have themselves come
under fire for failing to furnish viable explanations of developmental
mechanism: Even if some ability is innate, it must have developed somehow. In
addition, these "violation of expectation" methods have been criticized as
leading to ambiguity in interpretation. In general, then, there is much
disagreement about the origins of fundamental kinds of object knowledge in
infants.

The present proposal investigates this question by testing the role of specific
visual cues in young infants' perceptions of object motions, as well as
recording eye movements and reaching patterns in response to occlusion displays.
The results are expected to yield important information on infants' perceptual
and cognitive development, by providing converging evidence from multiple
methods including assessments of object continuity, intermodal (visual-auditory)
object perception, object "identity" (the ability to distinguish objects on the
basis of appearance, location, and movement), and depth perception. It is
anticipated that these findings will provide evidence and accounts that
elucidate fundamental mechanisms of development, and it is hoped that such work
will help guide theorizing on vital questions of the emergence of object
concepts in infancy.

