* 0418832
* Modeling and Analysis of Persistent Gamma Rhythms and Their Role in Sustained Attention
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Christoph Borgers, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2008
* USD 205,150.00

The investigator and his colleagues construct and analyze&lt;br/&gt;minimal
mathematical models of gamma (30-80 Hz) oscillations in&lt;br/&gt;the
hippocampus and neocortex. The model networks are composed
of&lt;br/&gt;synaptically coupled excitatory and inhibitory (single-
or&lt;br/&gt;multi-compartment) integrate-and-fire neurons. A major aim of
the&lt;br/&gt;project is a deeper understanding of the persistent
gamma&lt;br/&gt;oscillations observed in vitro by Eberhard Buhl,
Miles&lt;br/&gt;Whittington, et al., and computationally simulated, using
complex,&lt;br/&gt;biophysically realistic models, by Roger Traub et al. The
greater&lt;br/&gt;simplicity of the models in the present study permits much
more&lt;br/&gt;extensive computational experimentation, as well as
the&lt;br/&gt;mathematical analysis of the characteristics of the oscillations.
&lt;br/&gt;Tools from stochastic dynamics (noise-driven excitable
systems)&lt;br/&gt;and probability (order statistics) are used in this analysis.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator also studies hypothetical roles of gamma
oscillations&lt;br/&gt;in attentional processes. In this part of the project,
the&lt;br/&gt;working hypotheses are:&lt;br/&gt; 1. Widespread, persistent gamma
oscillations with infrequent,&lt;br/&gt;irregular participation of individual
excitatory cells are a&lt;br/&gt;correlate of sustained attention. &lt;br/&gt;
2. Ensemble-specific, transient gamma oscillations with&lt;br/&gt;frequent
participation of individual cells are a correlate of&lt;br/&gt;focused
attention.&lt;br/&gt;Computational simulation and mathematical analysis are used
to&lt;br/&gt;examine hypothetical functional roles of persistent
gamma&lt;br/&gt;oscillations in sustained attention (vigilance), and
interactions&lt;br/&gt;of ensemble-specific transient gamma oscillations with
a&lt;br/&gt;background of widespread persistent gamma
oscillations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Strong experimental evidence has shown a
correlation between&lt;br/&gt;attention and gamma frequency oscillations in the
brain. However,&lt;br/&gt;it is not known how (or even whether) gamma
oscillations support&lt;br/&gt;attentional processes. This project aims at
clarifying this link&lt;br/&gt;using mathematical modeling, analysis, and
computational&lt;br/&gt;simulation. Some experimental studies have
indicated&lt;br/&gt;abnormalities in gamma frequency oscillations in the brains
of&lt;br/&gt;patients with schizophrenia or Alzheimer's disease. A
deeper&lt;br/&gt;understanding of gamma oscillations and their roles in
attention&lt;br/&gt;may therefore eventually prove important in understanding
and&lt;br/&gt;treating these diseases. The project also provides
training&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;