* 0418491
* A Ballot-Level Study of Intentional and Unintentional Abstention in Presidential Election Voting
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2004
* Michael Herron, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2004
* USD 65,749.00

&lt;br/&gt;An election's residual vote rate is the fraction of ballots cast in
it that do not contain valid votes, and within contemporary literatures on
uncounted votes, voter disfranchisement, and electoral reform residual vote
rates are considered the barometer by which election administration is measured.
Nonetheless, a limitation of residual vote rates is that they aggregate many
types of invalid votes. Voter errors, voting machine problems, and intentional
abstention all produce residual votes that are observationally equivalent
insofar as affecting an election's overall residual vote rate. This is
problematic as researchers studying technology-related residual votes and those
focusing on minority voter disfranchisement care more about unintentional
residual votes than they do about intentional residual votes, i.e., deliberate
abstention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project disaggregates residual vote rates
into, among other rates, unintentional and intentional rates. This requires
generating and coding a set of ballot images. Contrast a general election ballot
that has no vote for president yet includes valid votes in all other contested
races with a ballot that has attempted votes for all offices including
president. The former ballot presumably contains an intentional presidential
residual vote while the latter, an unintentional residual vote. Distinguishing
between these nonvotes-that is, distinguishing between residual votes caused by
voter error, technology, and abstention-requires ballot images. On account of
the recount that took place in Florida following the 2000 general election, the
Florida State Archive now houses all the ballots cast in the state during this
contest. Across the United States there are no comparable ballot archives. The
ballots in the Florida archive consist of sheets of paper sorted by precinct,
and the ballots are not coded in any sense. Thus, the first step of the research
project is making electronic images of the ballots from a set of representative
Florida counties and then coding the images. For each county so considered
images will be made of all its ballots that have invalid presidential votes and
also of a randomly selected set of ballots that have valid presidential votes.
The second step of the project is applying case control statistical techniques
to estimate intentional residual vote rates, unintentional residual votes, and
residual vote rates associated with technology
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project concludes by publishing its ballot
images and associated codings on an Internet site so as to benefit scholars of
election reform, voting irregularities, and electoral participation. This will
generate an unprecedented resource on uncounted votes that will also be of
interest to researchers who study ticket splitting-a phenomenon that occurs when
individuals vote for a presidential candidate of one party and a Congressional
candidate of another in the same election. Ticket splitting rates are
unobservable and can only be estimated reliably with ballot images. Elections
influence the extent to which groups in society have their interests represented
in government, yet groups with high residual vote rates receive less
representation than groups with low rates. This is a concern for civil rights
scholars as there is compelling evidence that minority voters have high residual
vote rates relative to white voters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing more about
the origins of residual votes and whether they are in general unintentional or
intentional will help academics and election reform practitioners ensure that
all groups in society are well-served by elections. Finally, the project
illustrates the importance of ballot-level analyses and may encourage the
creation of ballot archives beyond Florida's. Such archives can vastly improve
the scholarly understanding of residual votes, and as such the project shows how
making ballots accessible for research will strengthen the legitimacy afforded
to American elections.