* 0418891
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Establishing Regulatory Networks in Arabidopsis: Integrating AGRIS with the Identification of Direct Targets for Transcription Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Betsy Read, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,018,375.00

Hierarchical arrangements (networks) of transcription factors (TFs) provide the
information necessary to deploy genes with particular spatial and temporal
patterns. The information for this is hardwired in the promoter regions formed
by cis-regulatory elements that bind specific TFs. Direct target genes for a
group of 31 selected TFs involved in regulatory networks associated with flower
development and epidermal functions will be identified using chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by analysis of microarrays of promoter sequences
(ChIP-CHIP). Identified direct target genes will be validated by in vitro DNA-
binding experiments, and the TF binding sites will be determined using in vitro
footprinting. The information obtained will be integrated into the established
AGRIS databases, resulting in public resources that integrate TFs, their binding
sites and the corresponding regulatory motifs. Results derived from this project
will be made available at http://arabidopsis.med.ohio-state.edu/NSF2010Project.
Materials developed in this research will be made readily available through the
ABRC. The combination of experimental data and powerful computational tools will
provide the first steps towards establishing the regulatory networks responsible
for the expression of all Arabidopsis genes, one of the central objectives of
the 2010 project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - Establishing the
regulatory networks that control the expression of all plant genes provides a
natural follow-up to the elucidation of the Arabidopsis genome and will
significantly impact the research in Arabidopsis and other plants. This project
integrates experimental biology, bioinformatics, statistics and mathematics,
offering unique opportunities for interdisciplinary research training. The
development of several databases available through the Web will continue to
ensure that findings derived from this work will have the broadest possible
dissemination. Tools and resources obtained from these studies will be applied
for educational purposes in courses at California State University, San Marcos
and Ohio State University.