* 0418963
* URC Planning Grant for INSPIRE:    Interstate Network of Science Programs Integrating Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Lon Mathias, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 49,876.00

The award from the Chemistry Division supports an Undergraduate Research Centers
(URC) planning grant. The PI is Lon J. Mathias assisted by co-PI Pollyanne
Franz. &lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will initially connect the University of
Southern Mississippi PIs with collaborators from St. Norbert College (Green Bay,
WI) and University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point. These participants will host a
workshop that will involve faculty from different types of institutions (high
schools, community colleges, colleges and universities) and support groups such
as the Alliance for Graduate Education in Mississippi (AGEM), and the
Mississippi Alliance for Minority Participation (MAMP). The workshop will
formulate curriculum modification models that emphasize exposure to research in
chemistry and polymer science appropriate to the students at the institutions
that they serve. One goal is to modify an existing general chemistry inquiry
based lecture course with a laboratory that is a project-oriented research
experience. The planning grant will also foster development of resource and
training materials to aid educators in implementing research activities;
development of a high school junior-senior model for initiating pre-college
research experiences; and development of plans for an Internet-access shared
instrumentation program for students to carry out experiments in real time. The
project will develop a physical and virtual center with modules that all
educators can use to implement course changes (that increase exposure to
research for science and non-science majors alike) and offer new research
projects at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;