* 0418983
* Glacial-Interglacial Variations in Late Paleozoic Atmospheric Circulation Inferred from Loessite-Paleosol Couplets of Western Equatorial Pangea
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Gerilyn Soreghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2009
* USD 174,995.00

Earth's climate during the late Paleozoic (ca. 300 Ma) was profoundly affected
by both large-scale&lt;br/&gt;continental glaciation and monsoonal circulation.
Accordingly, key elements of its climate exhibit&lt;br/&gt;parallels to Earth's
modern climate, which has intrigued both those who model climate, and those
who&lt;br/&gt;reconstruct climate using proxy data. Validation and further
sophistication of climate models of this&lt;br/&gt;interval are hampered,
however, by low-resolution geologic datasets. That is, although the broad
strokes&lt;br/&gt;of Pangea's climate system are well established, many aspects
remain unconstrained.&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary geochronologic and sedimentologic
data collected by the PIs from a lower Permian&lt;br/&gt;loessite-paleosol
couplet in the study region document a profound shift in equatorial wind
direction and&lt;br/&gt;strength; the PIs hypothesize that this shift signals a
geologically abrupt change in the intensity of&lt;br/&gt;monsoonal circulation
of western Pangea between glacials, and interglacials. The objective of
the&lt;br/&gt;proposed study, therefore, is to examine and characterize in
detail the character, variability, and&lt;br/&gt;chronology of such high-
frequency shifts in atmospheric circulation in western equatorial Pangea,
just&lt;br/&gt;before and after onset of monsoonal conditions. To achieve this,
the PIs and students will study loessite&lt;br/&gt;(eolian silt) and
intercalated paleosols that record alternating glacial-interglacial states. The
PIs have&lt;br/&gt;targeted for study loessite-paleosol couplets that represent
wide geographic coverage in western&lt;br/&gt;equatorial Pangea (western U.S.),
and that date from (1) middle-late Pennsylvanian (zonal), and (2)
early&lt;br/&gt;Permian (monsoonal) times. Each study couplet will be subjected
to several previously-tested techniques&lt;br/&gt;including detrital-zircon
based provenance analysis, magnetic susceptibility, whole-rock
geochemistry,&lt;br/&gt;and grain-size analysis as proxies for various climatic
parameters including wind direction, strength, and&lt;br/&gt;seasonality, and
relative aridity. High-precision, radio-isotopic (U-Pb) dating of the youngest
(volcanic)&lt;br/&gt;detrital zircons and some experimental dating of pedogenic
carbonate will be used to improve absolute&lt;br/&gt;age constraints on the
target couplets, and constrain durations of these glacial-interglacial
shifts.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Proposed Activity-- Project results will
enable examination of late Paleozoic&lt;br/&gt;icehouse variations in
atmospheric circulation at an unprecedented detail, and in particular, high-
resolution&lt;br/&gt;(glacial-interglacial) shifts in equatorial circulation
during both zonal and monsoonal states of&lt;br/&gt;the Pangean interval.
Results will also provide improved age constraints on target strata, and
durations of&lt;br/&gt;climatic fluctuations, and will enable further testing of
the paleosol-carbonate dating technique.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting
from Proposed Activity "Project results will provide better constraints
for&lt;br/&gt;climate models of the late Paleozoic and for natural variation in
climatic conditions of interglacials over&lt;br/&gt;geologically long periods of
time. Accordingly, results should further our understanding of
Earth's&lt;br/&gt;climate system in general, ultimately contributing to improved
climate predictions in our modern&lt;br/&gt;interglacial world. The PIs will
fund and train at least two graduate students directly from this
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research, and have a strong commitment to, and history of,
involving undergraduate geoscience majors in&lt;br/&gt;their research, which
they will continue in the proposed project. OU's formal agreement with Fort
Valley&lt;br/&gt;State University (a Historically Black University), in which
upperclassmen complete their geology&lt;br/&gt;degrees at OU, offers an
excellent opportunity to involve minority students in this undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;MJS has also used NSF funds to support science-education
majors in undergraduate research projects, and&lt;br/&gt;will actively recruit
at least one such student to work on aspects of the proposed project. The
project&lt;br/&gt;will enhance teaching and training at all levels
(undergraduate through professional). MJS teaches an&lt;br/&gt;Earth System
Science course for education majors, and GSS teaches advanced courses in Earth's
Past&lt;br/&gt;Climate and Depositional Systems; both PIs regularly utilizes
case examples from their own research to&lt;br/&gt;illustrate climate concepts.
Furthermore, the project will enable significant cross-disciplinary training,
and&lt;br/&gt;involves a mixed-gender research team of sedimentologists and
geochronologists. Finally, the PIs and&lt;br/&gt;students will continue to
disseminate results in high-profile journals and at national meetings.