* 0418352
* The Economics and Politics of Banking Regulation in the Industrialized World, 1850-2000
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Richard Grossman, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2007
* USD 59,957.00

Although social scientists and policy makers have devoted considerable effort to
explaining the consequences of banking regulation, comparatively little research
has been directed towards explaining the underlying reasons for the enactment of
different regulatory measures. The objective of this research is to first
assemble a dataset on banking regulations enacted across the industrialized
world during the past century and a half. The regulations to be examined include
entry regulation, capital requirements, reserve requirements, the enactment of
double liability for bank shareholders, the ability of banks to engage in
securities market transactions (universal banking), lender of last resort,
branching, and the requirement to publish bank balance sheets. The second
objective is to use that dataset to systematically assess the economic and
political motivations, including stability, efficiency, monetary control, and
redistribution, for such regulation. The substantial database for this project,
which includes banking, macroeconomic, political, and legal information, will
come from a variety of contemporary and historical sources. These include
reports of national central banks and governments, the financial press, and
various international agencies, such as the League of Nations, Bank for
International Settlements, European Union, Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, published electronic databases, and a substantial secondary
historical literature. This grant supports a pilot study of the time series of
regulatory enactments in one country: Germany.

The results of the research will increase our understanding of the political
economy forces that lead to changes in bank regulation. Because the structure of
banking has been shown to influence financial stability and economic growth,
explaining the pattern and timing of banking regulation will help account for
differences in financial structure and, therefore, will help explain differences
in economic growth among countries. Finally, since regulation is an ongoing
process, understanding the motivation behind earlier regulation may allow
current day policy makers to anticipate the political and economic pressures
demanding a regulatory response and may help them avoid some of the pitfalls of
their predecessors.