* 0418227
* Conference Proposal on Disaster Research and the Social Sciences:    Lessons Learned, Challenges, and Future Trajectories; April 30-May 1, 2004; Newark, DE
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2004,03/31/2005
* Benigno Aguirre, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 03/31/2005
* USD 56,406.00

-The Disaster Research Center (DRC) at the University of Delaware, with the
financial support of the National Science Foundation, is pleased to announce a
two-day conference titled "Disaster Research in the Social Sciences: Lessons
Learned, Challenges, and Future Trajectories." The conference will highlight
interdisciplinary and international perspectives in the field of disasters and
will allow us to focus on: 1) the growth and development of the field of
disasters, from the perspective of the Social Sciences; 2) the theoretical,
methodological, and public policy contributions of the field of disasters; 3)
lessons learned and best practices that have emerged from this field of
research; and 4) future trajectories or opportunities for Social Science
research in the field of disasters. An important outcome of the conference will
be the development of a disaster research agenda focusing on cutting edge
issues. The proposed conference will take place on April 30 and May 1, 2004 at
the University of Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The conference will include
leading scholars and researchers in the field of disasters and will allow us to
discuss substantive, theoretical, and methodological issues and concerns
relevant to the field and to generate new research initiatives that will
contribute to strengthening and increasing our understanding and contributions
of the field of disaster research. Important, critical, and substantive issues
that will be discussed in the conference include: growth and development of
disaster research in the Social Sciences; theoretical and methodological
contributions and challenges in disaster research; impact of disaster research
for practitioners; the role of multidisciplinary research in the disaster field;
developing an international disaster research agenda; the role of research
centers in training researchers; funding disaster research and priorities for
the future in a post 9/11 environment; the major research areas and issues that
need to be developed and explored in the next 5 to 10 years at the national and
international level; and establishing collaborative research initiatives across
disciplines and geographical boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The DRC was the
first Social Science research center in the world devoted to the study of
disasters, so it is appropriate and timely that a conference of such magnitude
will take place at the University of Delaware at this particular historical
moment for the DRC and the field of disaster studies. The aforementioned
conference will not only provide a stimulating intellectual environment but it
will also provide an opportunity to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the
University of Delaware's Disaster Research Center (DRC) and to examine the
impact and contributions of the Center to the field of disaster research both
nationally and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; For further information on
this conference, contact Havidan Rodriguez (DRC Director) or Tricia Wachtendorf
(Conference Coordinator) at (302) 831-6618.&lt;br/&gt;