* 0418730
* Si Isotope Fractionation During Rock Weathering and Pedogenesis
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Oliver Chadwick, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2008
* USD 195,242.00

The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the development of a more
complete understanding of the processes that cause fractionation of 30Si and
28Si during soil development. Herein, measurements are presented that
demonstrate interpretable patterns of change as unweathered minerals derived
from basalt and granite are transformed during weathering. During the early
stages of weathering d30Si values of soil solids decrease whereas the d30Si
values of soil solution increase relative to the parent material. Eventually,
secondary minerals begin to weather releasing Si that has lower d30Si that
parent material and therefore the d30Si signatures of soil solution and leaching
water decreases. Globally, the results are in agreement with predictions based
on the d30Si values of igneous rocks, large rivers and ocean water, but they
raise fundamental questions regarding the fate of Si isotopes as minerals
weather, secondary minerals are formed, and dissolved Si is leached. The d30Si
signatures of the reactants and products of weathering should be the most
effective tracer of Si, but more needs to be understood about the behavior of Si
isotopes in different aspects of this complex system. The proposed research will
develop a more comprehensive and quantitative understanding of the processes
that produce Si isotopic fractionations during weathering and soil formation. It
will combine systematic field- and laboratory-based experiments and measurement
of the changes in Si-isotope composition in solid and aqueous phases in order to
isolate the reactions that are most strongly responsible for driving changes in
d30Si values. The experiments target the following processes in which Si
participates: 1) dissolution of primary and secondary minerals, 2) precipitation
of secondary minerals, 3) the combined impact of near-simultaneous dissolution
and precipitation reactions, and 4) the integrated aspects of weathering,
leaching and clay synthesis. The first 3 of these experiments will be in-lab
benchtop experiments; and the fourth will utilize two ongoing experiments at the
US Geological Survey, one utilizing leaching columns, the other a well-monitored
soil chronosequence. The first 3 experiments simplify soil processes to insure
maximum interpretability whereas the column and field experiments measure the
integrated results of complex soil forming processes. The chronosequence is in
arkosic parent material, and thus will add a useful dimension to an existing
database on silicon isotopic changes associated with progressive weathering in
the Hawaiian basaltic chronosequence. Chemical weathering unlocks elements from
the lithosphere allowing them to participate in dynamic biogeochemical reactions
in terrestrial and ultimately marine systems. Silicon is the second most
abundant element in the Earth's crust and the dominant solute in rivers that
drain continents supplying at least 80% of the dissolved Si entering oceans. The
broader impact of this proposal lies in the importance of capturing the power of
Si isotopes as a tracer for silicate weathering, and the subsequent
participation of Si in Earth surface and ecosystem processes. Silicate
weathering is critical for buffering acid rain, for long-term regulation of
atmospheric CO2, and is the ultimate source of dissolved Si in natural waters.
Silicon's abundance, chemical reactivity, and the variation in the structural
stability of its host minerals ensure that it persists in soils even as its loss
supports downstream ecosystems and as it accumulates in sedimentary deposits.
The proposed research will augment understanding of the global Si cycle, and
specifically the weathering-controlled transfer of Si from continents to oceans.