* 0418815
* Landscape-Scale Morphology and Dynamics of Some Bahamian Ooid Shoals
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Eugene Rankey, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 11/30/2008
* USD 271,645.00

Coastal geomorphic-depositional systems represent the dynamic response of
&lt;br/&gt;sediments to forcing mechanisms that operate across a range of
spatio-temporal scales. &lt;br/&gt;Characterizing these systems is important for
meaningful prediction in both modern coastal &lt;br/&gt;systems and for accurate
stratigraphic interpretation of ancient analogs. In carbonate
&lt;br/&gt;depositional systems, general sedimentologic criteria indicative of
different facies are well &lt;br/&gt;documented, as are the general factors that
control the regional distribution of these facies on &lt;br/&gt;carbonate
platforms. What remains unclear are the details of the landscape-scale
geomorphic &lt;br/&gt;and sedimentologic patterns within individual facies belts
and bodies, the processes that &lt;br/&gt;influence these patterns, and possible
feedbacks between process and product. In examining &lt;br/&gt;how sediments
build into geomorphologic features which eventually may become the
&lt;br/&gt;stratigraphic record, this intermediate scale represents a
fundamental .missing link. between &lt;br/&gt;documentation of carbonate
sediments and study of carbonate stratigraphy. &lt;br/&gt; To begin to fill this
basic gap in understanding, this study proposes quantitatively
&lt;br/&gt;examining the landscape-scale patterns and processes within some
Bahamian ooid shoals, one &lt;br/&gt;carbonate depositional environment. Beyond
the fact that these systems and the ooids forming &lt;br/&gt;them are inherently
interesting, the locations chosen for this study also: a) have ancient analogs
&lt;br/&gt;that form important water and hydrocarbon reservoirs; b) include
ubiquitous lobate forms, &lt;br/&gt;geometries broadly analogous to some
siliciclastic environments, allowing explicit comparison; &lt;br/&gt;and c)
include lobes in both open-shelf and tidal delta settings, to permit assessing
the generality &lt;br/&gt;of process-response dynamics in different conditions.
&lt;br/&gt; We outline data collection and experiments to test several linked
hypotheses related to &lt;br/&gt;modern carbonate ooid shoals and deltas,
including: 1) at the landscape scale, the &lt;br/&gt;geomorphology of shoals is
closely linked to spatial patterns of fluid flow; 2) the grain size,
&lt;br/&gt;sorting, and type varies systematically and predictably within this
hydro-geomorphic framework; &lt;br/&gt;and 3) lobes are a dynamically stable
geomorphic configuration in many tide-dominated &lt;br/&gt;carbonate sand bodies
in both tidal deltaic and more open shelf tide-dominated conditions. &lt;br/&gt;
To address these hypotheses, this research will integrate remote sensing,
bathymetric, &lt;br/&gt;grain size and sorting, grain type, and fluid flow data
in a GIS,. In providing for quantitative &lt;br/&gt;characterization of these
landscape-scale patterns and links to processes, these data will represent
&lt;br/&gt;some of the first such analyses in carbonate systems. In exploring
patterns and processes within &lt;br/&gt;oolitic tidal systems, this study will
provide first-order predictive trends in morphodynamic &lt;br/&gt;evolution of
shoals (.creating geobodies.) and quantitative links between geomorphic
framework &lt;br/&gt;and grains (size, sorting) within shoals (.grains within
geobodies.). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The application of new
remote sensing, bathymetric and fluid flow analytical &lt;br/&gt;tools and
quantitative integration of these data in a GIS represents a novel approach to
study of &lt;br/&gt;landscape-scale sedimentologic-geomorphic systems. This
approach should be broadly &lt;br/&gt;applicable to other environments, and we
expect it will lead to a deeper understanding of &lt;br/&gt;geomorphic-
depositional systems in general. &lt;br/&gt; In addition to training a Ph.D.
student, this project includes educating underserved high &lt;br/&gt;school
minority students about science, enhancing understanding of technology and
environment &lt;br/&gt;in the local Bahamian community, and providing new
learning tools and experiences for &lt;br/&gt;University of Miami students.