* 0418923
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS &amp; Economics: Spousal Control and Savings Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* David Laibson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2006
* USD 9,920.00

Despite the fact that the majority of savings decisions are made at the
household level, very little is understood about how spouses with different time
preferences make decisions about allocating money. There is little empirical
work on intra-household financial decision-making, often because it is hard to
elicit honest responses from both spouses about what happens within the
household through survey questions. This project uses both laboratory
experiments and household surveys carried out in Mindanao, the Philippines; the
research elicits time preference of both spouses, as well as fear of
expropriation and trust with financial decisions in the household, under
randomly varied conditions of privacy, spousal presence, and negotiation with
one's spouse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is among the first to bring
spouses into the lab to make financial decisions and to correlate their
laboratory outcomes with household-level variables about savings and assets. It
provides a new application of experimental methodology to advance understanding
of intra-household decision making, and has implications for decreasing conflict
and overcoming obstacles to mobilize savings at the household level. Gaining a
better understanding of intra-household dynamics is critical to ensuring that
programs aimed at improving livelihood have a more sustainable and balanced
impact.