* 0418794
* Collaborative research: Robust estimation of biodiversity dynamics: Global versus regional patterns in the end Ordovician mass extinction of graptolites
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2009
* H. David Sheets, Canisius College
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/2009
* USD 70,000.00

Intellectual Merit- Ceratopsians are among the best known of dinosaur clades due
to their&lt;br/&gt;relative abundance, and the remarkable diversity of cranial
synapomorphies such as horns&lt;br/&gt;and frills that diagnose more derived
members of the clade. Gigantism is a trend in&lt;br/&gt;ceratopsian evolution
that is accompanied by the evolution of progressively more&lt;br/&gt;complex
feeding mechanisms and cranial display diversity. Heterochrony, and
in&lt;br/&gt;particular peramorphosis have been proposed as major influences in
ceratopsian&lt;br/&gt;evolution to explain the evolution towards large size and
late ontogenetic genesis of the&lt;br/&gt;display in advanced forms. Likewise,
the apparent hierarchical complexity of the feeding&lt;br/&gt;apparatus suggests
an evolution of character integration through both ontogeny
and&lt;br/&gt;phylogeny. All of these evolutionary hypotheses require detailed
knowledge of both the&lt;br/&gt;development and phylogeny of ceratopsian
dinosaurs, but so far age estimates have been&lt;br/&gt;poorly constrained and
non-quantified and rigorous reliance on detailed
phylogenies&lt;br/&gt;limited.&lt;br/&gt;In this study, an innovative approach
to developmentally staging fossils based on&lt;br/&gt;histological sectioning
and Developmental Mass extrapolation is combined with novel&lt;br/&gt;tree-based
methods toward studying heterochrony and integration using a
well-&lt;br/&gt;established phylogeny of Ceratopsia. Based on well-sampled
growth series of seven&lt;br/&gt;-backbone taxa representing the diversity of
the clade, and a detailed phylogeny of&lt;br/&gt;ceratopsians, we will examine
whether there are correlated shifts in developmental timing&lt;br/&gt;of
synapomorphies (heterochrony) relative to growth strategies, and also if blocks
of&lt;br/&gt;characters represent integrated modules that fulfill criteria for
being phylogenetically and&lt;br/&gt;ontogenetically constrained. These
quantitative studies will allow us to evaluate previous&lt;br/&gt;hypotheses on
the role heterochrony and integration have played in ceratopsian
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;By providing a quantified understanding of when in ontogeny
synapomorpies are&lt;br/&gt;expressed this research will help to resolve several
taxonomic quandaries related to the&lt;br/&gt;validity of species based on
juvenile holotypes and provide a more accurate&lt;br/&gt;understanding of
ceratopsian diversity.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This research represents a new
integrative exploration of evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;processes in a well-known
group of dinosaurs. The novel methods and the results of this&lt;br/&gt;research
promise to be widely applicable to fields as diverse as population
biology,&lt;br/&gt;developmental biology, macroevolution and evo-devo, and will
be disseminated through&lt;br/&gt;peer -reviewed journals, presentations at
professional meetings and professional web-&lt;br/&gt;sites. Two graduate and
two undergraduate students will be trained through this project,&lt;br/&gt;and
aspects of the research will be incorporated into university courses taught by
both&lt;br/&gt;PIs. Both PIs are involved with developing exhibits for natural
history museum, and&lt;br/&gt;parts of this research will be incorporated into
two ongoing exhibit projects, and&lt;br/&gt;associated educational web-sites and
programming. Given the media interest in dinosaur&lt;br/&gt;research, many
opportunities to disseminate results of this work to the public will
no&lt;br/&gt;doubt arise.