* 0418096
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Family Networks, Inheritance and Orphans in Tanzania
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Christopher Udry, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

The debate over the role of nature versus nurture continues to be unresolved
partly because of lack of appropriate data to test the relative importance of
each factor. This doctoral dissertation will analyze the effects of orphanhood
on orphaned children in the Kagera region of Tanzania. Between 13 and 20% of all
children have lost at least one parent. Since the effects on the orphans may
depend on the motives of the caretaking families, the decision to take care of
an orphan will be formally modeled to incorporate the costs and benefits of
taking in an orphan. Using asset information on the individuals' households from
1994, the research will analyze patterns of inheritance within the Kagera
region. Inheritances will be explained by a number of factors including
differing customary inheritance laws across tribes while also accounting for
recent legislative changes concerning, in particular, women's and female
children's inheritance rights. Inheritance rights will then be linked to the
decision of household members to take in orphans and ultimately to the welfare
effects on orphans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will collect and analyze
data on the welfare of orphaned children in the Kagera region of Tanzania. The
data collection for this project builds on an existing panel dataset, the World
Bank Kagera Health and Development Survey (KHDS), covering the years 1991-1994
and 2004. Around 150 orphans found in the sample will be selected. They, their
foster families and other members of their family network who did not take care
of them will be administered a survey instrument. The link with the KHDS data
will allow us to take into account that parents who die may have very different
characteristics than those who are alive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of
the allocation of orphans within networks will provide insights on risk sharing
within family networks, how household size changes in response to shocks and
whether networks are becoming overburdened. The welfare analysis will help
identifying the most vulnerable orphans and thus inform the policy debate. The
research will also partly inform on the nature/nurture debate by comparing the
wellbeing of orphaned children with those of non-orphans. The analysis of
patterns of inheritance will inform the policy debate whether recent legislative
changes had observable effects on inheritance patterns and orphan
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;