* 0418715
* Collaborative:  Effects of Migratory Stress &amp; Breeding Hormones on the Spring Recrudescence of Latent West Nile &amp; Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus Infections in the Gray C
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Frank Moore, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2008
* USD 357,646.00

Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) virus and West Nile (WN) virus are disease
agents of humans, horses, and birds and are transmitted among birds by bird-
feeding mosquitoes. Bird populations serve as a reservoir for these viruses, and
outbreaks occur when virus is transmitted from birds to horses and humans by
species of mosquitoes that feed on both mammals and birds. Although we
understand much about these viral cycles, the mechanism by which the viruses
survive winter and are reinitiated within the bird population each spring in
temperate climates is unknown. This is the greatest gap in our knowledge about
each virus and the missing link in our ability to develop effective strategies
for early detection and prevention. Field studies of EEE virus in free-ranging
songbirds provide evidence that the virus may survive the winter in birds. Birds
infected during previous years may maintain chronic infections that relapse and
provide a source of infection for newly emerged mosquitoes in the spring.
Relapse of latent infections in birds is likely initiated by increased levels of
hormones associated with breeding or stressful events such as migration.
Laboratory studies are needed to verify this hypothesis. Using a migratory
songbird, the gray catbird, we will conduct laboratory experiments to test the
prediction that gray catbirds chronically infected with EEE and WN virus will
undergo relapse when subjected to migratory conditions and hormonal change
associated with breeding. This study will contribute to society at large by
addressing a biological problem that directly affects human and animal health.