* 0418004
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Novel Highly Durable Sensors
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Eric Bakker, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

0418004&lt;br/&gt;Bakker&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to support a
cooperative research between Dr. Eric Bakker, Department of Chemistry, Auburn
University, Auburn, Alabama and Dr. Mohammed Abbas, Department of Applied
Chemistry, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to explore the
covalent immobilization of active sensing reagents for the detection of anions,
especially porphyrins, phthalocyanines, metallophthalocyanines and their
derivatives, onto a variety of polymeric materials used for the fabrication of
electrochemical and optical sensors. Target polymers include acrylates and
methacrylates as well as polypyrrole, polyaniline or polythiophene. The covalent
attachment of active sensing ingredients will allow one to fabricate
ultraminiaturized, yet durable sensing systems where the leaching of active
components is no longer limiting the lifetime of these devices. In recent years,
ion-selective electrodes have experienced a paradigm shift by the discovery that
they may reach extremely low detection limits, often in the low parts per
trillion-concentration range of total ion concentration measured. Research in
improving the materials chemistry aspects is required for better chemical
control of ion diffusion properties and the minimization of component leaching
into the contacting aqueous solution. This research lays the groundwork for
numerous current directions in the field of ion-selective electrodes and
miniature optical sensors. The covalent attachment of active sensing ingredients
will transform both fields from using traditionally doped systems to all-
polymeric materials with unique properties. Ultraminiaturized sensing systems
based on this technology will only be truly practically useful if this
transition can be accomplished. The research will eventually help answer
important questions: how will drastically lowered diffusion coefficients
influence the sensor response, especially in zero-current potentiometry? What
are the ultimate size limits of such sensors, considering the theoretical
necessity of maintaining permselectivity for proper functioning? Will sensing
systems with covalently attached ionophores lead to drastically low detection
limits because transmembrane ion fluxes can be largely
eliminated?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The collaborative research
between the Egyptian and U.S. research groups will foster the scientific
relationship between the two countries. From a broader scientific standpoint,
this research has a strong impact on the health care and environmental analysis
fields, where chemical sensors are currently used at the rate of over 1 billion
measurements per year. A significant enhancement of the underlying chemistry and
the possibility for the creation of durable ultraminiaturzed sensing systems on
the basis of this research will result in important breakthrough in analysis
techniques at the single cell level, in physiological samples, in bioanalysis,
and in the monitoring of environmental samples. &lt;br/&gt;