* 0418459
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Party System Collapse in South America: Voters, Party Organizations, and Adaptation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Henry Brady, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

In Venezuela and Peru, the traditional party systems have collapsed since 1980.
These two events, together with changes in the Italian and Canadian party
systems during the 1990.s, are probably the most dramatic party system changes
in recent democratic history. In Argentina, one of the two main parties has
likewise collapsed, but the other has survived. In many other Latin American
countries, such party system crises have not occurred. This project will seek to
explain the social and political origins of these contrasting outcomes. The
first stage of this project explores the electoral basis, or demand side, of the
party system crises in Latin America, with the goal of distinguishing countries
with high electoral volatility and deep voter dissatisfaction with the party
system, such as Argentina, Peru, and Venezuela, from countries that did not
experience such severe party system crises, like Chile and Costa Rica. Because
this part of the research will test hypotheses about voting behavior by
analyzing existing macro-political and .economic indicators, as well as survey
data, it does not require substantial fieldwork. Indeed, based on data from a
major archive at the Universidad de Simon Bolivar in Venezuela, some progress
has already been made on this component of the project. Initial findings suggest
that policy divergence between voters and the traditional parties, rather than
perceptions of corruption or economic incompetence, has been the driving force
behind the party system crises. A second part of the project will examine the
supply side of party system collapse: how each of the major political parties in
Argentina, Peru, and Venezuela responded to crises involving a mismatch between
party strategies and voter demands, focusing on decision-making by party
leaders. This project will use fieldwork to collect the data necessary for an
analysis of the evolving relationships among organization, party adaptation, and
electoral success for each party. The analysis will focus on the question of why
most of the major political parties in these countries failed to adapt to voter
demands and therefore lost electoral relevance.as well as why the Peronist Party
in Argentina was able to adapt. Specifically, statistical time-series analysis
combined with analysis of electoral and party variation in different
geographical subunits of each country will help distinguish among the major
explanations for failed party adaptation: over-bureaucratization of party
decision-making channels, over-institutionalization of party links to social
organizations (especially unions), and the opportunity costs of shifting away
from mobilized constituencies. The primary component of the research to be
funded by the National Science Foundation is the construction of a dataset on
socioeconomic characteristics, electoral behavior, and party organization in a
random sample of geographic subunits of each of the three focus countries. This
dataset, which will draw on a new survey of local party elites, census data,
voting data, and other sources, will be used to test the theories discussed in
this proposal. Broader Impacts This project will give several South American
social science graduate students training and experience in party elite
surveying. Furthermore, when appropriate, the results from this research will be
made public, through the popular press in addition to academic journals. This
may help citizens and political leaders better understand the nature and origins
of current conflicts in each country.