* 0418483
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Ties, Agenda Setting, and Parties in American State Legislatures
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Gary Cox, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

What explains the variation in party influence in different legislatures? What
mechanisms are responsible, and to what degree, for observed levels of
partisanship in floor voting? Are variations in preference homogeneity within
the parties key, per conditional party government theories (Aldrich and Rohde,
2001)? Are variations in agenda control institutions key, per procedural cartel
theory (Cox and McCubbins 2004)? Are parties simply unimportant (Krehbiel 1993)?
Most studies posing such questions in the American context focus on Congress;
but the contemporary Congress exhibits relatively little institutional or
preference variation over the postwar period typically studied, when compared to
the amount of such variation at the state level. This project seeks to exploit
several advantages offered by studying state legislatures. State legislatures
exhibit considerable variation in both their internal agenda-settting
institutions and their roll call voting patterns. Thus, they offer a potentially
attractive sample through which the role of agenda-setting institutions in
bringing about .party influence. can be examined. Furthermore, state
legislatures offer .natural experiments. in the form of partisan ties, which
have occurred with some frequency of late. By studying the impact of partisan
ties, and the institutional adaptations associated with them, on roll call
voting, this project will investigate the institutional basis of party influence
in state legislatures. NSF funding will be used to travel to state capitals and
collect the necessary roll call data and/or to interview legislators and
staffers involved in negotiating or implementing power-sharing agreements.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The burgeoning literature on party influence over
roll call voting in the states has paid relatively little attention to the
institutional sources of such influence. While the debate in Congress has
increasingly focused on the role of agenda-setting institutions in bringing
about the observed party influence, the lack of institutional variation within
the postwar Congress has hampered resolution of theoretical debates. The states
offer a natural laboratory in which agenda-setting institutions vary
considerably, both across space and time. Likewise, although partisan ties have
been relatively common in state legislatures, they have received little
scholarly attention, either in themselves or in their possible consequences.
This project seeks to fill these gaps. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact As the first
comprehensive study of the power-sharing agreements that have been struck in
state legislatures undergoing partisan ties, this research may shed some light
on features of those agreements that .work. and others that have been less
effective, in the view of the participants (state legislators and staff)
themselves. &lt;br/&gt;