* 0418134
* Collaborative Research: Vulnerability of Semi-arid Grasslands to Encroachment by Woody Plants: the Role of Grass Invasions, Seasonal Precipitation, and Soil Type
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Travis Huxman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2007
* USD 142,753.00

Within the last 100 years, many grasslands throughout the southwestern United
States have been inadvertently converted to dense thickets of woody plants,
including the thorny shrub mesquite. These conversions have had important
impacts on human activities, biological diversity, nutrient cycling, and
wildfire regimes. However, many mesquite-dominated grasslands have themselves
been recently invaded by an African grass, Lehmann lovegrass. Invasions by this
grass may change the availability of water and nutrients in the soil, and thus
shift mesquite shrublands back towards grassland. However, these grasslands
would be dominated by a non-native grass with arguably greater impacts on
ecological systems than mesquite has had on former grasslands. When predicting
how southwestern rangelands might respond to invasions by grasses and woody
plants, one must also consider how soil characteristics (e.g., clay content) and
potential changes in climate (e.g., changes in precipitation) affect the
relative performance, and the ultimate ratio, of grasses to shrubs. By
conducting a field experiment in southern Arizona, the investigators will test
the hypothesis that grass invasions will interact with soil type and seasonal
precipitation to affect the successful establishment of mesquite in this
habitat. The response of mesquite introduced as seeds into experimental plots
will be used to gauge the potential response of this species to different
environments. Concurrent investigations of the cycling and storage of carbon
dioxide and water within these plots will facilitate our understanding of
interactions between water, soil type, and plant cover. This research explicitly
considers both climate change and biological invasions, each of which will
continue to affect natural ecological systems and the goods and services that
they provide to human society. Research will foster collaborations between
scientists, land managers, and students from several institutions, and will
promote interdigitation of subdisciplines including soil science, modeling,
ecology and atmospheric sciences. The project includes training opportunities
for students, including those in teacher training programs and in
underrepresented groups.