* 0418333
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Language Contact and Change in J &amp; K Burushaski
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Anthony Woodbury, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Anthony Woodbury, Ms. Sadaf Munshi will conduct
fieldwork in India on Burushaski for her doctoral dissertation. This research
project studies the influence of neighboring languages, Kashmiri and Urdu, on
the variety of Burushaski (JKB) spoken in Jammu and Kashmir in India. The study
will produce a linguistic description of this undocumented dialect; a
sociolinguistic description of the JKB speech community; and a historical
linguistic analysis identifying the borrowings and other historical innovations
that distinguish JKB from the Burushaski dialects of Pakistan. It will also
explore the ways in which JKB retains features from earlier forms of Burushaski
that were lost elsewhere. The study will be done primarily from a text-and-
discourse-centered approach which aims to deepen the understanding of the
language-culture-society relationship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data will be
digitally recorded on audio- and videotapes for analysis and archiving. By
providing an archived corpus of data, the project will provide linguists and
anthropologists with a significant corpus for analysis both during and after the
project term. It is part of a broader effort to document the world's endangered
linguistic diversity, for which Burushaski holds special importance since it is
a language isolate, that is, it is not provably related to any other known
language or language family. The project will also study social factors that
affect both the maintenance of JKB up to now in India, as well as its future
prospects. This helps sociolinguists understand the general processes at work in
language change, as well as the specific situations that lead to the loss of
linguistic diversity. Finally, the documentation and analysis produced by this
study will contribute to community efforts at language preservation and
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;