* 0418479
* Genetics of the Nervous System
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Seymour Benzer, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,850,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The survival of an organism depends on its ability to respond
appropriately to environmental stimuli. In higher organisms, this response is
mediated through the function of the nervous system. To maximize adaptability,
the nervous system must not only distinguish between qualitatively different
stimuli, but also their intensities. Two major properties allow the nervous
system to achieve this goal. First, the nerve impulses produced by a given
stimulus travel via a specific neuronal network. Second, the threshold and
frequency of the nerve impulses generated by a given stimulus can be modified by
external conditions. The information necessary for building both the neuronal
network and its components for nervous impulse generation are encoded by the
genome of the organism.&lt;br/&gt;One of the major intellectual challenges of
modern biology is to understand how this genomic information is translated to an
appropriate axonal network, and how those networks function to produce
appropriate behavior.&lt;br/&gt;Genetic analysis of behavior is a powerful
approach to these problems. It is typically carried out in three stages. First,
a paradigm is designed in which the behavior of interest can be easily observed
and scored in normal individuals. The second stage uses mutagenesis to identify
mutant genes that show clear deviations in behavior. Third, modern genetic
techniques make it possible to either shut down or activate specific regions of
the nervous system, to identify the circuits within the neural network that
produces the behavior.&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is a genetic
analysis and silencing of specific neuronal circuits to examine two behavioral
paradigms, the Drosophila models of pain and fear, that the investigator's group
has developed. Both of these involve basic neuronal elements, including sensors
that detect the stimulus and neuronal networks that execute the behavior when
the sensor is activated.&lt;br/&gt;Using Drosophila as a model organism, this
research will increase the scientific understanding of the mechanisms that allow
complex behaviors to be encoded by the genome,. The basic principles learned
from these studies will provide a foundation for understanding the molecular and
neural principles that underlie behavior in humans and other organisms. It is
expected that students at a range of levels, from high school to graduate
school, will participate in this research.&lt;br/&gt;