* 0419353
* The Cerros De Trincheras and Defense Project
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2007
* Randall McGuire, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 132,551.00

Visions of peaceful people confronted by a harsh environment have long
dominated archaeological studies of the prehistoric Southwest of the United
States and Northwest of Mexico. Recently many archaeologists have begun to
question this view and argue instead that violence and warfare were ever present
and drove cultural developments in the region. These archaeologists offer a
significant challenge to established interpretations that ignore or downplay
warfare and that instead highlight factors such as environmental adaptation,
climatic change, and exchange as the driving forces behind cultural change. This
challenge necessitates a major reconsideration of our interpretations of
Southwestern/Northwestern prehistory. Archaeologists need to ask what is the
evidence for warfare in specific cases, when does it occur and how does it
change over time?

Dark, isolated, volcanic hills dot the desert landscape of Sonora, Mexico. The
prehistoric inhabitants of the desert constructed terraces up the sides of many
of these hills, and built rooms, compounds, and other edifices on their summits
to create cerros de trincheras. Advocates of a violent prehistory for the
Southwest/Northwest have interpreted these sites as being defensive in nature
and as evidence for warfare in the Sonora. Other archaeologists have explicitly
challenged the defensive nature of these sites. The Cerros de Trincheras and
Defense Project will synthesize and analyze the information from previous
projects in the region. It will conduct eight weeks of field work to map and
surface collect cerros de trincheras in the Rio Altar and Rio Magdalena
drainages of northwest Sonora, Mexico. The project will use Geographic
Information Systems analysis to answer a series of questions including: Is there
evidence for defense at these sites? If not what was the range of activities on
these sites? If so, how were these sites defensive? What is being protected? How
did defense relate to other activities and aspects of the sites? And how did
these relations change over time?

The results of the Cerros de Trincheras and Defense Project will advance
knowledge and understanding by resolving the debates over the defensive nature
of cerros de trincheras. This resolution will have implications for the larger
issue of the nature, extent, and role of warfare in the prehistoric
Southwest/Northwest. If these sites were not defensive then they cannot be used
as evidence for endemic or epidemic warfare in the Southwest/Northwest. If they
were defensive then knowing what was being protected will allow us to infer the
nature and extent of warfare in the region. By asking these questions for
multiple time periods we can examine the changing face of warfare and defense.
On the broadest scale our project will contribute to anthropological
considerations of war before civilization.

The project will integrate research and education to promote teaching, training
and learning. It will be a bi-national project that combines US and Mexican
students in a cooperative research program. It will introduce these students to
existing networks that link North American and Mexican archaeologists in
northern Mexico. The project will have a public education component that will
include lectures in the US and Mexico and field trips for interested public
groups. The project will communicate its results in scientific outlets, popular
journals, and museum exhibits.