* 0419602
* SBIR Phase I:    Low-Cost Metal Foams Produced by Novel Manufacturing Technique
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Jared Sommer, Sommer Materials Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,938.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I will develop a novel
method to fabricate low-cost foamed aluminum materials that will exhibit high-
energy absorption capability, high strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight
ratios. There has been a significant interest in porous metal foams for use in
the automotive, marine, and aerospace industries. Most methods of producing the
metal foams are quite expensive and cannot be easily scaled up to mass
production. Commercially available foamed materials are sometimes difficult to
machine or to join because of the presence of abrasive ceramic particles within
the metal matrix required for the foaming process. This novel foaming process
will be capable of producing closed-cell foamed aluminum panel or rod forms in
various cell sizes and densities using a low-cost manufacturing approach. The
foamed aluminum will be produced at lower cost in comparison to current state-
of-the-art foaming methods. The foamed aluminum can be used in automotive and
aerospace applications requiring high strength and stiffness to weight ratios.

The broader impact from this technology would be an aluminum foaming technology
that could be more versatile, economical, and tailorable than current foaming
processes. Conventional machining and welding techniques can be used to shape
and join the foamed aluminum. The foaming technology will also be applicable to
other metal systems, such as copper and magnesium. The foaming process will open
a wide range of technological applications within the aerospace, architectural,
marine, and automotive industries, due to the material's high strength and
stiffness to weight ratio. Lightweight foamed aluminum will enable high fuel
efficiencies and improved crashworthiness through energy absorption in
automobiles and aircraft. The foamed aluminum material should exhibit high
sound-absorption capabilities and be more structurally isotropic than honeycomb
aluminum panels. Lightweight foamed aluminum can be used in architectural
applications for signs and panels- by itself or in sandwiched composite panels.
The proposed fabrication approach should produce foamed aluminum at 20-40% less
cost in comparison to conventional powder metallurgy techniques.