* 0419754
* MRI: Acquisition of an Imaging Plate Based X-Ray Diffractometer for Use in a Materials Chemistry Research and Education Program
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Zhengtao Xu, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 198,100.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (NSF-MRI), the
Chemistry Department at the George Washington University (GWU) will acquire an
imaging plate (IP) based, dual purpose powder/single crystal X-ray
diffractometer to promote research and education in the areas of organic,
inorganic and materials chemistry. Specifically, the instrumentation will be
utilized as a key component of materials design and discovery efforts in a)
hybrid uranium oxide materials synthesis; b) templated metal-organic framework
materials; c) electroactive and crystalline porous solids; d) lanthanide and
ferrite nanoparticles; e) solution processable semiconductive solids. These
areas have particular relevance to gas sensing, hydrogen storage, catalysis,
electroactive materials, molecular recognition, magnetics and environmental
stewardship/remediation of spent nuclear fuel. The dual nature of this
instrumentation will allow dynamic, in situ studies of these systems (via powder
diffraction) under controlled atmospheres as well as structure determination of
novel synthetic products (via single crystal diffraction). Further, courses at
the undergraduate and graduate levels will be enhanced and/or introduced to make
use of this equipment and hence facilitate training for a range of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Major Research
Instrumentation Program (NSF-MRI), the Chemistry Department at the George
Washington University (GWU) will acquire an imaging plate (IP) based, dual
purpose powder/single crystal X-ray diffractometer to promote research and
education in the areas of organic, inorganic and materials chemistry. Targeted
research areas include the synthesis of novel hybrid- and nano-materials with
relevance to gas sensing, hydrogen storage, catalysis, electroactive materials,
molecular recognition and environmental stewardship/remediation of spent nuclear
fuel. Acquisition of this instrumentation will have an immediate and tangible
impact on our ability to educate and train students in x-ray crystallography as
we intend to develop courses for both graduate and undergraduate students.
Specifically, novel experiments for our undergraduate Physical Chemistry
Laboratory sections will be introduced, as will an advanced materials
characterization course with x-ray diffraction as the central
technique.&lt;br/&gt;