* 0419460
* SBIR Phase I:     Multiwavelength Laser Spectroscopy System for Non-Invasive Bio-Assay
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Robert Thornton, r. l. thornton and associates
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 03/31/2005
* USD 99,800.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will
demonstrate the feasibility of a light source for a portable and wearable near
infrared, multi-wavelength spectroscopy unit. This will enable portable, non-
invasive blood spectroscopy by the displacement of tungsten filament based light
sources with compact, efficient light sources based on semiconductor lasers. A
laser technology platform that is scalable in a cost effective manner to access
the clinically relevant 1350nm to 2450nm wavelength range, which includes an
optimal fingerprint range for the sensing of blood ethanol, urea or glucose,
will be demonstrated. This will result in a robust and efficient light source /
spectroscopy platform that will enable dramatic performance improvements and
size reductions in systems for optically based non-invasive monitoring of human
health.

The commercial application of this project will in the management and treatment
of diabetes. Diabetes is a disease that affects millions of Americans. It is
well known that much of the chronic damage from this disease results from
inadequate monitoring of blood sugar levels over time. A robust strategy for
real time monitoring and intervention in glucose level variation will have a
revolutionary impact on the quality of life for these millions, and millions
more worldwide.