* 0419214
* SBIR Phase I:     Non-Destructive Hydrogen Embrittlement Detection for High Strength Steels Using Induced Positron Annihilation Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Jagoda Urban-Klaehn, Positron Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 94,330.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
field use, nondestructive measurement capability for hydrogen embrittlement (HE)
damage in high-strength alloys based on induced positron annihilation. The
primary objective of this project will be to demonstrate this innovative
technology for the detection, quantification, depth profiling, and assessment of
damage progression for hydrogen embrittlement in high-strength alloys associated
with critical aerospace components. Numerous aerospace components (e.g., landing
gear) have been shown to be subject to early HE failure long before the expected
end of life thereby impacting flight safety. Consequently, a physically-based
detection tool will be developed that can be used to detect and measure HE in
high-strength alloys at any point in the damage progression suitable for
manufacturing and field measurement applications in numerous industries.
Development of this portable HE detection tool will significantly improve
manufacturing process-control/quality control for critical manufacturing
processes of concern, while improving safety and radically changing requirements
for component maintenance, surveillance and replacement criteria. This
revolutionary advancement in HE detection capability will provide a competitive
advantage for the aerospace and other industries by providing a fundamentally
new approach for the detection of HE.

The broader impacts of this project will be continued work on Induced Positron
Annihilation applications to hydrogen embrittlement damage. This work will
provide information not only on current damage, but also on the remaining life
of components. This technology will improve process control/quality control and
safety, and will positively impact many aspects of the design, manufacturing,
and use of components in numerous industries. This technology will result in
safer and less expensive operations of potentially hydrogen embrittled
machinery; providing long term benefits to manufacturers, maintainers, and
operators of machinery subject to this type of damage.

