* 0419745
* The role of histidine in plant development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Thomas Leustek, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 08/31/2009
* USD 379,064.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proteins in all living organisms are
constructed using a set of twenty different amino acids, and plants serve as the
primary source of these protein building blocks in the human diet. Plants also
use specific amino acids in a variety of other ways including combating insect
pests, plant diseases, and surviving environmental hardship. Therefore, it is
ultimately important to understand how plants supply amino acids to their
various organs. One example of this importance relates to the nutritional
quality of seeds. Amino acid content is an important factor affecting the
nutritional value of seed crops. Knowing how amino acids are accumulated in
seeds, whether they are produced endogenously or are delivered there from
elsewhere in the plant, would be critical to devising strategies to improve
nutritional quality.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on the amino acid
histidine. Examination of mutants of the plant species Arabidopsis thaliana that
are unable to synthesize histidine showed that they die at the earliest stages
of seed development. The mutants die even if they are borne by a maternal plant
that is able to produce histidine. This observation suggests that the maternal
plant cannot supply this amino acid to its seeds. The aim of the current
proposal is to learn how histidine is accumulated in seeds. To address this
issue a series of experiments are proposed to explore the following questions.
If the parent plant cannot supply histidine, is it because this amino acid is
actively excluded from developing seeds, or is it because the parent plant does
not produce enough histidine to supply its seeds? If histidine is actively
excluded, why is this so? Is it an indication that histidine plays some special
role in seed development and if so, what is this function? If developing seeds
produce their own histidine, what genes are necessary for the process and how
does the expression of these genes control histidine
production?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The current
proposal challenges common presumptions on how amino acids are supplied for seed
development. Until now it was thought that all of them are supplied to
developing seeds by the maternal plant. Apparently this is not true for
histidine. Studying how plants allocate histidine will lead to insights into the
allocation of other amino acids. Therefore, the proposed work will expand our
understanding of how plants control synthesis and utilization of amino acids,
processes that are essential for the growth and development of plants, and to
human use of plant resources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will provide research and training for
a postdoctoral fellow, undergraduates, and high school students. Laboratory
experiences for undergraduates and high school students in particular are
critical for the training of future scientists, policy makers, and informed
citizens. The P.I. has a strong track record of involving undergraduate and high
school students in vibrant research projects. The students are frequently from
demographic groups that are underrepresented in the biological sciences.
Moreover, the "educational" mindset in the P.I.'s group translates into
opportunities for the postdoctoral fellow to develop teaching skills.&lt;br/&gt;