* 0419257
* SBIR Phase I:     Highly Efficient Exhaust Cleanup Technology for Environmentally Benign Processing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Ofer Sneh, Sundew Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,630.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
a&lt;br/&gt;novel integrated reactive abatement module (IRAM) that effectively
removes solidifying&lt;br/&gt;chemicals from the exhaust effluent of deposition
and etch manufacturing processes. Growing&lt;br/&gt;safety concerns and
escalating costs dedicated to environmental protection is one of the drivers
to&lt;br/&gt;continuously migrate semiconductor manufacturing outside of the US.
In this project,&lt;br/&gt;hazardous chemicals will be reactively converted into
inert solid films over a removable high-area filtration element. An integrated
high-speed downstream pressure control will actively&lt;br/&gt;suppress IRAM-
induced pressure fluctuations that may affect the process. The reactive
process&lt;br/&gt;will apply highly effective chemical reactions to convert the
solidifying chemicals into stable&lt;br/&gt;inert films. Objectives include
superior maintainability of low-pressure exhaust manifolds and&lt;br/&gt;pumps
and substantially improved safety of device processing systems, hence promoting
safe and&lt;br/&gt;environmentally benign semiconductor manufacturing at a
competitive cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Chemical Vapor Deposition
(CVD), Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) and&lt;br/&gt;Reactive Ion Etching (RIE)
are considered the cornerstones of semiconductor
manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;technology. In the last decade these manufacturing-
technologies have also migrated into the&lt;br/&gt;explosively growing area of
nano-technology. These process techniques emit reactive, toxic
and&lt;br/&gt;solidifying chemicals and produce a hazardous and destructive
residue in low-pressure exhaust&lt;br/&gt;manifolds that clogs up the conduits
and destroys the vacuum pumps. Slow and inefficient&lt;br/&gt;chemical
reactions, driven by the typically low pressure and low temperature conditions
in&lt;br/&gt;exhaust manifolds, convert the reactive exhaust mixture into
hazardous residue instead of&lt;br/&gt;completely reacted inert films. Frequent
maintenance requires ambient exposure of these&lt;br/&gt;hazardous-residue-
containing exhaust manifolds with risks to the workers and the
workplace.&lt;br/&gt;Growing safety concerns and escalating cost dedicated to
environmental protection severely&lt;br/&gt;hampers the semiconductor industry
and reduces its competitiveness in the US. Overcoming this&lt;br/&gt;deficiency,
IRAM technology will apply environmentally benign chemistry with a
localized&lt;br/&gt;production of short-lived highly reactive species capable to
completely extracting the solidifying&lt;br/&gt;chemicals out of exhaust streams
to produce inert solid films. This novel chemistry has a broad&lt;br/&gt;range
of device processing applications and can positively impact manufacturing
costs.&lt;br/&gt;Key Words: CVD, RIE, ALD, abatement, semiconductor
manufacturing, LPCVD, foreline,&lt;br/&gt;EH&amp;S, environmental health and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;E.B.A 5/24/04&lt;br/&gt;