* 0419926
* Calcium and Rho GTPase Crosstalk in Growth Cone Motility
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Timothy Gomez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2007
* USD 420,000.00

During neural development motile growth cones at the leading edge of elongating
axons and dendrites use environmental cues to navigate to their synaptic
targets. While many diffusible, cell surface and extracellular matrix bound
guidance cues and their receptors have been identified, relatively little is
known of the downstream intracellular signal transduction cascades they
activate. One intracellular signal that has particularly diverse effects on
axonal and dendritic growth is cytosolic calcium ions (Ca2+). Transient
elevations of intracellular Ca2+ in growth cones can promote, inhibit or orient
motility depending on the size, duration and distribution of these signals, as
well as on the downstream Ca2+-dependent targets available. Interestingly, the
mode of Ca2+ entry has also been found to determine the specificity of some
responses. The diverse effects of Ca2+ on neurite outgrowth are likely due to
the many cytoskeletal regulatory targets expressed by growth cones. Importantly,
recent evidence suggests that Ca2+ signaling may influence the activity of some
of the Rho-family of small G proteins. Rho-family GTPases are potent and diverse
regulators of the actin cytoskeleton in growth cones and could be key
intermediaries between Ca2+ signals and growth cone motility. Dr. Gomez
hypothesizes that Ca2+ influx through plasma membrane channels versus release
from intracellular receptor stores regulate distinct subsets of Ca2+-sensors
within local microdomains of growth cones. Further, the downstream signaling
pathways activated by Ca2+ movement through different channels will have
opposing effects on growth cone motility. The aim of this study is to begin by
characterizing the effects of altering general and specific Ca2+ influx and
release pathways on neurite outgrowth. Next, the effects of these Ca2+ changes
on the activity of three different Rho GTPases will be measured and the
necessity of GTPase function for motility determined. The long-term goal of Dr.
Gomez's research is to understand how specific Ca2+ signals orchestrate the
spatial and temporal activation of downstream targets that control growth cone
pathfinding. Knowing the molecular mechanisms through which Ca2+ exerts such
varied effects on growth cone motility will support treatment strategies for
developmental disorders and neural injury. Five graduate students from three
different graduate programs and two undergraduates are current members of the
Gomez Lab. The proposed project will directly involve two graduate students, but
all students will receive some indirect support from this award. Students in the
lab are trained as developmental neurobiologists using molecular and biophotonic
based approaches. Student participation in research, as well as coursework,
journal clubs, lab meetings, graduate program subgroup meetings, and
international meetings reflect this focus. In addition to receiving training,
graduate students are expected to teach junior graduate students, undergraduates
or in some cases high school students. Several students are currently involved
in University organized teaching programs. Dr. Gomez is also an active member of
the Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate (CID) planning committee. If awarded to
the Neuroscience Training Program, CID will be a multi-year research program
aimed at enriching and invigorating the education of doctoral students. Finally,
as a member of the Biophotonics cluster hire, Dr. Gomez collaborates with labs
in other departments such as Physiology and Electrical and Computer Engineering.
These collaborations focus on technology transfer and as indicated by this
agreement the Gomez lab provides imaging expertise as well as access to the
lab's modern imaging facilities.