* 0419326
* SBIR Phase I: Development of Manufacturing Processes for High Thermal Conductivity Carbon Skeletal Structures for Use in Metal and Metal Matrix Components
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* James Connell, ADVANCED THERMAL TECHNOLOGIES
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,591.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I will develop novel metal
and metal matrix composite (MMC) materials that incorporate high thermal
conductivity carbon (HTCC) inserts. There is a critical need for advanced
materials with improved thermal properties capable of meeting the thermal
management requirements of current and future high power electronic systems. The
objective of this project is the development of the fundamental basis for the
manufacturing processes and procedures required to produce cost-effective HTCC
skeletal structure cores. This manufacturing technology would enable cost
effective metal-HTCC and MMC-HTCC material systems with a thermal conductivity
greater than that of copper and which have a coefficient of thermal expansion
that can be adjusted between 6.0 and 10 ppm /degrees C to match that of an
electronic package. The heat dissipation rate of electronic systems has
increased dramatically as a result of ongoing advances in semiconductor
materials, compression of circuit physical architecture, size reduction of
packaging envelops and faster switching speed. High power electronics have
reached heat flux levels of up to 500 W/cm2 and this level is projected to
exceed 1,000 W/cm2 within several years. The results of this project couldl
enable the manufacture of HTCC-based materials that achieve the target thermal
properties critical to satisfying thermal management solutions for high power
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts that could derive from
this project could be in advanced high power military and industrial systems
(e.g., phased-array radar systems, high energy laser systems, power control,
distribution and management systems), telecommunication base stations and
finally high-end computers (e.g., servers, work stations, etc.). The commercial
market for these HTCC-based materials will develop over a three to five year
period, during which time HTCC-based materials will achieve widespread use in a
broad spectrum of military, industrial, and commercial electronic applications
driven by the need to reduce system packaging envelop coupled with the need to
use more efficient, high temperature semiconductor materials that have higher
heat fluxes and higher heat dissipation rates.