* 0419427
* National Study of Ethnic Pluralism and Politics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Ronald Brown, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2007
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Demographic changes fueled by immigration and differential birth
rates are producing major changes in the ethnic and racial composition of the
population and eventually in the American electorate. Models of political
participation, organizational attachment and social capital, identity,
ideological beliefs, and electoral behavior have been developed on samples
constituted largely by non-Hispanic whites, and to a lesser degree, African
Americans. Over the next several decades of the 21st century, individuals from
Asian American, Caribbean American, Latino American, and African American groups
will constitute an increasingly substantial share of the population, until mid-
century when non-Hispanic whites are projected to comprise a numerical minority
of the national population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We believe this is a
propitious time to launch a comparative, baseline survey and modest panel
follow-up of Americans' political attitudes, beliefs, aspirations, and
behaviors; and to begin developing conceptual and empirical models that are
appropriate within and across these growing race and ethnic populations. These
groups differ greatly in the nature of ethnic and racial identity, political
consciousness, and their attachments to American ideological and political
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators and advisory panel members
bring to the study a long, complimentary, and productive history of empirical
political research on these diverse groups. The development of relevant
constructs and empirical measures will make a major contribution, not only to
the proposed data collections, but also to future local, regional, and national
studies on similar topics within and between these complex and heterogeneous
ethnic and racial groups. Based upon recently completed, large area probability
studies of multiple race and ethnic groups in the continental United States, the
proposed telephone surveys of 5,000 Asian, Caribbean, African, non-Hispanic
white and Latino American groups will be the first, to our knowledge, nationally
representative, explicitly comparative, simultaneous study of all these groups.
Using the same constructs, with measures empirically validated to work
satisfactorily across these samples, will provide opportunities for the first
comparative, empirical analysis of how race and ethnicity influence the
political attitudes, behaviors and activism levels across a broad array of
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data will permit scholars to explore within
and between group differences, thereby increasing our knowledge about how
identity, consciousness, ideological beliefs, socio-demographic, and social and
economic status factors, influence or structure the political lives of people
that differ in ethnic and racial background, immigration and citizenship status,
and geographic dispersion; advancing the understanding of the ways in which
important aspects of group, self, and social development related to political
behavior in adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of these datasets on
national samples of diverse American ethnic and racial populations will provide
unprecedented opportunities for hypothesis development and testing of empirical
relationships. Because the 2004 data collection will be disseminated (ICPSR and
the Web) in 2005 and the panel datasets released in 2009, the data will be
available very quickly to the larger social science fields, especially political
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will provide unprecedented opportunities for
seasoned and new investigators to test a variety of hypotheses about the
relative influence that group and individually based resources have on the
political lives of racial and ethnic groups, but rarely tested because of the
absence of appropriate, comparative, high quality data. As we have learned from
the earliest NBES and Black and Hispanic Politics studies of the 80s and 90s,
these data will also be of benefit in the high school, undergraduate and
graduate classrooms, and for other educational purposes (workshops, text books,
etc.). In addition, the research and training activities accompanying the
development of the NBES and related studies had positive influences in the
development and training of a large number of academic political scientists now
holding prestigious and important positions in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed study has the potential of surpassing
the accomplishments of these earlier studies because: 1) of its larger scope; 2)
it builds on the work of the last two decades; and, 3) the presence of a wider
array of interested political scientists across the country that are well-versed
in sophisticated survey research methods and quantitative data analyses. When
completed, this new study will have important implications for understanding the
nature of racial and ethnic minority policy concerns, policy and candidate
preferences, party attachments, and methods of increasing political
participation, including a wide variety of activities, such as voting, in the
American democratic process.&lt;br/&gt;