* 0419718
* SBIR Phase I:     Powder-Powder Mixing and Powder-Liquid Mixing by a Novel High-Intensity Vibrational Mixer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Aaron Cook, RESODYN CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 03/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the feasibility of using high intensity resonant vibrational energy
as the basis for developing an efficient, scalable mixer for solid-solid and
liquid-solid powder processing applications. Conventional powder mixers are
ineffective when mixing very small particles or when loading particles into
viscous liquids. Currently available mixers cannot reach the level of
homogeneity that industry demands. Vibratory mixers have the capacity to meet
these mixing demands, but the existing technology is limited in intensity and
has not been shown to be scalable. This project will extend this technology to
particle mixing applications required for the powder processing industry.

The broader impacts from this technology could enhance the scientific
understanding of solid-solid and liquid-solid mixing in a high intensity
resonant vibrational field. More generally, the results will have scientific
merit that can be extended to other complex, nonlinear dynamic systems. The
resulting technological benefits will allow on site mixing and color blending in
addition to custom formulation of nanocomposite coatings. By enabling more
powder processing applications, new high performance materials will be realized.
Replacing conventional coating techniques with powder coating applications will
reduce VOC emissions substantially. This technology could enhance the durability
of maintenance type coatings, which in turn will gain in popularity due to
improved quality and functionality. The initial commercial targets of this
technology will be the polymer powder coating and particle-loaded polymer
industries.