* 0419771
* Mobility, Budget Rules and Government Spending
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Marco Bassetto, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2007
* USD 203,901.00

In the last couple of years, the U.S. federal government and the state
governments have faced very similar budget shortfalls, but they have reacted to
them in radically different ways. While the federal government enacted tax cuts
and significantly increased its spending, most states have done exactly the
opposite. The stark difference is in large part due to a constitutional
provision, adopted by most states but absent from the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;Constitution, that severely restricts borrowing, except to
finance lasting improvements.&lt;br/&gt;This provision, commonly known as the
golden rule, has been seen as a way of aligning the identities of the taxpayers
and the recipients of government services. For ordinary expenses, beneficiaries
are mainly current generations, hence the requirement of budget balance, which
mandates funding with contemporaneous tax receipts; for capital improvements,
benefits spill over to future generations, that can be made to pay by issuing
debt. But what justifies the golden rule at the state level and not at the
federal level? Is this rule a needless straitjacket for the states, that causes
severe and painful fluctuations in the size of their government? Or is its lack
at the federal level an incentive to run large deficits, shifting the burden of
taxes onto future generations? Or is there a rationale for adopting the rule in
one context, but not in the other? This project develops a dynamic, politico-
economic model to study quantitatively the performance of different budget
rules. In the model, individuals of different ages vote over the size and
composition of the government sector, subject to the financing rules laid out in
the constitution. In making their private choices as well as in casting their
votes, individuals take into account the repercussions of current policy choices
on the future path of the economy. A key role in an individual's preferences
over public investment is played by mobility across tax jurisdictions. As an
example, the probability that a U.S. resident will move out of the country in
any given year is much lower than his/her probability of death in the same year.
By contrast, young and middle-age people face a yearly probability of moving
across state lines that is about 10 times as high as their probability of death.
This stark difference implies that the conflict between current and future
generations has a very different meaning in the two cases, and it implies that
different fiscal institutions at the state and federal level may be
warranted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent resurgence of the federal deficit is
likely to rekindle the debate on the restrictions that should be imposed on the
yearly budgeting process to insure fiscal discipline, and on the appropriateness
of a balanced-budget amendment to the U.S. Constitution. A similar debate is
already very lively in the European Union, where the European Stability Pact
imposes (in principle, at least) tight bounds to deficit spending, without
distinguishing between its different categories. The analysis proposed in this
project will be very valuable in making informed decisions on the design of such
fiscal institutions.&lt;br/&gt;