* 0419204
* GOALI:  Structure and Stability of Gas Hydrates - Probing the Mechanism of Binary Gas Hydrate Decomposition
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Steven Dec, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/2008
* USD 299,999.00

Sloan, E. Dendy et al / Jefferson L. Creek&lt;br/&gt;Colorado School of Mines /
ChevronTexaco&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; "GOALI: Structure and Stability of Gas
Hydrates - Probing the Mechanism of Binary Gas Hydrate
Decomposition."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane, ethane and carbon dioxide are
three of the most important natural gas hydrates. These are potential rich
energy sources. Double hydrates of methane + ethane and methane + carbon dioxide
span a size range suitable to provide detailed experimental and theoretical
investigations of Structure I and Structure II hydrates at equilibrium and
during decomposition. The experimental techniques to be used in the proposed
work are NMR spectroscopy and neutron diffraction. This project proposes to
measure pressure-temperature-composition relations in the methane + ethane and
methane + carbon dioxide double hydrate systems. The proposed work will study
hydrate decomposition as well as equilibrium properties of these double hydrates
as a function of three variables: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. The gas phase
composition for methane mole fractions of 0 to 1. &lt;br/&gt;. The temperature
range of 233 to 283 K. &lt;br/&gt;. The pressure range of about 450 to 4000 kPa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will develop quantitative models based
on the molecular size -- cavity size ratio concept to be used to predict the
structure and stability of natural gas hydrates. These models will be developed
from theoretical Langmuir adsorption coefficient calculations. At equilibrium
the double hydrates methane + ethane and methane + carbon dioxide are
particularly appropriate for these types of studies because methane + carbon
dioxide should only form Structure I hydrate while the methane + ethane
&lt;br/&gt;and theoretical studies in the proposed work provide for a molecular
level understanding of gas hydrate.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
including educational and technical are as follows: The proposed work will help
foster both graduate and undergraduate education and research in the chemical
sciences at the Colorado School of Mines. Both graduate and undergraduate
students who participate in the proposed work are expected to publish the
results of their work in peer-reviewed journals and to attend scientific
conferences in order to present results based on their work. The students and
project in general will benefit from the intellectual collaboration with Dr. J.
Creek (co-PI) of ChevronTexaco Energy Technology Company. Dr. &lt;br/&gt;Creek
will help guide the project team on the industrial relevance of the work.
Strategies for energy resource recovery and hydrate plug remediation in the gas
and oil energy industries will also benefit from the knowledge generated in the
proposed work. The amount of gas contained in hydrate formations depends on the
hydrate structure and guest fractional occupancy. Hydrate plug structure and
formation conditions will also be better understood based on information
developed in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;