* 0419915
* SBIR Phase I: Non-Traditional Material Removal
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Aric Shorey, QED Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,440.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will use abrasive
jet technology for manufacturing/finishing of micro-optics. In contrast to well
known abrasive jet finishing, where material removal relies on the kinetic
energy of impinging particles, the approach in this project will be based on the
material removal caused by the fluid shear flow, which occurs when an impinging
jet spreads over the surface. This mode of material removal is very stable,
improves surface integrity and provides very smooth surfaces at high removal
rate. This project will use a new jet flow embodiment, which allows significant
reduction in polishing tool size. The technology will allow for the creation of
a precision manufacturing process for optics with diameters less than one to
several millimeters for medical instrumentation, telecommunication industry,
printers, cameras, DVD players, etc.

The broader impacts of this technology, if successful, could be the creation of
a precision manufacturing process for small and micro-optics. The optic mold
industry would benefit by having a means to finish (and re-finish) aspheric
molds leading to higher precision and more repeatable and reliable process. The
ability to manufacture millimeter or smaller sized lenses would allow for the
use of precision lenses for applications such as coupling devices used in the
telecommunications industry, medical instrumentation, cameras, DVD players,
printers, etc. Finally, all industries would benefit from the fact that the size
of precision optics could be dramatically reduced, thereby shrinking the size
and weight of optical systems. Additionally, technology could also be used as a
high precision micro-machining tool in manufacturing of MEMS and other micro
devices.