* 0419819
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Functional Analysis and Phosphorylation Site Mapping of Leucine-Rich Repeat Receptor-Like Kinases in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Steven Huber, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,000,000.00

The Arabidopsis genome encodes more than 200 Leucine-Rich Repeat Receptor-like
kinases (LRR RLKs) with an organization of functional domains similar to that of
animal receptor kinases. Several LRR RLKs are known to be critical elements in
signaling pathways regulating plant development and response to the environment,
but the biological functions of most members of this large family of putative
receptors remain unknown. This project will acquire fundamental biochemical
knowledge of the kinase domains of all Arabidopsis LRR RLKs by using Gateway
cloning and high-throughput liquid robotics for in vitro analysis of
autophosphorylation activity, substrate preference and pair-wise interactions. A
proteomic analysis of membrane proteins isolated from Arabidopsis plants grown
under a variety of physiological conditions will be used to identify a subset of
30 LRR RLKs for detailed analysis of in vivo autophosphorylation sites by mass
spectrometry. The functional significance of selected phosphorylation sites will
be examined using genetic and biochemical approaches, and interaction between
selected LRR RLKs in planta will also be examined. Information about the
project, including a list of genes studied can be obtained at
http://www.cals.ncsu.edu/hort_sci/faculty/clouse.html.

Significance to 2010 Project Objectives-- Identification of specific
phosphorylation sites and their functional significance will advance our
understanding of RLK signaling mechanisms and provide a comparative database of
phosphorylation sites for membrane localized kinases. The family-wide analysis
of LRR RLK kinase domains may reveal new aspects of the evolution of function in
multigene families and studies of in vivo interactions may uncover novel
heterodimers, suggesting possible cross-talk between signaling pathways.

Broader Impact of the Proposed Activity--Phosphorylation sites determined in
this study will be posted regularly on the PlantsP database
(http://plantsp.sdsc.edu), creating a unique community resource for comparative
study. A variety of tagged constructs in Gateway vectors for in vitro and in
vivo studies of Arabidopsis LRR RLKs will be deposited in the Arabidopsis
Biological Resource Center, along with numerous lines of transgenic plants.
Given the known importance of several LRR RLKs to plant development, it is
likely that increased knowledge of this gene family could have practical
agricultural impact. The project will provide excellent training in protein
biochemistry, mass spectrometry, and Arabidopsis molecular genetics at all
levels from high school student interns through postdoctoral scientists in an
environment that encourages the participation of underrepresented minorities.