* 0419893
* U.S.-Bangladesh Workshop on Innovation for Windstorm Mitigation Construction, Dhaka, Bangladesh, December 20-21, 2005
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Nasim Uddin, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2006
* USD 30,000.00

0419893 Uddin

Description: This project supports a US-Bangladesh Workshop on Innovation for
Windstorm Mitigation Construction, to be held in Dhaka, Bangladesh December
20-21, 2005. The U.S. organizer is Dr. Nasim Uddin, Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama. The
Bangladesh co-organizer is Dr. Sk. Sekender Ali, Department of Civil
Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka. The
workshop will be hosted by BUET with the Bangladesh Building Research Institute.
The goal is to promote global interaction and foster research collaboration
towards innovative construction for windstorm mitigation technology. The meeting
will cover: advances in the field; interaction of materials and structural
scientists; identification of locally available natural fibers like jute fabrics
for strengthening of building materials; identification of gaps in knowledge;
identification of barriers to the effective utilization of advance composites
and innovative materials for windstorm resistant construction; and
prioritization of effective research programs in the area of repair,
reinforcing, rehabilitation, and new construction. Research related to these
topics has been carried out in the US, Canada, Europe, Japan, India and
Bangladesh, with little communication between these groups. There is a need for
an international exchange of experience to increase the efficiency, and to
ensure that the U.S. is at the leading edge of this critical area. Site visits
will be organized to hurricane prone areas in Bangladesh. Workshop Proceedings
will be produced and widely disseminated to researchers and code writers as well
as in professional journals.

Scope: Coastal States and many Island States and territories are vulnerable to
the hazards of windstorms. In the U.S., many states are vulnerable to the
hazards of tornadoes and thunderstorms, while increased building activity is
occurring in high-risk areas. Hurricanes, combining high winds and flooding
cause enormous loss of life, injury, destruction of property, and economic and
social disruption, as evidenced by the 56 deaths and $6 Billion in property
damage in 1999 from Hurricane Floyd. Every year, thousands of people die in
Bangladesh, and the southeastern part of India, due to hurricanes. The fiercest
such windstorm was of 29 April 1991, when material damage was to the tune of
about $2.4 billion and human casualty of about 140,000 lives. The workshop is
organized on the premise that the exchange of existing American and foreign
experience in the area of innovative windstorm mitigation construction is
beneficial for both parties. This project is funded jointly by OISE and the
Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems.