* 0419700
* SBIR Phase I: An Improved Multi-Sensor Manufacturing System for Scrap Metal Sorting
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* David Spencer, wTe Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will combine two
methods of optoelectronic sortation onto a single manufacturing platform for
high speed sorting of scrap metal. The project is aimed at sorting scrap metals
and alloys, both low Z and high Z, at previously unattainable accuracy and
speed;however, it may be applicable to other material sorting and identification
applications such as for chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and ceramic materials. The
technology platform of optoelectronic manufacturing technologies for analyzing
copper-rich, aluminum-rich, zinc-rich, titaniumrich, cobalt- and nickel-rich
alloys at previously unachievable accuracy and high speeds into known alloys to
meet smelter alloy specifications. The technology platform is not only aimed at
sorting alloys into base metal groups, but can also sort a wide range of alloys
by each alloy grade or type. The system is fully automatic and does not require
operator intervention.

The broader impact from this project could be a new technology that potentially
could revolutionize the way nonferrous metals from plants are handled. Instead
of disposing of the metals in a landfill, or selling them as metal mixtures,
where they will contribute to land and water pollution or be sold at low prices,
they will instead be separated, refined, sorted and resold into commercial end
uses as high-grade, recycled metal. This project is aimed at validating small
scale, cost effective rapid sortation technology having the potential of
replacing large smelting and refining operations with small scale sorting
operations. The market niche opportunity represents about $2 billion of a total
potential $50 billion worldwide aluminum smelting and casting market. Mixed
nonferrous concentrates from these sources and mixed scrap metal from thousands
of metals dealers and scrap yards will be upgraded, creating significant value.
Moreover, The new technology will also reduce environmental pollution because it
does not generate emissions such as those produced by refineries, metal smelters
and heavy-media plants.