* 0419840
* Evolution of Stress and Mass Transport During keV Ion Bombardment
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* David Cahill, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2007
* USD 379,926.00

This project seeks new knowledge and insight on fundamental features/mechanisms
of ion beam materials processing, analysis and thin film deposition. Greater
understanding is particularly sought of stress-states produced by keV ion beams
and the relaxation of those stresses through radiation-induced viscous flow and
changes in surface morphology. Project goals include answers to questions such
as: Does radiation enhanced surface diffusion play a significant role in mass
transport during low energy ion bombardment or is radiation-induced viscosity in
the bulk of the near surface region a better description? Do low mass ions have
the same radiation-induced viscosity as heavy ions despite large differences in
the energy density of the cascade? (Computational results suggest that, when
scaled properly, radiation-induced viscosity should be almost independent of
material, ion energy and ion mass.) Does the proximity of grain boundaries or
surfaces strongly modify radiation-induced viscosity? Are a series of spatially
and temporally localized melting events equivalent to a very short but uniform
melting? The approach encompasses experimental measurements of the evolution of
stress created by keV ion bombardment of amorphous, nanocrystalline, and
polycrystalline metals, ceramics, and semiconductors. Most films will be
deposited in-situ and studies will include ion energy and temperature dependence
of stress evolution; time dependence of stress generated by a time-varying ion
flux; and stress evolution during de-wetting of films patterned by electron beam
lithography. Experiments will be complemented by computational studies of stress
generation and relaxation in amorphous, nanocrystalline, and single-crystal
materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science having high potential technological
relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
fundamental level to new understanding and capabilities in electronic devices.
An important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area. This project will support the education and training of two
graduate research assistants. Additionally, undergraduate students will be
incorporated into the research activities. New knowledge gained in the research
will be integrated into graduate-level courses on surface physics and
nanoscience. The PIs will work closely with engineers at APL Engineered
Materials, an Urbana, IL company developing products for ion-beam assisted film
deposition and a real-time stress sensor suitable for
industry.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;