* 0419617
* Facilities Support: Amino Acid Geochronology Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,737.00

0419617&lt;br/&gt;Kaufman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding environmental
changes of the past requires two equally important types of information: one is
the evidence of the change, and the second is the timing and rate of the change.
The ages of recent geological, climatological, and archeological events older
than the range of radiocarbon dating (&gt;30,000 years) are often poorly known.
This award establishes a Shared Facility aimed at increasing accessibility and
reliability of a geochronological tool used to understand the timing, frequency,
and rates of Earth surface processes. The amino acid geochronology laboratory
was initiated in 1996 with an EAR/IF award. An analytical procedure was
developed with the new instrumentation that has improved detection capabilities
by at least an order of magnitude, presenting new opportunities to apply amino
acid geochronology and paleothermometry to microfossils, including ostracodes
and foraminifera. The mission of the Shared Facility for amino acid
geochronology is to: (1) refine an important geochronological tool, (2) apply it
to a variety of scientific problems, (3) train new users, and (4) coordinate
activities among laboratories practicing amino acid geochronology. The shared
facility will support more than a dozen NSF-funded and other researchers by
performing analyses and providing interpretive information. Approximately 1500
analyses per year will be offered at a nominal fee ($5 per sample, about one-
tenth the standard rate). A primary goal is to cross-check the results of amino
acid geochronology with results of other geochronological methods. The facility
will also work with researchers to design and conduct a variety of experiments
aimed at improving the accuracy and applicability of the technique. The facility
will train new users, and it will offer services to add cohesion and uniformity
to amino acid geochronology, including: distributing inter-laboratory standards,
sharing HPLC columns, compiling extended AAR data sets, and developing a
website. The operation of the facility will be guided by two designated
advisors, who will also assess the impact of the facility at the conclusion of
the award period. The majority of the award budget will be devoted to one half
of the laboratory technician's (Jordon Bright) salary. Bright has worked in the
lab for over eight years and has gained considerably expertise. His ongoing
involvement will enable the laboratory to develop into a Shared Facility, which
will make amino acid analyses and other services accessible to a broader
community of practitioners and users.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;