* 0419704
* Atmospheric Oxygen Effects on Insect Body Size and Tracheal Function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Jon Harrison, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 05/31/2009
* USD 657,725.00

It has been hypothesized that the giant insects of the late Paleozoic were made
possible by high atmospheric oxygen levels, and that current insect body sizes
are constrained by our atmospheric oxygen level of 21%. This research will test
this hypothesis with a series of experiments that examine the effect of single-
and multi-generation exposure to different atmospheric O2 levels on insect size,
developmental rate, tracheal structure and function. Most of these experiments
use fruitflies (Drosophila melanogaster), but one broad comparative study of the
developmental plasticity of 16 insect species in response to variation in
atmospheric O2 levels is included. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The first goal of this
research is to test whether D. melanogaster evolve different body sizes in
response to variation in atmospheric O2 level (10, 20, 40% O2) in the lab. A
second goal is to determine whether atmospheric O2 level can serve as a
constraint on the evolution of large body size in D. melanogaster by selecting
for large size in different O2 atmospheres. A third goal is to test for O2
delivery limitations, and potential compensatory responses of the respiratory
system to variation in atmospheric oxygen level in fruitflies. Specifically
these experiments will examine respiratory responses to rearing flies in 10, 20
and 40% O2 for one generation, multiple generations, or when selecting for large
size. Atmospheric O2 effects on the capacity of the tracheal system to deliver
oxygen will be measured morphologically with electron microscopy, and
physiologically by measuring the lowest O2 level that permits normal metabolic
rate. A fourth goal is to test three non-alternative hypotheses for why rearing
O2 level affects individual fruitfly size: 1) The Direct O2 Limitation (DOL)
Hypothesis that increasing O2 availability increases larval growth rates by
increasing nutrient intake rates, 2) The O2 Cue (OC) Hypothesis, that increasing
oxygen levels extend development rate by delaying the initiation of molting, and
3) The Cell Size (CS) hypothesis, that higher O2 levels increase fly size by
increasing cell size at constant cell number. Finally, we will test for the
generality of rearing O2 level on insect size and development rate. This
comparative study of 16 species will also test whether O2 effects on these
variables are influenced by insect size, developmental pattern, or habitat.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a unique system in which we can
quantify the degree of physiological constraint (O2 availability) on the
evolution of major life history traits (body size, developmental rate), and thus
will be of interest to a wide array of evolutionary biologists, physiologists
and ecologists. In addition, the possible control of atmospheric O2 on insect
size (and historical insect gigantism) is of substantial interest to many non-
biologists including paleogeologists, environmental scientists and the general
public. Results will be widely disseminated through reviewed scientific papers
in physiological and evolutionary journals as well as more general outlets such
as Scientific American or Natural History. A web site on insect respiratory
physiology and oxygen effects on insect size will be created and linked to the
Insect Physiology On-line web site
(http://lamar.colostate.edu/%7Einsects/index.html). Finally, this award will
also fund postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate training programs for
individuals from groups currently under-represented among biology
professions.&lt;br/&gt;