* 0419542
* Arabidopsis 2010: Collaborative Research: Functional and Evolutionary Genomics of Drought Adaptation Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Eli Stahl, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 50,718.00

Drought stress is ubiquitous and has played an important selective role in the
evolution of plant growth, development, and physiology. It is also a major
limiting factor to crop productivity worldwide. This 2010 project will use
genome-wide molecular techniques to study the quantitative genetics of
adaptation to differences in water availability in the model plant, Arabidopsis
thaliana. A major goal of the project is to map and identify genomic regions and
characterize genes and gene networks that function in escape, avoidance, and
tolerance of drought among plants adapted to habitats spanning extremes of water
availability. In addition, new resources will be developed for the study of
quantitative genetics in Arabidopsis, including a mapping population and a
series of genetic lines capturing genes controlling key components of plant
physiology related to drought adaptation. This project builds on the
infrastructure of genomic data and tools developed by the Arabidopsis research
community, and will link molecular variation of functional genes to evolutionary
processes. The ultimate goal of this research is to determine why, as well as
how, the Arabidopsis thaliana genome has evolved functional variation in traits
important for adaptation to habitats differing in water
availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of the proposed work in
relation to the overall 2010 project objectives is twofold. First, most traits
of ecological and agricultural significance are quantitative and influenced by
many genes as well as by the environment. Unfortunately, little is known about
the molecular genetic details underlying quantitative genetic variation.
Understanding the genetics of quantitative variation will be necessary for a
complete elucidation of the function of all Arabidopsis thaliana genes. In
addition, results of this project will complement ongoing efforts to
characterize the genetics of constitutive and inducible traits that enhance
stress tolerance in plants. The study of naturally evolved variation is a
largely unexplored avenue for understanding the molecular genetic basis of plant
stress responses. Secondly, genetic mapping resources, genetic lines, and
improved analytical methods developed through the project will facilitate future
quantitative genetic studies of Arabidopsis thaliana. The broader impact of the
proposed research includes integrated training for students and postdoctoral
scholars in molecular genetics, evolutionary biology, physiology, and
bioinformatics - skills necessary for the next generation of successful genomic
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All plant materials and associated genotypic
data will be made available using The Arabidopsis Information Resource
infrastructure (http://www.arabidopsis.org . Progress and details of particular
aspects of the project will be available at the project website
(http://orthos.bio.umassd.edu:8080/Arabidopsis/drought), available in October
2004.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;