* 0419213
* Financial Frictions in Quantitative International Business Cycle Models
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2004,04/30/2012
* Patrick Kehoe, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2012
* USD 221,333.00

Financial frictions seem to play a major role in generating movements in
aggregate prices and quantities. The first two parts of this project are
motivated by the fact that models without financial frictions have a hard time
accounting for the behavior of real exchange rates, a key variable in
international economics. These parts of the project examine specific frictions
discussed in the literature and assess their ability to better account for the
observations. The third part develops a new quantitative model of the business
cycle that formalizes the commonly held view that monetary contractions
operating through a credit channel disproportionately affect small firms. The
fourth project uses a panel data set to document how the behavior of small and
large firms differ over the business cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A model that
generates substantial time-varying risk is needed to explain the movements in
interest rates and exchange rates. The challenge is to generate such risk
without making variables like interest rates counterfactually volatile and
without putting substantial time-varying risk in the underlying fundamentals,
for which there is scant evidence. This project attempts to meet this challenge
with a monetary general equilibrium model that generates time-varying risk
premia as a result of endogenous market segmentation arising from fixed costs.
The model generates time-varying risk since, as the shocks vary, so do the
fraction and quantity of trades by active agents in the asset market. The
project studies the financial friction caused by the difficulty of enforcing
contracts between sovereign nations involving large transfers of resources at
one date and state which are backed only by promises to pay at later dates and
states. Theoretically, this friction breaks the tight link between real exchange
rates and relative consumption present in frictionless models by introducing a
stochastic wedge between the real exchange rate and the ratio of marginal
utilities. The project will investigate the quantitative role of this friction
and contrast it with the iceberg shipping cost friction recently championed by
Obstfeld and Rogoff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a new
quantitative model of the business cycle. A large empirical literature has
argued that in business cycle downturns, and particularly after monetary
contractions, small firms contract disproportionately. This literature has
emphasized the credit channel for monetary policy in which monetary contractions
lead firms, in the aggregate, to reduce their use of bank loans. Larger firms
are less affected by monetary contractions because they can access markets for
commercial paper and other forms of debt as well as equity. Panel data on the
patterns of large and small firms over the cycle are used to discipline the
analysis. Guided by this new theory, the project studies the patterns of small
and large firms over the cycle. The Census Bureau has approved a separate
proposal asking for access to an extensive, detailed collection of data at the
plant and firm level available at the Census data
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposal will help
policymakers design monetary policy, regulatory policy for the banking and
financial services industry, and policy aimed at new and small firms. The
research will be disseminated to policymakers in easily digestible formats and
presented at policy conferences.&lt;br/&gt;