* 0419435
* Functional and Comparative Genomic Analysis of Aluminum Tolerance in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Leon Kochian, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2010
* USD 933,485.00

&lt;br/&gt;Aluminum (Al) toxicity is a profound limitation to crop production
worldwide, reducing yields on up to 50% of potentially arable lands. Breeding
for Al tolerance and agronomic practices aimed at ameliorating soil acidity have
historically been productive avenues for improved crop production. However, it
is widely recognized that additional tolerance enhancement will depend upon the
identification of Al tolerance genes and mechanisms to facilitate improvement
via biotechnology. We will identify and characterize Al tolerance genes and
their associated mechanisms in maize, one of the most important crops grown on
acid soils. Our study populations are derived from diverse sources; thus we will
capture a wide range of Al tolerance levels and useful alleles. Central to the
project are Al tolerant and sensitive NIL pairs representing the major QTLs we
already have identified; these lines are a major resource for gene discovery.
Our research objectives are: 1) Identify the physiological mechanisms for
tolerance associated with specific QTLs; 2) Profile gene expression with
selected NIL pairs to identify candidate Al tolerance genes underlying these
QTLs; 3) Evaluate and confirm candidate tolerance genes via comparative genomics
and genetic association analysis; 4) Deposit and curate the generated datasets
(genetic linkage, phenotypes, microarray, nucleotide sequence) into publicly
available databases including Gramene, the NSF Maize Genetic Diversity Project,
and the MIAME compliant expression profiling repository for the NSF-funded Maize
Oligonucleotide Project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of Proposed
Research&lt;br/&gt;We will conduct fundamental research on an important
worldwide agricultural problem. This problem is especially pronounced in South
America and Africa, where maize is a staple crop and acid soils are prevalent.
The proposed research should greatly expand our understanding of the molecular
and physiological basis of Al tolerance, generating the molecular/genomic
resources needed to enhance crop performance in acid soils. This information
should be useful for both traditional and biotechnological crop improvement
strategies. We will deposit the information from this project into public
databases, which will be useful to a broad collection of basic and applied
scientists; nucleotide polymorphism and phenotypic scoring data collected from
distantly related maize cultivars should be of particular interest to molecular
evolutionary biologists and breeders. Furthermore, we will facilitate the
participation of under-represented groups in science by participating in the
summer internship program that targets recruitment of minority undergraduates
that has been established at Cornell University and The Boyce Thompson Institute
through funding by NSF (the Plant Genome Research Outreach program).
Additionally, we have established and will continue to run an undergraduate
summer intern program with California State University at Fresno to recruit
Hispanic undergraduate students into USDA-ARS labs. &lt;br/&gt;