* 0419557
* SBIR Phase I: Innovative Selective Laser Sintering Rapid Manufacturing Technique Using Nanotechnology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Joseph Koo, Koo & Associates Internatinal, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 02/28/2005
* USD 99,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will use a rapid
manufacturing method to produce high performance structural components. This
process will combine nanotechnology with Selective Laser Sintering (SLS), and a
Rapid Prototyping (RP) additive layered build fabrication method. The use of SLS
RP technique will facilitate true, flexible manufacturing of small batch of
parts, while avoiding product-line tooling, under utilization of skilled labor
and the need to maintain high overhead facilities costs. The SLS rapid
manufacturing method will contribute to the concept of just in time
manufacturing as well as lean manufacturing. Current thermoplastic polymer
powders (Nylon 11 or Nylon 12) used in SLS are lacking in fire resistance and
high strength/high heat resistance characteristics. It is anticipated that
nanomodification of Nylon 11 will result in the expected polymer performance
characteristics, i.e., fire resistance, high strength and high heat resistance
for Nylon 11 and will expand the market opportunities for SLS users and Nylon 11
resin manufacturers. The broader impacts from this technology could be an
unique, low specific gravity polymer powders (Nylon 11) that are fire-resistant,
possess high strength and high heat resistance that ordinarily require large
amounts of flame retardant additives as well as large amounts of reinforcing
agents, and additives. The use of nanoparticles avoids the use of hazardous
flame retardant additives such as halogenated or nitrogen/phosphorous materials,
all of which contribute to smoke and toxicity when burning. Use of small amounts
of nanoparticles (~7%) provides sufficient strength and heat resistance as
compared to 20 to 30% conventional inorganic filler (glass fiber, mineral fiber,
etc). The multifunctional characteristics of the nanoparticles could lead to low
specific gravity polymer powders and substantial weight savings in finished part
fabrication. This new rapid manufacturing method will be greatly embraced by SLS
users who are qualified to provide parts to the U.S. Defense Industry. The
ability to quickly and economically provide spare parts for aging legacy weapon
systems through a seamless procurement mechanism of just in time could produce
enormous cost savings.