* 0419531
* Molecular Control of Ovule Development
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Charles Gasser, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Thomas P.  Jack
* 07/31/2008
* USD 381,675.00

Abstract

Arabidopsis ovule development is a useful model system to study the roles of
timing and patterning of gene expression in plant development. Because ovules
are the precursors to seeds, the major products of field agriculture, better
understanding of ovule development has the potential to contribute to crop
productivity.

The INNER NO OUTER (INO) gene encodes a transcription factor essential for
development of the ovule outer integument, the precursor to the outer layer of
the seed coat. INO is especially suitable for gene regulation studies because it
exhibits a tightly regulated pattern of expression, a relatively short region of
5'-flanking DNA (the INO promoter, P-INO) is sufficient to reproduce this
expression pattern, and robust assays to evaluate P-INO function have been
developed. In the current study, sequences responsible for INO regulation will
be characterized and immediate upstream effectors and downstream targets will be
identified.

Specific sequence motifs within P-INO necessary for promoter activity will be
defined through evaluating the function of altered elements in transgenic
plants. Fragments containing identified regulatory elements will be used to
screen for interacting regulatory proteins. In vitro DNA-binding assays,
expression and mutant analysis will be performed on selected genes and gene
products to evaluate roles in ovule development and INO regulation.

Analysis of gene expression during ovule development will be performed by
evaluating the level of expression of most Arabidopsis genes in various
Arabidopsis ovule mutants using DNA microarray technology. The expression data
will be used to identify new ovule regulatory genes and to assemble a model of
molecular interactions governing ovule development.

Completion of the proposed research will contribute to our knowledge of
regulation of reproductive development in higher plants and to a general
understanding of molecular control of morphogenesis. This research can have
broader impacts by facilitating improvements in seed crops through exploitation
of identified regulatory interactions, and through interdisciplinary education
of undergraduate and graduate students.