* 0419554
* Acquisition of Instrumentation to Enhance Research and Teaching of the Coastal Processes Research Group at East Carolina University
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* David Mallinson, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2007
* USD 443,971.00

0419554 Corbett This Major Research Instrumentation award to East Carolina
University provides funds for acquisition of geochemical, geophysical and
oceanographic instrumentation to for research and education in coastal
processes. Geochemical instrumentation includes alpha and gamma spectrometers, a
low background alpha/beta counting system, a radium delayed coincidence counting
system, and an ICP optical emission spectrometer. Sediment transport
instrumentation includes acoustic Doppler current profilers and autonomous
'pods' for measuring temperature, conductivity, pressure and turbidity.
Geophysical instrumentation includes a seismic acquisition system, sub-bottom
profiler, a GPS system and software for seismic survey acquisition and
processing. A well-integrated plan is presented that incorporates these systems
into existing and planned courses, involves students in research projects, and
provides cross-disciplinary interactions for faculty and students. The
department has a full-time technician with expertise and responsibility for
supporting these instruments. The broader impacts of the planned use of these
instruments include very strong integration of education and research, and they
are likely to impact the research training and education of a large number of
undergraduate students, as well as graduate students. Many of the research
projects to which these instruments are likely to be applied have high societal
relevance, including studies of benthic habitats, anthropogenic impacts on
ecosystems, sea level change and erosion/deposition, climate variability, and
processes impacting the survival of coastal wetlands. This proposal is supported
by the Division of Ocean Sciences at NSF. ***