* 0419311
* SBIR Phase I:     Compacting Fly Ash to Make Bricks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Henry Liu, Freight Pipeline Company
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 97,915.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new method to make bricks using fly ash, which is a byproduct or waste material
generated at coal-fired power plants. This new method for making bricks is
simple and effective. It uses pressure instead of high temperature to make
bricks, thereby reducing cost and conserving energy, at the same time recycling
an otherwise wasted material. Preliminary research showed that strong bricks
could be made this way, though the resistance of such bricks to freezing/thawing
encountered in winter needs substantial improvement before such bricks can be
used commercially. While current industry standards requires that bricks must
pass at least 50 freezing/thawing cycles, the fly ash bricks produced at present
can pass less than 10 cycles. This research explores several novel methods to
improve the freezing/thawing property of such bricks, enabling them to meet
standards and become commercially viable. The information generated will enhance
current knowledge in the freezing/thawing effects on bricks, and in the
understanding of crack formation during manufacturing of compacted products. The
research enhances the state-of-the-art of a few technologies in making bricks.
The broader impacts from this project could be significant. Much of the fly ash
generated at coal-fired power plants is unused, ends up in landfills and slurry
ponds. Using fly ash to make bricks not only produces a valuable commercial
product but also reduces a major waste disposal problem for power plants.
Furthermore, manufacturing ordinary clay bricks requires using high temperature
(around 2,000 degrees F), which is energy-intensive and costly. In contrast, the
fly ash bricks can be produced at room temperature, using only a fraction of the
energy used in making clay bricks. The energy cost of making conventional clay
bricks is very high, fly ash bricks are expected to cost much less than clay
bricks to produce. As compared to conventional concrete bricks, which use
cement, this new technology uses low-cost fly ash and hence costs less to
produce.