* 0419131
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope and Energy Dispersive X-ray Analysis System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* David Domozych, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 233,790.00

This award provides funds for the acquisition of a Variable Pressure Scanning
Electron Microscope (VPSEM) and an Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS). These
instruments will be placed in the Skidmore Microscopy Imaging Center, a shared
use facility serving the research and training needs of faculty and students in
Biology, Chemistry, Anthropology and Geosciences. The instruments will be used
in a variety of projects, including the following: analysis of the structure and
development of the extracellular matrix of green algae found in wetland
biofilms; studies of the structure and elemental composition of natural and
synthetic clays with encapsulated metal ions, metal complexes, or
metalloenzymes; developmental studies of symbiotic bacterial biofilms found in
intestinal tissues of tropical squid; identification and bioinorganic analyses
of dacryoconarid fossils; textural and elemental analyses of chert artifacts
found in the Hudson and Mohawk River valleys that have archeological importance.
In addition to their role in research, the instruments will be used to enhance
well-established student-faculty collaborative research opportunities and to
enrich learning in several advanced microscopy-courses. They will also find use
in several outreach programs including the Skidmore Science Institute for Girls,
and collaborative efforts between faculty of local high schools and college
faculty that involve the Skidmore Microscopy Imaging Center. The Institution
will provide funds needed to assure the effective and continuing operation of
this instrument throughout its useful life.&lt;br/&gt;