* 0419198
* SBIR Phase I:     Twisted Polygonal Fiber Composite Technology for Creating Safer Low Cost High Ductile Concrete Structures
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Kulsiri Chandrangsu, POLYTORX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 98,845.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new concrete reinforcement technology. Helix fiber is designed to solve the
fundamental problem with cement-based materials - their brittle nature. When
concrete is overloaded it tends to fail suddenly, unlike materials such as steel
that will bend and actually harden when overloaded. This shortcoming causes
problems ranging from cracks in sidewalks to catastrophic failures of concrete
structures. Helix is a toothpick-sized, coated metallic-wire which is shaped
then twisted and is added at the concrete ready mix plant, Helix fibers are
randomly dispersed and reinforcing concrete in all directions. Each individual
fiber acts like a tiny screw locked into the concrete, Helix combines
unprecedented performance with economy. The project will focus on developing the
fiber design and proving its effectiveness. The project will ultimately focus on
cost optimization and proving the technology's effectiveness for large-scale
commercial construction applications. The technology will enable a new
generation of concrete-based composites that behave more like steel, making them
safer and longer lasting.

The broader impacts from this project could be significant. Helix is a major
advance in the development of high performance fiber reinforced cement
composites which could offer a combination of high tensile strength, ductility,
toughness and impact resistance. These composites are suitable in structural
applications (i.e., blast-impact and seismic-resistant structures) and in stand-
alone applications (thin sheet products for housing, buildings, bridge decks,
etc.).