* 0419695
* The Ionome
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Mary Lou Guerinot, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 08/31/2010
* USD 3,490,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to use high throughput ICP-MS
technology to identify gene networks that control uptake and accumulation of a
wide array of minerals, the "ionome". The prioritized list of target genes is
based on four criteria. First, all genes have unknown functions. Second,
priority has been given to genes expressed primarily in roots, as uptake and
translocation functions in the root have a significant influence on leaf and
seed ion profiles. Third, priority is given to those genes that show expression
profile changes in response to nutrients. A critical hypothesis to be tested is
whether expression profiling changes can be used to identify functionally
important genes. Fourth, priority will be given to unique genes to test the
hypothesis that defects in unique genes are more likely to generate a phenotype
than mutations in genes with close homologs in the genome. A complete gene list
is available at http://www.cbs.umn.edu/arabidopsis/ionome/. All the ion
profiling data will be available and searchable online, with seeds for various
lines available through the ABRC. Analysis of the ionome and its interactions
with other cellular processes is essential to understand how plants respond to
nutrient availability and toxic metals. The collaborative group will serve as a
"Center of Expertise" to test the hypothesis that &gt; 5% of the genome
functions in plant mineral nutrition. The long-term goal is to quantify the
functional contribution to mineral nutrition and ion homeostasis of every gene
in Arabidopsis. The main objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Conduct ion
profiling (quantitation of Fe, Zn, Ca, K, Mn, P, S, Se, Na, Pb, As, etc.) in
leaves and seeds of 1600 homozygous disruption lines isolated in genes of
unknown function, and thousands of additional lines made available by the
Arabidopsis community.&lt;br/&gt;o Conduct saturation mutagenesis, using
&gt;100,000 fast neutron (FN) mutagenized lines to identify genes that regulate
mineral nutrient accumulation. &lt;br/&gt;o Identify the mutant genes in more
than 50 ion profile mutants obtained from FN mutagenesis. &lt;br/&gt;o Conduct
expression profiling experiments on 10 lines with altered ion profiles. The goal
is to correlate ionome and transcriptome profiling results to understand the
networks controlling ion homeostasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
There are four key contributions to the Broader Impacts of the proposed
research. 1) Educational outreach will include training of undergraduate and
graduate students. 2) Information on the contribution of science to human
health, agriculture, and bioremediation will be disseminated through museum
exhibits and interactions with the PIs' local communities. 3) Research tools
will be provided to the public through web sites and seed line deposits at stock
centers. 4) Fundamental knowledge will be provided to facilitate future
engineering of increased yields and of more nutritious agricultural crops. For
most of the world, plants are the major source of essential minerals. Food-based
solutions to "hidden hunger" offer sustainable solutions to problems of
malnutrition. Therefore, this project will contribute to increasing bio-
available minerals in plants and to solving important problems in human health.
Furthermore, understanding the pathways by which toxic metals accumulate in
plants will enable the engineering of crops to exclude toxic metals and create
healthier food sources, or to extract toxic metals from the soil as a strategy
to clean up polluted lands and water.&lt;br/&gt;