* 0419184
* Financial Frictions, Monetary Policy and Business Cycles:  Developing Quantitative Models of Economic Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2010
* Varadarajan Chari, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 10/31/2010
* USD 206,895.00

This project develops quantitative general equilibrium models of business cycles
to assess the quantitative role of monetary policy and financial frictions in
generating business cycles. The models must be consistent with available
microeconomic evidence at the firm and plant level. This project has a sizable
empirical component that involves accessing datasets typically not used by
macroeconomists. The project develops a new accounting framework for conducting
business cycle analysis. This framework and the data suggest the need for new
models of business cycle fluctuations. Factors that distort the relationship
between the marginal rate of substitution in leisure and consumption and the
marginal product of labor, called labor wedges, and factors which distort the
relationship between factor inputs and output, called efficiency wedges, play
large roles over the business cycle. The challenge is to develop models in which
monetary policy and financial frictions introduce labor and efficiency
wedges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops models in which financial
frictions induce efficiency wedges. In the data, small firms contract
disproportionately following a monetary tightening. A model of endogenous
liquidity constraints is developed in which financial frictions affect the use
of working capital, particularly for small firms. Larger firms are less affected
by liquidity constraints because they have greater access to public debt
markets. A monetary tightening disproportionately affects small firms and
distorts the use of working capital relative to other inputs by small firms, and
thereby produces an efficiency wedge. The project develops models in which small
firms discipline the monopoly power of large firms. Financial frictions
disproportionately affect small firms. In recessions, financial frictions worsen
and small firms' marginal costs rise relative to those of large firms. The
economy becomes less competitive and the resulting distortions manifest
themselves as labor wedges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is primarily
empirical. A proposal to the Census Bureau requesting access to an extensive
detailed collection of data at the plant and firm level has been approved. This
project analyzes the business cycle characteristics of the size distribution of
firms, price-cost margins by firm size, labor productivity by firm size as well
as borrowing costs and other measures of financial constraints by firm size. A
panel tracking the behaviour of plants and the characteristics of their
associated firms will be constructed using data from the Annual Census of
Manufactures, the Census of Manufactures and data from publicly available
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts are that the
project will help improve the conduct of monetary policy over the business
cycle. The projects will also help in the design of regulatory policy aimed at
the banking and financial services industry and in the design of policies aimed
at new and small firms. &lt;br/&gt;