* 0419218
* STTR Phase I:     Development of Fourth Generation High Temperature Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Jason Lincoln, Performance Polymer Solutions Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,633.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop and
characterize the structure property- processing relationships for a novel class
of phenylethynyl terminated thermosetting polyimide/inorganic hybrid resins.
There exists a growing need for polymer matrix composite (PMC) materials capable
of 371-454C (700-900F) extended service life durability that: (i) are compatible
with existing fabrication procedures (autoclave, resin transfer molding, resin
infusion, etc.), (ii) exhibit at least equivalent mechanical performance and
chemical resistance to state of the art polyimides, and (iii) can withstand the
aggressive service environments of defense aerospace, missile, and NASA and Air
Force launch vehicle applications. Materials with these properties do not
presently exist, but are enabling for these and many other future systems.

Current state of the art PMCs are limited to, at best, 343C (650F) extended
service temperatures for aggressive environments required in defense
applications, deep sea drilling, commercial aircraft engines, and reusable
launch vehicle (RLV) technology. Necessary balancing of processing and
performance combined with fundamental limitations in organic chemistry yield
this limit. This project's novel hybrid approach combines known structure-
property-processing relationships of state of the art thermosetting polyimides
developed at Air Force and NASA research laboratories with the current
understanding of inorganic and organic/inorganic hybrid polymers provided by
academia and industry. Building the proposed "Fourth Generation" materials from
the molecular level represents a state of the art technology.