* 0420292
* Acquisition of a Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization-Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) Mass Spectrometer for Research Involving Undergraduate Students
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Ron Morrison, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 292,024.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of North Carolina at Greensboro
(UNCG) under the direction of Dr. Nadja Cech for support of the acquisition of a
matrix assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight (MALDI -TOF) mass
spectrometer. Projects at UNCG that will benefit from the MALDI -TOF mass
spectrometer include: a research project that will focus on the mechanism of
action of Echinacea, an herbal preparation that is widely used for the treatment
and prevention of colds and flues; characterization of reactive intermediates in
catalysis by cytochrome P450 enzymes; the development of novel strategies for
the analysis of signaling proteins following separation by capillary
electrophoresis; the detection and characterization of protein-derived reaction
products of enzymes involved with polyketide synthesis; and using the MALDI mass
spectrometer to analyze proteins involved in transcriptional events that mediate
adipocyte gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer
to be purchased with this grant will foster collaborations between a number of
investigators pursuing research in different areas of chemistry and biology.
These collaborations are expected to strengthen the investigators' research
programs and lead to important scientific developments. In addition, this
instrument will be an integral part of the education of a number of graduate and
undergraduate students. Through their involvement with this research, the
students will learn the details of sample preparation, instrument operation, and
data interpretation for an analytical technique (MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry)
that is becoming increasingly indispensable in biochemical research. In
addition, the students will improve their laboratory skills in other areas, such
as protein expression, and extraction and purification of biological compounds,
and will become acquainted with the process of hypothesis driven research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diverse research projects that will benefit from this
award are expected to be significant to the scientific community and society as
a whole in a number of ways. Dr. Nadja Cech expects to obtain information useful
in the assessment of the safety and efficacy of an herbal medicine (Echinacea)
on which the general public in the US spends millions of dollars annually. The
results of Dr. Gregory Raner's research may be useful in the development of
novel strategies for industrial synthesis, bioremediation, and biosensor
development. Dr. Dawson's research is of benefit to society because it is
expected to aid in the identification of abnormalities in protein signaling
associated with disease states, and lead to the development of novel protein
therapies. In carrying out the aims of his proposed research, Dr. Jason Reddick
expects to provide insight into improved methods for biosyntheses of medicinally
useful polyketides, a class of compounds that includes the antibiotic
erythromycin and the potent anticancer compound epothilone. Finally, Dr. Ron
Morrison hopes that the results of his research will facilitate the development
of novel approaches to combat obesity and diabetes. &lt;br/&gt;