* 0420300
* Symposium Q:     Nucleation Phenomena-Mechanisms, Dynamics and Structures;  April 12-16, 2004; San Francisco, CA
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Nitash Balsara, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2005
* USD 3,000.00

A four-day symposium focusing on nucleation will be held during the 2004
Materials&lt;br/&gt;Research Society (MRS) Spring Meeting, Moscone West, San
Francisco CA during April &lt;br/&gt;12-16, 2004. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;Nucleation of new phases underlies processes and phenomena of
interest to scientific&lt;br/&gt;fields ranging from atmospheric science through
pharmaceutical, colloid, materials, and&lt;br/&gt;surface sciences to
biomineralization, biotechnology, and medicine. It is believed
that&lt;br/&gt;the underlying process of nucleation in these diverse systems is
universal. There is,&lt;br/&gt;however, no consensus regarding the nature of
this universal process. The purpose of the&lt;br/&gt;symposium is to make
progress toward a fundamental understanding of nucleation. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact &lt;br/&gt;This symposium will bring scientists from diverse and
interdisciplinary research areas&lt;br/&gt;together to examine the subject of
nucleation and the extent to which the underpinnings&lt;br/&gt;of nucleation are
universal. &lt;br/&gt;The funds obtained from the National Science Foundation
will be used to support the&lt;br/&gt;participation of six speakers from the US
(registration fees and travel costs). Preference&lt;br/&gt;will be given to
young researchers (assistant professors and graduate students).