* 0420407
* CREST: Center for Research Excellence in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2011
* Brook Milligan, New Mexico State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard N. Smith
* 07/31/2011
* USD 4,577,274.00

Title: CREST Center for Research Excellence in Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HRD - 0420407&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI - Desh
Ranjan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With NSF support, New Mexico State University (NMSU)
will establish a Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (BCB). The
mission of the Center is to foster development of inter-disciplinary
collaborative efforts in BCB. The Center combines the complementary expertise of
a team of researchers from Computer Science, Biology, Chemistry, and
Agriculture. The research mission of the Center is the development of
computational models that integrate the use of multiple, complex sources of data
to enhance understanding of biological systems. The Center will pursue three
research thrusts: (1) development of computational models and tools to extract
knowledge from complex biological data sources; (2) development of novel
computational methods to improve protein structure prediction; and (3) building
computational tools to improve determination of the functionally important parts
of the genomes and understand how these coordinate to make the various
biological mechanisms function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the
Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New Mexico State University CREST
Center will enable a wide range of research and educational activities, and
create inter-disciplinary and inter-institutional collaborations significantly
advancing knowledge of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology. The research
thrusts will advance understanding of biological phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center is in a unique position to benefit from
and serve a diverse student population with a large presence of Native Americans
and Hispanics. It will build on existing NMSU infrastructures to enhance
minority participation in STEM, and extend their impact by providing access to
academic excellence in BCB. The Center's educational infrastructure will lead to
a comprehensive program, composed of outreach pathways towards high-schools and
tribal colleges, research training, and a BCB Master 's
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NMSU programs such as the MII Native American
Pathways, the NIH Bridge in biomedical sciences, the NMSU NIGMS MARC program,
and the NM-AMP, NM-ADVANCE, and NM-AGEP programs, will coordinate efforts with
the Center.&lt;br/&gt;