* 0420984
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Cluster Computer for Digital Biology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Wah Chiu, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This project, impacting genome analysis, structural proteomics, and
macromolecular imaging by linking massive and exponentially growing data in each
of these fields to the molecular basis of biological functions, aims at
acquiring a 220-CPU Opteron distributed memory computing cluster. The Structural
and Computational Biology and Molecular Biophysics (SCBMB) Program using the
cluster encompasses six institutions: Baylor College of Medicine, Rice
University, the University of Houston, the University of Texas MD Anderson, the
University of Texas Health Sciences Center-Houston, and the University of Texas
Medical Branch-Galveston. The infrastructure will service the following research
activities:&lt;br/&gt;Electron Cryo-Microscopic Reconstruction of Biological
Assemblies at the National Center for Macromolecular Imaging (NCMI) (mainly
Electronic Cryomicroscopy and Image Reconstruction), Characterization of
Functional Surfaces for Structural Proteomics (involving the Evolutionary Trace
Method (ET) and utilizing High-Throughput Identification and Geometric Matching
of Functional Surfaces), Comparative Genomics (including Parallel Comparison of
DNA sequences via Positional Hashing (Pash) and Comparative Sequence Assembly
and Mapping)&lt;br/&gt;Micro-RNA (miRNA) (binding target complementary mRNS by
regulating gene expressions)&lt;br/&gt;Each research project has high
computational demands that will be met with the proposed parallel environments.
The derivation of meaningful inferences from raw biological data requires
intensive computation involving data sets. For example, to reconstruct 3-D
images of macromolecular machines, the labs need to transform and auto-correlate
gigabytes of voxels from electron cryomicroscope data; to identify functional
sites in protein structures, the lab requires all-against-all comparisons of
thousands of protein structures; and to identify mammalian genes and detect
novel micro-RNAs, the labs require cross-comparisons of billions of basepairs of
DNA sequence. These applications all share the common feature of repeated but
relatively independent computations that can be split among many CPUs with
modest need of communication through a common file server. These shared
characteristics can be serviced well by the requested
cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The infrastructure enhances the
educational experience at participating institutions. Students in the SCBMB
graduate program (encompassing 6 institutions) will use the system,
significantly enhancing their research opportunities. Baylor has outreach
programs for undergraduates and for high school. Workshops, software tool
development, and technology transfer will serve to disseminate the
results.&lt;br/&gt;