* 0420535
* MRI:  Acquistion of Planar Laser Induced Fluorescence/Raman Imaging System
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Bradford Bruno, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 07/31/2005
* USD 277,992.00

The equipment purchased with this grant will provide capabilities for a suite of
laser combustion diagnostic techniques, including tracer Planar Laser Induced
Fluorescence (PLIF), hydroxyl radical (OH) LIF/PLIF, chemiluminescence, Raman
and Raleigh scattering, exciplex fluorescence, and Mie scattering techniques.
These diagnostic methods will be used in a series of projects related to
combustion processes occurring in internal combustion (IC) engines.
Additionally, the equipment will enable a significant leap in the pedagogical
capabilities of Union College's new IC engine lab, and will greatly strengthen
the thermal/fluid sciences stem of the mechanical engineering curriculum through
its inclusion in teaching labs and demos. The equipment will help attract,
teach, and retain engineering students, including those from traditionally
underrepresented groups, by providing significant new opportunities for
undergraduate students to become engaged in modern IC engine and combustion
research. Lastly, this equipment will foster cross-disciplinary collaboration.
For example, the Raman spectroscopy capabilities will enhance ongoing research
in the chemistry department on the oxidation states of polyaniline in the
development of conductive nanocomposite materials for future chemical sensing
and conductive composite applications.&lt;br/&gt;With regard to IC engine and
combustion research, the initial project will develop a quantitative LIF based
fuel film thickness measurement technique for use with fuel (hydrocarbon) films
on solid surfaces. Fuel films play a critical role in the performance of many
liquid fueled combustion devices, yet they are currently very difficult to study
in situ. Improved understanding of the behavior of these types of films is a
necessary first step for reducing harmful emissions from many important
combustion systems (such as modern automobile engines). The outcome of this
project will be a technique capable of making spatially, temporally, and
chemical component resolved measurements of hydrocarbon fuel film thicknesses in
situ, and which requires optical access to only the exposed (top) surface of the
fuel film. A related hydrogen fuels project will develop laser based
visualization techniques to study the mixing and combustion of hydrogen fuels in
IC engines. Recently, hydrogen has been receiving increasing attention as a
fuel, and the hydrogen IC engine represents a viable technology for harnessing
this fuel for transportation applications. However, laser diagnostic / optical
engine tools of the type used in modern IC engine research and development are
not available for hydrogen-fueled systems. Several complementary techniques will
be explored in an attempt to provide the diagnostic functionality for hydrogen
IC engines that is available via PLIF measurements for hydrocarbon fueled IC
engine research. &lt;br/&gt;