* 0420440
* Acquisition of an Integrated Digital Fluid Flow/Pressure Analysis System for the Study of Functional Design
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Christopher Sanford, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 196,750.00

A grant has been awarded to Hofstra University under the direction of Dr.
Christopher Sanford for the support of an Integrated Digital Fluid Flow/Pressure
Analysis system (IFPAS). This state-of-the-art system will be used to study
patterns of fluid flow important in several biological phenomena. A broad range
of research topics will be examined using the IFPAS, including suspension
feeding in polychaete worms, the behavioral responses of lobsters to olfactory
cues, and feeding in fishes. The research programs of all the users of the
equipment will greatly benefit from this system and it is likely to provide
significant breakthroughs in our understanding of biologically relevant tasks
important in fitness and survival. The IFPAS will also provide new
interdisciplinary partnerships including one between Biology and Engineering. It
will also foster new collaborations between Hofstra faculty and scientists from
neighboring institutions (American Museum of Natural History and University of
Rhode Island).

Hofstra University is a Primarily Undergraduate Institution (PUI) so in addition
to providing an advanced tool for research the IFPAS will also provide a
research-rich training environment for many undergraduate students, the majority
of which are from underrepresented groups in science. The IFPAS will
significantly increase the scope and quality of research opportunities available
to students, and create an exciting and dynamic research environment. The
proposed research and modern techniques have widespread applicability to biology
and is likely to attract students and retain them in the biological sciences.
Biology students will also directly benefit from increased interaction with
individuals from other departments as well as neighboring institutions. The
IFPAS will be integrated directly into all levels of the new biology curriculum.
Research conducted using the IFPAS will also be highlighted on the department
website, and coupled with the very visual nature of the data, has tremendous
potential to attract prospective students to biology. The equipment will also be
incorporated into a course aimed at science teachers, and will therefore have a
direct impact on science education in high schools.