* 0420516
* Establishment of a Center of Excellence in Physics and Chemistry of Materials at Fisk University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Weijie Lu, Fisk University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Victor Santiago
* 01/31/2010
* USD 4,400,000.00

Title: CREST Center for Physics and Chemistry of
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fisk University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HRD -
0420516&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI - Warren E. Collins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
NSF support, Fisk University will establish the Center for Physics and Chemistry
of Materials (CPCoM). The research focus of the proposed Center is the study of
advanced materials, novel processing methods, new properties and phenomena that
will enable new devices for science, industry and medicine. Phenomena and their
applications will focus on detection, emission and modulation of electromagnetic
radiation based on selected electronic and optical materials in the form of
crystals, nanomaterials, glass-ceramics and thin films.&lt;br/&gt;The Center
will pursue four research thrusts: (1) controlled defect formation during
processing of wide-gap semiconductors for optical and electro-optical
applications (crystal growth and materials science), (2) fabrication of metal
and semiconductor nanocrystals by pulsed laser deposition: linear and nonlinear
optical properties (chemical physics and optics), (3) mesoscale materials for
photonic applications (applied optics and spectroscopy), (4) modification, and
characterization of new thin film optical materials (surface
sciences).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;The Fisk University CREST Center will contribute to the
knowledge base of electronic and optical materials and related technologies. The
Center for Physics and Chemistry of Materials will address some of the critical
issues in this area, requiring expertise in materials science, chemical physics,
optics and spectroscopy, solid-state physics and surface
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of the Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;Through strong collaborations with other universities,
national research laboratories, and industry, the Fisk CREST Center will serve
as a regional resource center that will enhance the access and involvement of
minority students and faculty from HBCU's in Tennessee and its neighboring
states. The establishment of CPCoM is in alignment with the long term planning
and strategy of the university. &lt;br/&gt;