* 0420394
* Rootstock-Dependent Gene Expression in Apple Tree Scions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2012
* James Travis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,269,241.00

Apple trees do not reproduce true-to-type from seed. Instead, desirable
cultivars are propagated by grafting vegetative material onto suitable
rootstocks. Rootstocks can alter scion traits of importance to agriculture,
including fruit size, flowering timing, the number of flowers and fruits
produced, drought tolerance, disease resistance, cold tolerance, and tree
stature. In effect, the traits of genetically identical apple cultivar scions
can be very different depending on the rootstock to which they are grafted. This
project harnesses this phenomenon to identify genes in apple trees that are
involved in controlling agriculturally important traits. The central hypothesis
driving this research is that scions grafted to different rootstocks have
different overall patterns of gene activity, and that these differences in gene
activity play a role in determining the trait differences between the trees.
Global gene expression patterns in "Gala" cultivar scions grafted to a series of
different rootstocks will be compared. Genes whose expression level is
rootstock-dependent will be identified (at least 500 unique genes). A DNA
microarray comprised of the differentially expressed genes will be developed and
used to survey a large number of scion/rootstock combinations in order to
associate the expression of particular genes with particular
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in the identification of
genes whose activity depends on the identity of the rootstock. The sequences of
these genes will be made public though databases including GenBank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and the Genome Database for Rosaceae
(http://www.genome.clemson.edu/gdr/). The results of the microarray experiments
will be made available to the public though GEO database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). The sequence and microarray data will be
made publicly available through the GEO database as soon as the first manuscript
describing the results is accepted for journal publication, and will remain
accessible after the completion of the project into the foreseeable future. The
microarrays themselves will be made available at cost to other non-profit
research groups. The broader impacts of this work include minority undergraduate
student summer training through the SROP program
(http://www.cic.uiuc.edu/programs/SROP/). Each summer, two or three
underrepresented undergraduates will be given the opportunity to participate in
the project. In addition, one or more graduate students will receive training in
genomics research and undergraduates will be engaged in research related to this
project during the academic year. The results of this project may also be useful
for the development of gene activity markers that could be used in apple
breeding programs to try to predict the traits of a tree early on in its
development. &lt;br/&gt;