* 0420855
* Acquisition of a high resolution ICP &amp; XRD for environmental, Earth, &amp; material science research in biology, Chemistry, Geology, &amp; Physics at Southern Oregon University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Sidney Abrahams, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 219,538.00

0420855&lt;br/&gt;Elliot&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support form the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the acquisition of an x-ray
diffractometer (XRD) and inductively coupled plasma spectrometer (ICP) will
significantly improve the earth science, materials, and environmental research
facilities at Southern Oregon University (SOU). The ICP will assist earth
science faculty with elemental characterization of water samples associated with
acid mine drainage and naturally occurring arsenic in groundwater. The ICP will
also provide biology, chemistry, and geology faculty with the ability to
evaluate natural and anthropogenic trace metal distributions on the
physiological effects of serpentine-rich geologic terrains on small mammals and
on the identification and protection of threatened and endangered sturgeon
species. The XRD will provide earth science faculty the capability of
identifying unknown minerals, studying the distribution and environmental
conditions that result in the formation of various clay minerals within
mudrocks, and assessing the mineralogical composition of sulfide minerals and
precipitated salts associated with acid mine drainage. The XRD will immediately
be highly beneficial to our materials research program under NSF grant
DMR-0137323. All new potentially-ferroelectric materials examined are locally
prepared, with few exceptions. Each preparation must be single phase to produce
definitive results and this is achievable only by using XRD in close conjunction
with each preparation. It will now become possible to prepare single phase
K2HCr2AsO10, NaSb3F10, YInO3 and a series of related oxides, among a large
backlog of promising materials, so that conclusive measurements can be made. It
will also improve our analytical and research capability in training and
educating students in our new Material Sciences program. In addition to the
collaborative research conducted at SOU, the XRD and ICP will also provide new
research opportunities for faculty and students at regional institutions
throughout southern Oregon and northern California as well as local, state, and
federal researchers in the community. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;