* 0420357
* Development of a Multibeam, Parabolic Pulse, Kilohertz Terawatt Laser Facility for Ultrafast Optical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Charles Durfee, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2008
* USD 632,307.00

This MRI award provides for the construction of a multibeam TeraWatt kilohertz
laser system at the Colorado School of Mines. Parabolic pulses from a
Ti:sapphire oscillator will be used as the seed for a unique, multibeam TeraWatt
kilohertz laser. Using adaptive optics, focused intensities on the order of ten
to the power 20 Watts per square centimeter can be achieved with this system. A
broad array of available frequency conversion optics makes it possible for this
laser source to generate radiation that spans from the x-ray regime to the mid-
infrared. This TeraWatt kilohertz laser facility will form the basis of a
universal light source that will be used by multiple departments on the Colorado
School of Mines (CSM) campus and will enable interdisciplinary programs in
optical, atomic and nuclear physics, chemistry, metallurgy, and biology.

The laser facility will feature two beamlines: a 1mJ, 20 fs, 1 kHz beamline, and
a 20 mJ, 20 fs, 1 kHz beamline. Each line can be manipulated independently (in
wavelength, pulse duration, and intensity) making it possible to simultaneously
drive a large number of experiments at low and high intensities. Scientific
applications for the low energy arm include generating mid-IR pulses to be used
for surface vibrational sum-frequency spectroscopy (SVSFG). Through the special
sensitivity of SVSFG we expect dramatic progress in the understanding of systems
across a broad range of applications such as: chemical mechanisms of self-
assembly of covalently attached molecular monolayers, energy dissipation
mechanisms in nano-lubrication, photochemical degradation mechanisms of
polymeric materials, bio-specific surface attachment for implant compatibility,
fundamental mechanisms of liquid crystal dynamics at interfaces, and primary
processes in adhesion. Scientific applications for the high energy arm include
the efficient generation of ultrafast x-rays for medical imaging, ultrafast
x-ray absorption (EXAFS) and diffractive studies in solid-state materials and
complex molecules.