* 0420485
* ITWF:  Scholars of the Future:  An Implementation Model for Increasing Diversity in Information Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Bevlee Watford, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 07/31/2009
* USD 754,983.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CNS-0420485&lt;br/&gt;PI: Juan Gilbert&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Auburn University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITWF: Scholars of the Future: An
Implementation Model for Increasing Diversity in Information
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITWF project provides significant research
and mentoring to upper level undergraduate computer science students, with a
focus on under-represented participants. The goal is for these students to
pursue graduate degrees in information technology related fields and then pursue
academic careers. This Scholars of the Future model is to be implemented at
Auburn University all four years and at Virginia Polytechnic Institute in the
last two years. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
lies in strong research basis and the expertise of the collaborative partners
participating in the project. The project features an extremely comprehensive
assessment plan that should provide research-based insights that are of great
value. The student research covers a broad spectrum of the information
technology discipline, with leadership and mentorship from recognized scholars
in the various fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project
lie with the potential to produce a substantial number of computer science
graduate students and potential faculty members, with many from underrepresented
groups. In addition, the model is easily replicated at other institutions and
could be sustained as part of the research programs at the institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;