* 0420310
* CRCD/EI:  ALASKA:  Applet and Library Augmented Shared Knowledge Areas
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Roy Anderson, United States Air Force Academy
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

This project involves collaboration between the PI at the US Air Force Academy,
and partners at SRI International, and the University of Colorado. The project
involves building and testing a prototype of a platform that integrates shared
work in educational domains. The platform facilitates opening of a series of new
and instructionally potent interactive pathways: each student interacts with his
or her personal agent in solving problems or acquiring new curricular concepts,
the professor can also direct the agents, and all of them -- professor, student
or agent -- have immediate access to the curriculum-tailored library of applets
that provide clarifying visualizations, simulations, animations or fuller
explanations of curriculum concepts. The agents communicate with each other and
can aggregate instructionally specific data across the class for the professor.
The professor also has a perceptive agent in his or her space to organize data
but also to serve as an observer that can debrief with the instructor and with
other agents. The three IT advances that are integrated in this project involve
shared workspaces; digital libraries; and perceptive animated agents. The
curriculum development research involves teams of upper level computer science
students and educators who collaborate in the creation of applet libraries that
are customized for individual curricula. The deliverables for this project
include: Shared Workspaces, Applets, and Perceptive Agents. For the purposes of
this project, a Shared Workspace involves a software application -- such as a
programming editor or electronic sketchpad -- that is networked and shared by
different users in a "What You See Is What I See" or WYSIWIS manner and that
also permits teacher-to-class screen broadcasting. This project's foci lie with
instructionally sophisticated WYSIWIS architectures whose interfaces feature
authentic classroom metaphors. In the context of this project, Applets are
portable "mini-programs" that produce text or video explanations, simulations,
visualizations, animations, or graphical representations of course concepts.
And, finally, the Perceptive Agents developed for ALASKA enable a form of
personal tutoring, where the agent-tutor and student work closely together in a
virtual one-on-one setting. Agents in this project engage in simple dialogs with
students to help fulfill their goals; they have three possible classes of
responses to student requests: 1) give an answer or invoke an applet; 2) engage
in a clarification dialog with the student; or 3) pass the history of the
interaction to the teacher or agent network for resolution. This project's
framework is easily translated to classroom settings for many other disciplines
with compatible curricula as well as to asynchronous learning environments. The
proposal capitalizes on and extends substantial investments by NSF and others in
animated agent technologies, digital library production, and participatory
design models for crafting high quality and usable education objects, and
collaborative lesson-studies.&lt;br/&gt;