* 0420889
* MRI/RUI  Replacement and Up Scaling of a GC-MS to Enhance Faculty &amp; Undergraduate Research and Chemistry Education at Augustana College
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Richard Narske, Augustana College
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 08/31/2007
* USD 85,590.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Augustana College will acquire a gas chromatograph
mass spectrometer (GC/MS). GC/MS will be used to identify and quantify
decomposition products from substrate surface reactions on nanocrystalling MGO
and aluminum oxide. These high surface area nanocrystalline metal oxides have
shown promise at detoxifying chemical warfare agents. Other users will measure
the concentrations of lead and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in a nearby
superfund cleanup site. GC/MS analysis will be used to monitor the reaction
progress of a series of chiral spiro-aromatic compounds. Finally, direct probe
MS will enable mass spectroscopic characterization of nonvolatile, higher
molecular weight liquid crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gas chromatograph with
mass spectrometric detection (GC/MS) is an extremely powerful technique used for
the separation and analysis of complex mixtures. These studies will have a
tremendous impact in a number of fields, ranging from environmental sciences, to
nanotechnology. The liquid crystal studies may lead to the development of
electrooptical switches, piezo- and pyroelectric devices and nonlinear optics in
addition to liquid crystal displays. In addition, undergraduates will have
hands-on experience in a number of newly developed courses at Augustana College.
&lt;br/&gt;