* 0420995
* MRI:      Acquisition of Instrumentation for Characterization and Fabrication of Hard and Soft Structures for Remote and On-Site National Usage (NNIN Consortium)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Stephen Campbell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 175,000.00

The acquisition of the Xenon difluoride release system, by Cornell Nanoscale
Facility (CNF), a member of the National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network
(NNIN) will make possible the development of reproducible etch capability for
fabricating released micro- and nanostructures. &lt;br/&gt;Released structures
are formed by the selective removal of a sacrificial material contained beneath
a surface micro-machined layer. The dissimilar material is removed selectively
leaving the surface layer suspended from the substrate. Suspended structures are
employed in a range of science and engineering experiments and applications. In
characterization, very common forms are the suspended probes used in atomic
force, tunneling, magnetic resonance, and optical probe instruments. In biology
and electronics applications of micro-electro-mechanical systems, these include
sensitive mass detection through resonance, ultra-fine integrated sharp probes
used to access regions of soft materials, and resonators. In physics, these
include sensitive single electron transistor based detection of position and
charge. Fabrication of such structures requires reproducibility and reliability,
and since the fragile suspended structures are commonly released through a
liquid medium, surface tension during the release process, leads to failure.
&lt;br/&gt;Xenon difluoride (XeF2) dry gas etching is a technique for achieving
this release directly through the gas phase. XeF2 etches silicon spontaneously
with high selectivity to other materials. &lt;br/&gt;The NNIN, of which CNF is a
member, provides equipment, education and technical support to the scientific
community. The resources of NNIN are openly available to the entire nation. The
presence of a XeF2 Etch System at CNF will represent the first such dry gas etch
capability within the NNIN and immediately support an estimated 70 projects in a
variety of disciplines involving over 125 users of CNF. The structure of NNIN
will enable users throughout the network to take advantage of this process. By
leveraging the unique infrastructure contained within the network, the addition
of this capability will lead to interesting new directions of research involving
new materials, nanoscale released structures, devices with novel 3-D geometries,
and other interdisciplinary applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;