* 0420634
* Temporal and spatial interaction patterns of bZIP proteins in living C. elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Chang-Deng Hu, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Reddy
* 07/31/2008
* USD 468,750.00

Protein-protein interactions play a pivotal role in regulating and executing all
cellular processes. Although studies of a genome-wide interaction network can
provide clues to predict how each protein might function in cells through
protein-protein interactions, it remains a challenge to prove whether the
identified interactions are biologically relevant and how the interactions are
temporally and spatially regulated in vivo. The major objective of this project
is to use a novel bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) approach to
investigate how protein-protein interactions are temporally and spatially
regulated throughout development in the living nematode worm, C. elegans. The
principle of the assay is to fuse one half of a yellow fluorescent protein (YFP)
to each of two proteins and co-express them in living worms. Any interaction
between the two fusion proteins brings two halves of non-fluorescent fragments
in proximity and reconstitutes an intact YFP, allowing direct visualization of
their interactions throughout development. Specifically, the first objective is
to use Ce-FOS-1 and Ce-JUN-1, two homologs of mammalian and Drosophila Fos and
Jun transcription factors which function as a heterodimer, as a model system to
establish an assay for the visualization of their temporal and spatial
interactions in living worms. The second objective is to identify other
interaction partners of Ce-FOS-1 and examine the temporal and spatial
interaction patterns of Ce-FOS-1 with other bZIP proteins (basic region leucine
zipper family transcription factors). The third objective is to use RNAi and
other genetic approaches to determine the loss-of-function phenotypes of these
interactions and correlate the phenotypes to the temporal and spatial
interaction patterns. Ultimately, the temporal and spatial interaction patterns
of all bZIP proteins will be analyzed. The proven system will allow the study of
temporal and spatial interactions of other families of proteins in worms and in
other organisms as well. This project will involve the training of undergraduate
and graduate students, and the established system will allow biology students to
directly visualize how interactions of bZIP proteins regulate specific
developmental events.