* 0420322
* MRI: Aquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer with Low Temperature and Powder Capabilities
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Peter LeMaire, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 335,850.00

This award fro the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports the
Departments of Chemistry, Engineering Technology, and Physics and Earth Sciences
at Central Connecticut State University (CCSU) with the acquisition of a single
crystal 3-circle diffractometer. The diffractometer is equipped with a CCD
detector and software that is also capable of low temperature, powder, and
fiber. The diffractometer will support research at the Departments of Chemistry,
Engineering Technology, and Physics and Earth Sciences. It is ideal for small
molecule structure determination and materials identification. Equipped with
standard accessories for low temperature diffraction and additional software
packages for powder/fiber analysis and structural database searching, the
instrument will see heavy use on research projects as well as for teaching and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over twelve Nobel Prizes have been
awarded to scientists who have worked in the field of X-ray crystallography and
today it remains the primary experimental method to elucidate the three
dimensional structure of molecules- giving accurate determinations of bond
lengths, bond angles, and torsion relationships. This award from the Major
Research Instrumentation program will provide funds to Central Connecticut State
University (CCSU) for acquisition of a diffractometer. The diffractometer will
support research at the Departments of Chemistry, Engineering Technology, and
Physics and Earth Sciences. It is ideal for small molecule structure
determination and materials identification. Equipped with standard accessories
for low temperature diffraction and additional software packages for
powder/fiber analysis and structural database searching, the instrument will see
heavy use on research projects as well as for teaching and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;