* 0420890
* MRI-RUI:  Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffraction System for Improvement in the Quality of Research and Education  in Materials Related Sciences and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Tina Hudson, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 129,965.00

This grant provides researchers at Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology (RHIT)
and surrounding colleges with access to an x-ray machine that is capable of (i)
producing publishable x-ray diffraction patterns for faculty and student
research projects; (ii) providing students training on a modern research tool
used in basic materials science and engineering, and (iii) generating enthusiasm
for science in middle school students. The grant will enable research on novel
magnetic materials and shape memory alloy (SMA) based MEMS devices by providing
the ability to identify the materials and phases produced by various fabrication
techniques. The magnetic material research uses two fabrication techniques. The
first technique uses a modified carbon-arc technique with 1) faster cooling
rates during the synthesis and/or 2) higher pressure reactions to create an
alloyed samarium cobalt/carbon nanoparticle. The second technique uses
sputtering with controlled annealing to deposit a SmCo-carbon thin film, which
allows for more control over particle size during nucleation from the solid
phase. Two projects are being proposed in the field of SMA-MEMS: 1) an
electrical engineering project involving the development of a MEMS model of a
sarcomere (the building block for muscles) and 2) a mechanical engineering
project developing a heat engine capable of using waste heat as an energy
source. The MEMS model sarcomere will use multiple SMA-MEMS heat actuators to
move a model sarcomere in a manner similar to biological sarcomeres. The MEMS
heat engine design, based on the high work densities of SMAs, will result in an
oscillating device driven by a temperature gradient. The grant also provides
training to students in the use of an x-ray diffraction machine and will enhance
student cognitive understanding of the theory of x-ray diffraction. Finally,
middle school students will have an opportunity to use the x-ray machine in
RHIT's Explore Engineering program. The x-ray machine will be useful for
research, training undergraduates, and generating enthusiasm in students of all
ages.

This grant provides researchers at Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology (RHIT)
and surrounding colleges with access to an x-ray machine that is capable of (i)
producing publishable results for faculty and student research projects; (ii)
providing students training on a modern research tool used in basic materials
science and engineering, and (iii) generating enthusiasm for science in middle
school students. The x-ray machine provides the ability to utilize novel
materials that are necessary in materials research. The grant also provides for
training of students in the use of an x-ray diffraction machine and enhances
their cognitive understanding of the theory of x-ray diffraction through the
modification of existing experiments and the development of new laboratories.
Finally, middle school students in RHIT's Explore Engineering program will be
given the opportunity to generate diffraction patterns of common materials such
as pennies and to use these patterns in determining the composition of the
materials. The x-ray machine would be useful for research, training
undergraduates, and generating enthusiasm in students of all ages.