* 0420674
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Top-Loading Refrigerator and Magnet System for Studies of Quantum Systems and Undergraduate Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Robert Hallock, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 354,000.00

A top-loading dilution refrigerator and magnet system will be acquired to serve
as a shared facility between four research groups. This system will provide a
combined environment of extremely low temperatures (15 mK or less) and high
magnetic fields (up to 10 T). It will permit relatively rapid and uncomplicated
sample changes, which will facilitate sharing the facility between the research
groups and will make it possible to engage undergraduates in research projects
using this system. The refrigerator/magnet system will be used to study a
variety of quantum phenomena at low temperature: nanoscale devices (crossed
Andreev reflection devices and nanowire arrays), entangled states of molecular
magnets, macroscopic quantum phenomena in SQUIDS, exotic states in quantum-fluid
films, spin dynamics of quantum fluids, and cryogenic production of
hyperpolarized contrast agents for MRI. Broader impacts will include opening new
areas of low-temperature research to participation by undergraduates, and laying
the scientific groundwork for future nanoscale, quantum-information, and
hyperpolarized MRI technologies.

A specialized refrigerator and magnet system will be acquired, which will make
it possible to cool samples to within fifteen thousandths of a degree from
absolute zero temperature while subjecting them to extremely large magnetic
fields (up to ten tesla, or about 200,000 times larger than the Earth's field).
Four research groups will share this system and use it to study quantum
phenomena at low temperature. The areas to be studied will include nano devices,
phenomena of potential use for quantum computing, and other exotic quantum
systems. A special feature of this refrigerator/magnet system is the ability to
quickly and easily change samples without disassembling the entire system. This
will make it possible to engage undergraduate students in research using the
refrigerator, opening up new areas of physics to undergraduate physics
instruction and research.