* 0420961
* Collaborative Research: An Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Biogeoscience Research and Teaching at the University of New Orleans and Tulane University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2004,09/30/2008
* William Simmons, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 09/30/2008
* USD 178,310.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of New Orleans and Tulane University
under the direction for Dr. William Simmons for partial support of an isotope
ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) facility for biogeoscience research and
education. Stable isotope measurements provide critical information about the
earth that is unobtainable by any other means and that is necessary to answer
fundamental questions in the biogeosciences. Researchers at the University of
New Orleans (UNO) and Tulane University are currently using stable isotopes of
C, N, O and S in their research programs, but due to lack of a local IRMS
facility, have to rely on out-of-state laboratories for these measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The UNO/Tulane IRMS facility will be used for high
precision measurement of stable isotope ratios on N2, O2, CO2, CO, N2O and SO2.
The research projects that will benefit from the IRMS facility address a broad
suite of basic and applied problems in the fields of watershed science,
paleoclimate investigation, foodweb study and tropical ecology. Scientific
assessment of programs to reverse coastal erosion and preserve wetlands in
southern Louisiana will benefit greatly from this new facility by providing
critical information on ecosystem dynamics and the movement of elements through
the environment. In addition to facilitating research programs, the IRMS will
enhance the training of undergraduate and graduate students at UNO and Tulane.
Several upper division and graduate level courses will now incorporate mass
spectrometry in field and laboratory exercises. Special educational initiatives
at UNO including an NSF-funded program to enhance under-represented minorities
in environmental biology (UMEB) will take advantage of the IRMS as a recruiting
tool and training facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Besides providing a tool that
is vital to the success of many research programs, the IRMS facility will
stimulate collaboration between the major private and public Universities in New
Orleans; these universities serve students and early-career scientists from
underrepresented groups in the biogeosciences. The IRMS system will be a shared-
use facility benefiting research and teaching activities at UNO and Tulane
University as well as other Louisiana Universities.&lt;br/&gt;