* 0420433
* ITWF: Collaborative Research: Increasing the Representation of Undergraduate Women and Minorities in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Barbara Ryder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 08/31/2009
* USD 59,832.00

Title: ITWF Collaborative Research: Increasing the Representation of
Undergraduate Women and Minorities in Computer Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNS
0420436, PI Horwitz, Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0419340, PI Huss-
Lederman, Beloit College&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420312, PI Munson, Univ. of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420337, PI Dunsmore, Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;CNS
0420343, PI Rodger, Duke University&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420358, PI Binkley, Loyola
College of Maryland&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420368, PI Biggers, Georgia Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420433, PI Ryder, Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative ITWF project
implements a new approach to introductory computer science with the goal of
increasing the enrollment and retention of women and under-represented
minorities in undergraduate computer science degree programs. The project adapts
the Emerging Scholars Program and the Peer-led Team Learning approaches, which
have been proven successful in mathematics and other sciences, to computer
science. It is a collaborative project between the University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Beloit College, Duke University, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Loyola College of Maryland, Purdue University, Rutgers University, and the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. The project includes targeted recruitment of
students with strong mathematics and science backgrounds to the new course. The
course includes students working in small groups on challenging problems with
group facilitation by outstanding undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the strong basis on models that have
been successful in other disciplines. The collaborative represents a team of
investigators with significant expertise in educational reform and
transformation. Implementation will take place at the diverse set of
institutions represented by the collaborative partners, thus providing an
excellent environment for evaluation of this innovative approach and
illustrating the possibilities for replication and adoption by a wide range of
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project lie with
the potential increasing the participation of under-represented groups in
computer science. The method to be tested is relative low cost and
straightforward to implement, thus it has a high potential for broad impact
across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;