* 0420365
* Collaborative Research:    ITWF - Creating an Inclusive Learning Environment:    Enhancing Retention of Women and Minorities in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Donald Davis, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 08/31/2009
* USD 602,520.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;ITWF Program - FY04&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420365, PI's
Donald Davis, Debra Major, Janis Sanchez-Hucles, Old Dominion
U.&lt;br/&gt;Title: Creating an Inclusive Learning Environment: Enhancing
Retention of Women and Minorities in Computer
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Projects:&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420365, PI's
Donald Davis, Debra Major, Janis Sanchez-Hucles, Old Dominion U.&lt;br/&gt;CNS
0420371, PI Sandra DeLoatch, Norfolk State U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Old Dominion
University and Norfolk State University have been awarded an ITWF grant to
conduct a collaborative four-year implementation project designed to create an
inclusive learning environment in computer science (CS) and thereby increase
retention of women and minority undergraduate students. The two institutions
will create an inclusive learning environment through (a) strengthening faculty-
student and student-peer relationships using collaborative and multicultural
teaching and learning practices and (b) strengthening student self-efficacy,
optimism, career management, and collaboration and coping skills. All beginning
CS students will participate in a required, semester-long class that presents a
realistic preview of the challenges of being a computer science major,
techniques and skills for coping with such challenges, training in attitudes and
beliefs that foster persistence, and use of role models to describe the career
rewards that are possible in computer science. Faculty will be trained in "wise
schooling" techniques to foster inclusiveness. Faculty will also include pair
programming and collaborative learning in programming classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;