* 0420980
* Acquisition of the Notre Dame Biocomplexity Computer Cluster
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Mark Alber, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 160,160.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Notre Dame under the direction of
Dr. Mark Alber for support of establishing a Beowulf type Biocomplexity Cluster
to provide computer infrastructure for The Notre Dame Interdisciplinary Center
for the Study of Biocomplexity (ICSB) to meet its broad research and educational
goals. The Biocomplexity Cluster will be added to the existing BoB cluster
(http://bob.nd.edu) at Notre Dame. Its addition to this high performance
computing facility will be embedded in the administrative structures of the
Science Computation Facilities (SCF) at Notre Dame. Establishment of the Cluster
will result in dramatic increase in the range and complexity of the biological
computations on Notre Dame campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICSB supports the
development of quantitative predictive models of biological processes ranging
from subcellular to multicellular and ecological. The unique aspects of the ICSB
are its interdisciplinary approach, its pursuit of complex biological systems at
all scales simultaneously, and its insistence that modeling and quantitative
experiments develop jointly. The Biocomplexity Cluster will help ICSB in
supporting a variety of projects, which require a high-end computational
environment. These projects: Molecular Dynamics, Multiscale Simulation of Avian
Limb Development, Microscale Modeling of Cancellous Bone Damage and
Environmental Biocomplexity- cover all interacting scales of Biocomplexity
phenomena from molecular to environmental. New collaborations with groups
working on Biological Networks and Modeling of Cytoskeleton will also greatly
benefit from the Cluster. 25% of the CPU time of the Cluster will be accessible
to other researchers in the Colleges of Science and Engineering. During academic
year up to 5% of the computer time will be allocated for teaching purposes. The
Cluster will also allow students participating in the Summer REU programs on
Notre Dame campus to learn and apply high-end computational techniques as a part
of their training. Interactive web pages will be developed with separate
sections aimed at junior-high and high school students to provide educational
materials on Biocomplexity which will utilize the
Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary study of Biocomplexity
incorporates quantitative modeling into biology and related disciplines, and
thus has broad impact on diverse fields such as Biology, Geology, Environmental
Engineering, Life Sciences, Computer Science, and Mathematics. The Biocomplexity
Cluster will be used to support interdisciplinary research projects and
coursework, helping to train a new generation of students in the integration of
interdisciplinary biological experimentation and modeling. Collaboration of ICSB
with the newly established Indiana University Biocomplexity Institute at
Bloomington and the Indiana University Medical School at Indianapolis,
formalized as the Indiana Biocomplexity Consortium, will ensure broad impact
through student exchange, development of new educational initiatives, and
development of additional collaborative research projects. The Cluster will help
the ICSB in achieving one of its major goals of developing new computational
techniques and tools of broad utility to bioscientists and distributing these
freely to researches within the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;