* 0420996
* MRI:    Acquisition of CAVE for Experiments in the Creation of Collaborative Learning Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Simon Parsons, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 299,750.00

This project, creating learning environments where children can be fully
immersed in and engaged with their learning materials, aims at acquiring high-
end visualization and motion capture in the form of the Tangible Interfaces
Collaborative Learning Environments (TICLE) project. The project centers around
the development of learning environments; techniques for handling multi-sensory
cues in user interfaces, and the use of visual technology in learning and
adaptation in intelligent agents. While studying interfaces amenable for human
computer interaction and learning, proposed is the acquisition of a CAVE-based
immersive environment as well as a motion capture system that will be integrated
with it. Exploring techniques such as virtual reality, full motion tracking, and
sensor input devices, the work involves working on gesture tracking and
recognition/ interpretation, determining how to relate gestures to manipulation
of objects. The proposal addresses the following research
directions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tangible Interfaces for Collaborative Learning
Environments&lt;br/&gt;Interaction Paradigms&lt;br/&gt;Tracking and Representing
the Learning Environment&lt;br/&gt;Rectifying and Resolving Conflicts among Data
Sources&lt;br/&gt;Multi-Parametric Interfaces and Complex Multi-Media Control
Situations&lt;br/&gt;Increasingly Multi-Parametric Real-Time Multi-Media Control
Situations&lt;br/&gt;User Feedback Strategies for Multi-Parametric Real-Time
Multi-Media Control Situations&lt;br/&gt;Training and Learning Multi-Parametric
Real-Time Multi-Media Control&lt;br/&gt;Learning and Adaptation in Intelligent
Agents&lt;br/&gt;Learning and Adaptation by Artificial Intelligent
Agents&lt;br/&gt;Learning and Adapting Human Agents&lt;br/&gt;Learning and
Adapting as a Programming Metaphor&lt;br/&gt;Several subprojects extend previous
work into a 3D cave environment, requiring a significant jump in complexity of
the system including computer vision, graphics, and systems; as well as quite a
bit of training. For the latter project, a motion tracking system monitors the
robots and the CAVE to give feedback to the robots. In the area of human
computer interfaces (HCI), strategies will be developed for tracking and
representing what is going on in the learning environment, including algorithms
for rectifying and resolving conflicts among disparate sources (such as multiple
pairs of cameras and sensors). Experimentation with various paradigms determines
how students may best interact with the objects and information. Ways of
interacting with the space and the data in natural, expressive ways, affecting
multiple parameters will be explored. In the area of artificial intelligence,
the focus will be in determining what the users understand or intend. The
investigation of adaptive agents will continue, allowing the system to fill in
missing data and learn over time. All tracks focus on how the HCI can enhance
collaborative educational environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Supporting research at a minority institution, the work involves undergraduate
and graduate students, including those from underrepresented groups. Exposing a
wider audience into science, the work on TICLE exhibits high potential for
broader impact in education. Moreover, outreach to K-12 is already under
way.&lt;br/&gt;