* 0420626
* MRI: Acquisition of X-ray Scattering Systems for the Characterization of Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Robert Houser, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 474,842.00

Funds are being requested to build a x-ray diffraction facility with broad
applications to the field of materials characterization. This facility will
consist of two pieces of equipment: one to perform powder wide-angle x-ray
diffraction and the other to perform small-angle x-ray diffraction. The
equipment will be used to characterize of nanostructured materials: the former
will be used to characterize crystal structures, i.e. the arrangement of
individual atoms on a sub-&lt;br/&gt;nanometer scale, while the latter will be
used to characterize larger structures, i.e. the arrangement of groups of atoms
or molecules on a nanometer or tens of nanometer scale. These instruments will
truly be multi-user pieces of equipment, we have provided brief descriptions of
11 different projects involving 10 different faculty members from 5 different
departments. In &lt;br/&gt;addition, we have listed titles of more projects,
some of which involve faculty from other universities in the State of Oklahoma.
These instruments will become an important part of Nanonet, an NSF EPSCoR funded
center in the State of Oklahoma that encompasses scientists
&lt;br/&gt;interested in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are being
requested to build a x-ray facility with broad applications to the field of
materials characterization. This facility will consist of two pieces of
equipment: one to study crystals and the other to perform measurements on less
structured materials. The equipment will be used to characterize of materials
structured on a very fine scale: the former will be used to characterize crystal
structures, i.e. the arrangement of individual atoms, while the latter will be
used to characterize larger structures, i.e. the arrangement of groups of atoms
or molecules. These instruments will truly be multi-user pieces of equipment.
These instruments will become an important part of Nanonet, an NSF EPSCoR funded
center in the State of Oklahoma that encompasses scientists interested in
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;