* 0420639
* Acquisition of a Quantitative Gene Detection and Expression System
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Peter Straub, Stockton University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 103,856.00

A grant has been awarded to The Richard Stockton College of New Jersey under the
direction of Dr. Brian Rogerson for the acquisition of a quantitative gene
detection and expression system. This acquisition project will enhance the
capabilities of our Core Molecular Analysis Facility, which is being used to
support undergraduate student research, faculty research and teaching in the
biology and chemistry programs, as well as collaborative research efforts with
investigators outside the college. Research projects that will benefit from this
technology include: (1) The examination of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis
adaptive response to life in the lungs of infected mouse hosts exhibiting
different levels of resistance (Dr. Rogerson), (2) the study of pollution
effects on gene expression in winter flounder (Dr. Straub), a project that is
being carried out in support of local fisheries research and that will compare
individual fish from the highly pollution-impacted Raritan/Hudson Estuary with
less impacted sites, and (3) the study of protein phosphatase 2A, a highly
conserved cellular enzyme, and its role in regulating gene expression in the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Dr. York). This instrumentation will also allow
gene expression experiments to be more easily integrated into upper level
laboratory courses such as Biotechnology (Dr. Straub), Molecular Genetics (Dr.
York) and Developmental Biology (Dr. Herlands).

Addition of a quantitative sequence detection system to our undergraduate
research laboratories is part of our continuing effort to provide relevant
training opportunities for students that will prepare them for jobs in the
technology sector or prepare them for graduate and professional training. This
will help us fulfill one of the goals of the New Jersey Commission on Higher
Education. This project is expected to contribute to our understanding of: (1)
bacterial adaptation to the immune response in mammals, (2) biomarkers for
surveying fish habitats for suitability, production or degree of contamination,
and (3) how model organisms such as yeast can shed light on basic cellular
processes such as gene regulation. This acquisition project will also help
maintain our core facility as a focal point for collaboration with researchers
at other institutions.