* 0420952
* MRI: Acquisition of a Tunable Infrared Laser and Chamber for the Deposition and Characterization of Thin Films of Ceramics, Oxides and Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Stephen Kelty, Seton Hall University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 383,208.00

This Major Research Instrumentation/Research in Undergraduate Institution
(MRI/RUI) award provides funds for the acquisition of a high power tunable
infrared laser, a high power ultraviolet laser, and a pulsed laser deposition
vacuum chamber assembly. Together with the institution's existing
characterization equipment, this equipment will be used for advanced laser
processing of materials research and thin film deposition of polymers, ceramics,
and oxides. The lasers are used to evaporate target materials inside the vacuum
chamber, which are then deposited upon substrates as thin films. The vacuum
chamber has a variety of features and capabilities that include rotation of the
target and a multi-target carousel that will enable the deposition of composite
and/or multi-layer films. Thin films may be deposited in either an inert or
reactive background gas and the substrate may be either heated or cooled. In
addition an optical train is included that allows the laser beam to be rastered
across the target. Including the lasers, the entire system is then computer
controlled and may be configured for multiple user requirements. The instruments
will be used for both research and education with particular emphasis on
undergraduate students from physics, chemistry and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research that is supported by these
instruments will lead to a deeper understanding of the laser-material
interaction that allows the deposition of thin films. It will provide unique
research opportunities for students from across the science departments, thus
fostering multidisciplinary research initiatives. The instruments will be of
benefit to ongoing research programs and will provide a common reference point
for these programs. The instruments will also support research that directly
overlaps with existing curricula and reinforces classroom and laboratory
learning. Finally, thin films deposited using these instruments will have
importance to diverse application areas such as microelectronics and chemical
and biological sensing.&lt;br/&gt;