* 0420736
* MRI: Acquisition of a Millimeter Wave Vector Network Analyzer for Research and Training
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* James Becker, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2005
* USD 204,930.00

This project seeks to establish a state-of-the-art research and training
facility at Montana State University devoted toward the study of microwave and
millimeter wave devices, circuits, systems and phenomena. The requested
equipment, a 110 GHz vector network analyzer (VNA), will form The cornerstone of
the microwave/millimeter wave lab at MSU, complementing the lab's outstanding
array of simulation tools currently being used for such research. The VNA is the
key piece of test equipment for such work, allowing researchers to determine the
vector reflection and transmission behavior of devices, circuits and systems. As
reflection and transmission characteristics are of fundamental importance in
high-frequency design, the VNA is an indispensable tool for microwave/millimeter
wave experimentalists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of research and training
activities in the area of microwave and millimeter wave electronics is currently
being conducted in the Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) department at
MSU. For example, novel power combining architectures suitable for millimeter
wave source development are being investigated through microwave modeling. The
equipment sought through this proposal will allow researchers to demonstrate
micromachined versions of such structures in their intended frequency range (75
GHz and above). In other present efforts, planar antenna technology is being
studied for use in ad hoc networks and in environmental sensing applications,
and low-cost frequency scalable micromachined receivers are being considered for
applications at millimeter and submillimeter-wave frequencies. The requested
equipment will be used extensively in these activities and will foster the
development of interdisciplinary efforts between the microwave/millimeter wave
group and research groups devoted toward biofilm engineering, material
development, and spatial-spectral holography for
example.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activities: The
PI has many years of experience in the design and analysis of planar
microwave/millimeter wave circuitry, and has established the necessary
simulation and modeling infrastructure to take full advantage of the requested
equipment. Combined with a precision probe station to be acquired through a
recent grant, and frequency extension modules sought through the M.J. Murdock
Charitable Trust, the requested VNA will establish a state-of-the art test bed
for on-wafer characterization to true submillimeter wave frequencies. The
activities that will be made possible through acquisition of the VNA will
contribute to the understanding of microwave and millimeter wave phenomenon and
to the development of devices, circuits and systems operating in this
increasingly important frequency range. Current projects include creative
efforts aimed at: (1) developing low-cost power sources, the lack of which is
widely regarded as the primary impediment to further development of the higher
millimeter wave range, (2) demonstrating the potential of low-cost micromachined
receiver circuits, (3) exploiting planar circuitry and novel materials for
environmental sensing in applications that cross various fields and (4)
developing high-resolution radar using spatial spectral
holography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the proposed activities: The
requested equipment will significantly enhance the research and training
activities at MSU by providing participants the ability to properly characterize
devices and circuits at millimeter wave frequencies. To the PI's knowledge, such
facilities do not presently exist in the state of Montana or in neighboring
states. To maximize the impact of the proposed activities within the region, the
facilities will be advertised and open to external users. The requested
equipment will provide the necessary resources to inspire and support
multidisciplinary collaborations between research groups including those whose
primary emphasis is far afield from microwave/millimeter wave engineering. For
example, MSU currently enjoys vibrant research programs in biofilms,
nanomaterial development and spatial-spectral holography. Creative interaction
between such groups and the microwave/millimeter wave group will emerge to make
notable contributions to the fields of microsensors, metamaterials, and high-
resolution radar. Establishment of the proposed facility will aid in the
recruitment and retention of faculty and graduate students. To this point, the
ECE department is recruiting two additional faculty members in 2004. As
candidates with background in telecommunications and VLSI design are sought,
there is a high probability that the number of personnel using the requested
equipment will grow. Finally, by enabling the testing of microfabricated
millimeter wave circuitry, the requested equipment will allow the
microwave/millimeter wave group to support the microfabrication facilities at
MSU. The microfabrication lab is undergoing a major upgrade thanks in part to a
recent two million dollar grant awarded to MSU researchers for this
purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;