* 0420199
* Arabidopsis 2010: High-Throughput Analysis of the Mystery Genes of CoA Metabolism
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* John Browse, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Burnap
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,163,656.00

This 2010 project will determine specific functions for 59 genes of CoA
metabolism. The genes include 44 encoding carboxy-CoA ligases and 15 encoding
carboxy-CoA thioesterases. Currently, only 11 of these 59 genes have known
functions. CoA-linked substrates are central to intermediary metabolism and to
pathways that produce structural building blocks of the cell and its organelles,
many chemicals that protect plants against biotic and abiotic stresses, and
several hormones. Catabolic pathways that recycle carbon also depend upon CoA.
Many CoA pathways have been resistant to biochemical and genetic investigation.
This project is important because it will provide biochemical and genetic access
points in many pathways to which the genes collectively contribute. Assigning
definitive functions for the genes will require parallel/integrated deployment
of four strategies: 1) Bioinformatics approaches including transcript profiling,
promoter motif analysis, and modeling of protein structures. 2) Biochemical
assays of recombinant proteins will identify substrates and define enzyme
kinetics. 3) Tissue-specific expression and subcellular-targeting information
will distinguish pathways utilizing different isozymes. 4) Reverse genetics
(knockout/RNAi/TILLING as appropriate) and overexpression will define the
broader biological context. These results will provide critical first openings
into a number of biochemical pathways in Arabidopsis and new information about
others.

Broader Impacts: Because many CoA-linked pathways are poorly understood
currently, the results from this project will facilitate investigations in
diverse areas of plant biology. Information developed under this project will be
available directly (http://www.ibc.wsu.edu/research/browse/NSF2010) and
incorporated into AraCyc and other TAIR databases. Biological resources will be
available through the Stock Centers. Eventually, better understanding of the 59
genes that are the focus of this research will contribute to improved
capabilities in many areas of agriculture, forestry and environmental
management. These broader impacts will be assisted by close contacts with
industry. Washington State University has a strong commitment to diversity in
student training, and has several active programs for recruitment of minority
and underrepresented groups. Both graduate and undergraduate students will
receive training in research techniques and scientific logic through their
involvement in this research project.