* 0420783
* Acquistion of Instrumentation for a DNA Sequencing and Analysis Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Christopher Kvaal, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 105,455.00

A grant has been awarded to Saint Cloud State University under the direction of
Dr. Christopher Kvaal to develop an Automated DNA Sequencing and Analysis
Facility. The ability to sequence DNA is now a necessary skill for wide areas of
biological study, from phylogeny to water quality to genetics/genomics to
medicine. In order to train the next generation of scientists in these diverse
fields, the capacity to perform DNA sequencing reactions in the classroom and
research lab is needed. The funding from this proposal will enable the purchase
of a DNA Analysis System, a 96 well thermocycler, and multiple computer
workstations for analysis of DNA sequence data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrumentation acquired with this grant will enable eight diverse research
projects at Saint Cloud State University to make continued progress. These
projects include plant and diatom systematics, immunology, cell and
developmental biology, and endocrine physiology. In the case of each of the
research projects, DNA sequence data is a critical component of the experimental
strategy for answering vital questions in these fields. In a few cases, the
acquisition of DNA sequence data for these projects will coincide with
undergraduate courses, allowing students being trained in-class in the area of
DNA sequencing to generate data for these research projects. The instrumentation
will also be used in undergraduate courses as an educational
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biology and Chemistry faculty at Saint Cloud State
University will be able to join together in research and education
collaborations using this instrumentation. Undergraduate and graduate education
is enhanced in two departments by having the ability to bridge the gap between
education and research, to allow students to go beyond learning to inquiry. They
will acquire the technical prowess to operate an automated DNA Sequencer and the
intellectual capacity to understand why sequencing is important. For many
students it can be said that they will have their "first" tangible discoveries
with this instrumentation. Students will see on a computer screen data they
generated, some of which has never been seen
before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;