* 0420353
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for an Urban Environmental Biogeochemistry Laboratory at Towson University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Susan Gresens, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 208,316.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at Towson University will acquire an X-ray fluorescence
spectrometer and a carbon-nitrogen analyzer with a solid sample combustion unit.
The specific projects that will be carried out using this equipment will address
the following questions: What is the relative importance of soil-derived trace
elements to the total trace element budget of the Chesapeake Bay? How does the
elemental stoichiometry of food sources impact the growth of stream
invertebrates along an urban to rural gradient? Can constructed wetlands be
effectively used for the removal of fertilizer-derived nitrogen from
intermittent runoff events. What role do biofilms play in the transfer of trace
elements to wildlife in storm water retention ponds? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
instruments were chosen because their software interfaces are approachable for
students at the undergraduate level. The carbon and nitrogen analyses are fast,
which means that students can accomplish more analyses and take on more sample-
intensive projects within the constraints of their schedules. These instruments
will also be utilized in numerous courses and will play a role in the newly
developed Forensic Chemistry program. They will be used for undergraduate
research by students in Chemistry, Environmental Science, Biology and Geology,
and will serve to support masters-level research in Environmental Science and
Biology. &lt;br/&gt;