* 0420921
* MRI:  Acquisition of Equipment to Construct Microfluidic Instruments for use In Chemistry, Biology, and Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Seth Fraden, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 157,500.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation supports Brandeis University
with the acquisition of a semi-conductor manufacturing equipment to enable the
development of microfluidic devices. These are devices, typically constructed of
a square inch of plastic, that contain microscopic plumbing designed to
precisely meter, mix, and store minute amounts of fluids. A bottleneck in
research in chemistry, biology, and materials science is often the limited
availability of the sample of interest, whether it be a new drug, protein, or
synthetic material. Microfluidic devices are a way of reducing a thousand fold
the volumes of liquids handled in current laboratories. Because these devices
are manufactured using semiconductor technology the economies of scale realized
by converting transistors from large vacuum tubes to microscopic semiconductors
are now being achieved in fluid handling technologies through the use of
microfluidics to miniaturize plumbing. The integration of microfluidics with
semiconductor technology is leading to the creation of commercial "lab-on-a-
chip" instruments and the transformation of laboratory practices in chemistry
and biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an example of an application of this
technology, one of the principal users of this equipment will manufacture
microfluidic devices for protein crystallization. Protein crystals are needed in
order to deduce the protein's structure, which is important in understanding the
function of proteins, as well as the drugs designed for therapeutic purposes.
The process of protein crystallization requires the trial of many different
solvent conditions and the use of microfluidics will permit a thousand fold
increase in throughput.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the
Major Research Instrumentation supports Brandeis University with the acquisition
of a semi-conductor manufacturing equipment to enable the development of
microfluidic devices . These microfluidic instruments consist of an elastomeric
polymer through which run channels of tens to hundreds of microns in height and
width. Different microfluidic components are designed, fabricated, and combined
into a single instrument (lab-on-a-chip) to precisely meter, mix, and store sub-
nanoliter amounts of sample, solvent, and other reagents. The suite of equipment
described above will provide the capability to design, manufacture, and operate
microfluidic instruments that are customized for each application. For example,
one of the principal users of this equipment will manufacture microfluidic
devices for protein crystallization, where the need to process many different
solvent conditions rapidly while consuming as little as possible of the protein
provides the motivation to develop microfluidic devices. Another user will
utilize microfluidic devices to study the kinetics of phase transitions in
colloidal liquid crystals, where the requirement to rapidly mix reagents in a
high resolution optical microscope drives the need for microfluidic devices,
while a third investigator will study coupling between drops undergoing chemical
reactions, where employment of microfluidic devices allows precise control of
both the drop size and spatial configuration of the drops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;