* 0420724
* MRI:    Acquisition of Instrumentation Systems for Education and Research in Image Processing and Understanding
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Orlando Hernandez, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2006
* USD 93,320.00

The School of Engineering at The College of New Jersey is committed to building
a solid foundation for education and research through the establishment of
state-of-the-art laboratory facilities. This project consists of the addition of
an Image Processing &amp; Understanding Laboratory at the College, which will
enable the teaching and research of image processing, as well as faculty
research in the areas of image understanding and computer vision. The proposed
laboratory infrastructure consists of multiprocessor computer workstations,
storage server and backup, image acquisition and reproduction equipment, and
computer-hosted Digital Signal Processing boards; all connected over a high
speed network with wireless capabilities. All the supporting software and
uninterruptible power supplies complete this equipment infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The acquisition of the proposed
equipment will allow the PI to establish a research program capable of
addressing issues related to algorithm development, and optimal implementation
of such algorithms, for image processing and computer vision. Specific thrust
areas to be targeted by the research will initially focus on the optimized
implementation of color textured image segmentation algorithms via the usage of
Multispectral Random Field feature sets in multiprocessing, networked, and non-
networked compute environments. Due to the information rich nature of Random
Field features, image processing and computer vision problems addressed by the
usage of these features are of interest to industry and defense. In addition,
the laboratory will be used to research the solution to issues in the areas of
medical and biotechnological image processing and robotics. An example of the
latter is the different topological system configurations for the remote
processing of imagery obtained by a robot or a network of
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Incorporation of state-of-the-art
image processing and understanding facilities into undergraduate curricula and
Digital Image Processing courses will allow students to gain deeper insight into
a host of image processing procedures and algorithms by obtaining a solid
understanding and feedback that is both gratifying and motivational. Integration
of theory and design is one of the cornerstones of the well-balanced engineering
education received by students at the College. The quality of student senior
design projects will be greatly enhanced through access to an Image Processing
&amp; Understanding Laboratory for evaluating, prototyping, and testing the
implementation of novel concepts related to the field and germane to their
projects; and there will be ample opportunities for involvement of undergraduate
students in research. Through the PI's involvement with different minority
initiatives, many outreach activities involving the laboratory are envisioned.
Due to the visual nature of image processing, this body of knowledge lends
itself, in a simplified way, to serve as an attractor of underrepresented
minorities and K-12 students to the study of science, technology, and
engineering. Through established relationships, collaboration between the PI and
researchers at the University of South Florida is also
envisioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;