* 0420022
* SBIR Phase I:  Device for the Activation of Nanoparticle-based Cancer Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Dennis O'Neal, NANOSPECTRA BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 02/28/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I research project will
develop a device for the in-vivo activation of nanoparticles for the minimally-
invasive treatment of solid tumors and for the prophylactic treatment of
potential routes of metastatic spread with minimal damage to surrounding
tissues. Nanoshells are a new class of nanoparticles that can be designed to
absorb light in the near-infrared, wavelengths where tissue is minimally
absorptive. Prior nanoshell research has demonstrated its promise for a
significant new class of cancer therapies. However, the optical and thermal
properties of this new class of materials, the interaction of these properties
with the optical properties of human tissue, and, in particular, this
interaction at near-infrared wavelengths, are not well understood. This Phase I
research will first determine the properties of this new class of materials in
vivo and then optimize laser power, laser pulse characteristics (repetition
rate, duration and duty cycle), and fiber optic delivery
modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of this project will be
in the area of cancer therapy. The nanoshell-based therapy is expected to be
useful for a broad range of cancer types, with significant advantages relative
to other treatments.