* 0420575
* Nonlinear Feedbacks in Coupled Element Cycles During Eutrophication of Shallow Coastal Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Robert Howarth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2010
* USD 1,699,977.00

0420575&lt;br/&gt;Howarth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current conceptual models of N
pollution are inadequate for shallow marine ecosystems (depths &lt; 10 m) that
are typically dominated by benthic primary producers such as seagrasses,
macroalgae and benthic microalgae. Major nonlinear changes in the coupling of
element cycles occur in these ecosystems as they receive increasing external N
loads from anthropogenic changes in surrounding watersheds. Numerous
biogeochemical feedbacks can accelerate eutrophication and aggravate some of its
consequences including increased incidences of harmful algal blooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A consortium of researchers from Cornell University,
University of Virginia and The Ecosystems Center in Woods Hole, Ma will take
advantage of a whole-ecosystem "experiment" in which external N loading to a
79-hectare coastal system on Cape Cod, MA, will approximately double over the
next 3-5 years, as a plume of N-polluted groundwater reaches the estuary. This
"experiment" reflects the transition from low to moderate, and ultimately to
high, nutrient loading, and spans the continuum of eutrophication stages within
the ecosystem zones. A study of the recovery of the shallow portions of a
severely eutrophied ecosystem (Boston Harbor) following diversion of wastewater
offshore (N-loading decreased 10-fold in 2000) will also be continued. Process
and flux measurements will focus on non-linear feedbacks and interactions among
the cycles of N, C, P, O, S, Fe, Mn, and Si, along with the relationship of
these cycles to biotic structure during different stages of eutrophication.
Modeling at both the process and whole-system scales will integrate the
research, and make the results accessible to the management community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has a significant broader impact since N
pollution (and the resulting eutrophication) is one of the greatest threats to
the ecological integrity and functioning of coastal marine ecosystems, with two-
thirds of coastal rivers and bays in the U.S. moderately or severely degraded
from N pollution. &lt;br/&gt;