* 0420785
* MRI: Acquisition of a X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Multidisciplinary Materials Research at the University of Michigan
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* David Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 377,363.00

The project will lead to the acquisition of a X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) instrument, which represents a major advance in commercially available
instrumentation. XPS has become a critical technique in the characterization of
the chemical composition, oxidation and bonding states in various materials,
including polymers, catalysts, metals, and semiconductors. The XPS instrument
will provide real time chemical state and elemental imaging capabilities using
the full range of pass energies and multi-point analysis from either real time
or scanned images without the need for sample translation. The instrumentation
further comes with the ability to obtain data over a large field of view, while
maintaining photoelectron and Auger peak positions. The initial research foci of
the instrument will include fundamental studies of: designer surfaces for
biomedical applications; advanced micro-probes for neural prostheses; chemo-
mechanical nanopatterning of polymer substrates for cell culture; surface-
modified nano-fibrous scaffolds for tissue engineering applications; surface-
modified microfabricated chemical analysis devices; controlled anchoring of DNA
molecules at chemically tailored surfaces; coaxial semiconductor nanowires;
smart surfaces assembled from molecular switches; directed self assembly of
nanostructures by focused ion beam patterning; fuel processors for PEM fuel
cells; lean NOx traps for automotive emission control; semiconductor alloy
surfaces; surfaces and interfaces for electronic devices; and GaInNAs for high
efficiency solar cells. The instrument will also have broad impact upon the
research and educational infrastructure at U of M. Most faculty involved in the
project have Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP) and Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) students in their research groups actively
working on characterization of materials. The instrument will be used in summer
research projects for minority high school students and young women. For
example, a number of students from under-represented groups participating in the
NASA Summer High School Apprenticeship Program (SHARP) have worked on projects
with instruments at the University of Michigan's Electron Microbeam Analysis
Laboratory (EMAL), which will be the home of the new XPS instrument. As soon as
the proposed instrument is installed, it will be included in this program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to the acquisition of a X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) instrument with advanced capabilities. XPS has
become a critical technique in the surface characterization of various
materials, including polymers, catalysts, metals, and semiconductors. The XPS
instrument will enable the real time chemical state and elemental imaging of
surfaces. In essence, it will allow us to determine and image the chemical
composition of the outermost layers of a material. Initially, the
instrumentation will support research in the areas of biomaterials, surface
science, nanoscience, catalysis, and fuel cells. The instrument will also have
broad impact upon the research and educational infrastructure at U of M. The new
XPS instrument will be used in the undergraduate and graduate curriculum, as
well as in summer research projects for minority high school students and young
women. &lt;br/&gt;