* 0420395
* The Acquisition of Equipment to Proccess and Image Brain Tissue for Use in Undergraduate Behavioral Neuroscience Research and Training
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Fay Guarraci, Southwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 171,109.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Southwestern
University will be able to significantly expand the analytical capabilities of
the behavioral neuroscience program. This grant will be used to acquire
equipment for on-site processing and imaging of brain tissue, and will be used
in research projects designed to identify the contribution of neurotransmitter
systems to the display of female rodent mating behavior. This research will
advance the understanding of the neurobiology of mammalian mating behavior, as
well as prepare undergraduates for future careers in science. Neuroscience is a
fast growing and technically demanding science. The rapid development of
technology in neuroscience presents a challenge to smaller colleges and
universities with limited funds for research.

The state of the art histological equipment acquired through the MRI program
will allow Southwestern to provide an accurate portrayal of neuroscience to the
students. Undergraduate students will use and benefit directly from the
technology and will receive the one-on-one mentoring that takes place at small,
liberal arts institutions. In order to cultivate enthusiasm for behavioral
neuroscience at Southwestern, as well as to prepare students for future careers
in science, students must be engaged in basic research and have access to the
equipment that is required to produce publishable results. As part of degree
requirements, honors' theses, and regular coursework, students are already
investigating the physiological factors that influence mating behavior in rats.
Access to brain processing and imaging equipment will provide the students with
the opportunity to conduct these projects at the caliber required by the peer-
review of the scientific community.

The rat represents an excellent model system to study how the brain controls
behavior because research has established a foundation of basic neuroanatomy and
a thorough description of the behavioral patterns of the laboratory rat. Recent
research has begun to identify the brain areas that are critical for female
mating behavior in the rat. In the present project, it is hypothesized that
monoaminergic neurotransmission in these and other critical brain regions
modulates the expression of female mating behavior. Injecting psychoactive
substances directly into the brain prior to tests of mating behavior is an
effective method to test this hypothesis. After careful training, undergraduate
students can study the neural circuits and neurochemicals involved in the
expression of various aspects of mating behavior by using this method. The
equipment acquired with this grant will allow students at both Southwestern and
St. Edward's University, a nearby small institution that will be collaborating
on the project, to conduct such experiments and prepare the results for
publication. In summary, having access to state of the art equipment will allow
students and faculty members at Southwestern and St. Edward's to continue to be
active members of the scientific community through collaborations and peer-
reviewed publications.