* 0420933
* MRI:     Acquisition of a High-Performance Laser Scanner for Research and Education in Civil Engineering, Architecture, Robotics and Computer Graphics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Omer Akin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2008
* USD 207,413.00

This proposal, acquiring a high-end scanner device for high-precision mapping
and visualization applications, supports research in various projects in civil
engineering and architecture ((re-)engineering in as-built environments),
computer graphics (body motion), robotics (humanoid robotics locomotion), and
haptics (force-based manipulation) among others. The research constitutes a
substantial change in approaching disciplines where the loss of information (due
to current-generation site) and equipment form major barriers. Improving the
accuracy and quantity of information capture for direct applications in
construction management, for object recognition and classification, and for
model building more broadly, the work addresses the following
projects:&lt;br/&gt;Information technology enabled construction management with
research on early detection and management of defects at construction sites, and
utilization of advanced technologies in dynamic service
networks,&lt;br/&gt;Computational building evaluation in architecture with
simulation of building designs and visualization of as-built
environments,&lt;br/&gt;Computer graphics and humanoid robotics with specific
research on high fidelity animation, perception/performance experiments in
virtual environments, humanoid locomotion among obstacles and force-based
manipulation, and&lt;br/&gt;3D perception with specific on-going and future
research on model building, object recognition, and
classification.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The infrastructure, supporting
research across multiple departments, includes improvement on 3D scanning
technology and 3D content acquisition, and offers education and training in the
use of the new scanning technology and its applications. The involvement of
undergraduates appears particularly suitable due to the promise of new
engineering approaches.&lt;br/&gt;