* 0420553
* Acquisition of 2 Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometers
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* David Janos, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 252,130.00

&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to the University of Miami under the
direction of Dr. Leonel Sternberg for the acquisition of two stable isotope
ratio mass spectrometers. These two instruments will provide isotopic analysis
of samples from several funded research projects at the University of Miami and
other institutions. The two instruments will also serve as teaching tools for
graduate students involved in the above projects, as well as introducing
undergraduate students to state of the art scientific techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The acquisition of these automated instruments will
greatly facilitate the generation of data by different research groups at UM.
First, by being an in-house facility, it will greatly increase the speed by
which results are obtained. Second, the instruments will be tailored to the
specific analysis necessary by each group. Lastly, being automated systems,
these instruments will greatly decrease the cost of sample analysis. The
research projects that will be advanced by the utilization of this instrument
include research in topics such as: water conservation in the Everglades and
savanna ecosystems of central Brazil, development of analytical tools towards
the understanding of past and present climate change and aspects of nitrogen
metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; These two instruments will also serve an
important part in the University of Miami commitment towards graduate and
undergraduate education. Graduate students will have full access to the
instrumentation once trained in their operation. Graduate students will realize
the full potential of this "high tech" approach towards solving problems ranging
in scale from metabolic biology to global ecology. This will be one of the many
efforts at the University of Miami to prepare our graduate students towards
understanding the application of state of the art scientific techniques to
biological problems. In addition one of the CoPI's has several outreach programs
focused in bringing under represented minorities to the research experience and
these instruments will be utilized towards this goal. The impact of the research
utilizing these two instruments will cover several important areas such as water
management in South Florida, biomedical aspects of metabolism, climate change
and hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;