* 0420992
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Design and Processing Characteristics of Novel Three Dimensional Fibrous Preforms for Composite Reinforcement
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Heshmat Aglan, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 34,201.00

0420992 &lt;br/&gt;Adanur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative project by the Dr. Sabit Adanur, Department of Textile
Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama, Dr. Heshmat Aglan, Tuskegee
University, Tuskegee, Alabama and Drs. Levent Gumusel, and Hasan Bas, Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey. They
plan to characterize, automate and optimize the novel three-dimensional hybrid
weaving/knitting machines that combine knitting and weaving principles to
produce novel 3D woven/knit structures using the state of the art electronic and
robotic control concepts. The hybrid machine motions and fabric processing
parameters will be defined and studied. Novel fabric prototypes will be
fabricated to establish the basic knowledge to understand the motions of active
parts and their results on the production of 3D fabric structures. Design
defects and problems will be identified and solved. Three major industrial yarns
(carbon, glass and aramid) will be evaluated for their formability in the hybrid
3D weaving/knitting machine. Variations of yarn stress along the yarn path will
be studied for different fabric thickness, stitch length, machine speed, and
needle strokes. Interactions and relations between knittability and machine
settings will be investigated. The limitations of stitch length for each yarn
type will be determined. A theoretical model, which could predict the knitting
performance based on yarn characteristics, will be generated. Manufacturing
principles of a patented novel hybrid structure will be characterized and
established. The preparation, characterization and understanding the
capabilities of this novel structure will open up new opportunities for fiber-
based composites. With the proposed work, a new 3D fibrous structure and its
manufacturing method will be introduced to the literature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader Impacts: The novel 3D hybrid fabric
structures and the machines used to produce them will be included in the
material of textile engineering courses. Undergraduate and graduate students can
use these machines for their projects. Several textile companies will be
interested in the outcome of the proposed work. The results will be mutually
beneficial to the participating countries. This project is jointly funded by
OISE and the Division of Manufacturing and Industrial
Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;