* 0420359
* Acquisition of Biology Instruments for Medgar Evers College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Margaret Carroll, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 164,204.00

A grant has been awarded to CUNY Medgar Evers College under the direction of
Drs. Edward J. Catapane and Margaret A. Carroll and with the participation of
Dr. Ebere Nduka for support of acquiring instruments to expand the scope of
faculty research and to enrich our students, who are historically
underrepresented in sciences. To accomplish these goals, the following
instruments: (1) a HPLC System with a Fluorescence Detector, (2) an Atomic
Absorption Spectrometer and (3) a Microplate Reader will be
purchased.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this proposal,
utilizing the equipment purchased, is to advance an ongoing research project
studying the physiological and biochemical effects of metal and organic
pollutants on the American oyster, Crassostrea virginica, in Jamaica Bay, NY,
with broader implications on ecological reclamation and reestablishing animal
life in polluted environments. Jamaica Bay was once the "oyster capital of the
United States." The three faculty members in the areas of Cell Biology,
Physiology and Endocrinolgy are collaborating on this research project. The
Atomic Absorption Spectrometer will be used to quantify metal levels in water,
sediment and animal tissues. The HPLC with fluorescence detector and the
Microplate Reader will be used to identify and quantify biogenic amines and
other neuroendocrine chemicals in oyster tissues as well as to determine tissue
levels of organic pollutants and various biomarkers of stress associated with
toxicant exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of the instrumentation will
have a broader impact because research aimed at advancing the understanding of
mechanisms that allow oysters to survive or not survive stresses of toxicant
exposure is important to restoring a healthy ecosystem to Jamaica Bay. Just as
important will be the benefits gained by increasing the awareness of our
students to the value of a healthy ecosystem and the necessity for devising
methods for remedying and preventing further environmental damage. Giving
undergraduates, especially those who have been historically underrepresented in
sciences, access to modem scientific instrumentation and opportunities to
participate in exciting research projects provides an educational environment
that not only upgrades their training but assists in recruiting bright young
people into science. The acquisition of these three modem instruments will
greatly improve the efficiency and productivity of faculty research projects and
will have an even boarder impact on the number of women and minority
undergraduate students that gain access to sophisticated science training and
ultimately participate in biological and biologically related science
enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;