* 0420768
* Chemical Vapor Deposition of Metallic Films at Low Temperatures:  Precursor Synthesis and Hydrogen-Assisted Reaction Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Gregory Girolami, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 605,288.00

This project aims for greater understanding of thin film growth/deposition,
achievement of new routes to chemical vapor deposition of metal diboride thin
films, and atomic layer deposition (ALD) of copper, tantalum, and other metallic
films, all at low substrate temperatures. The scientific goal is to understand
the chemistry of film formation using in situ optical, mass, and electron
spectroscopies. The approach involves four parallel efforts: 1) New precursor
molecules will be synthesized that are designed for the growth of Cu, Ta, and
other metals using hydrogen plasma enhanced atomic layer deposition, and for the
growth of ZrB2, MgB2, and other diboride alloys using hydrogen plasma enhanced
CVD. 2) Film growth strategies using the new precursors will be developed:
deposition of Cu and Ta by hydrogen plasma enhanced ALD, CrB2 by thermal CVD
(chemical vapor deposition), and MgB2 by hydrogen plasma enhanced CVD. CrB2 and
MgB2 growth will be investigated using precursors Cr(B3H8) 2 and Mg(B3H8) 2
recently discovered by the PIs. Heteroepitaxial growth of single crystal films
of ZrB2 and CrB2 on Si(111) and MgB2 films on ZrB2 or CrB2 will be explored, as
well as the synthesis of ZrB2 or CrB2 nanotubes using multi-walled C nanotubes
as a template. 3) Film formation pathways will be analyzed using in situ
spectroscopies to determine the mechanisms that govern ALD and CVD processes.
Surface reactions will be analyzed using downstream mass spectroscopy,
reflection IR absorption, quartz crystal microbalance, temperature programmed
desorption, and Auger electron spectroscopy. Where applicable, isotopic labeling
(D for H) will be utilized. Both static (post-growth) and dynamic (during
growth) surfaces will be studied, including the use of time-modulated fluxes.
Conformal coverage experiments on trench substrates will be used to extract the
surface reaction probability of precursors, as a function of temperature and the
concurrent flux of atomic hydrogen. Nucleation, composition, and surface
roughness will be studied using real time spectroscopic ellipsometry. 4) Film
structure and properties will be evaluated, including crystal structure,
electrical conductivity, and performance as impurity diffusion barriers.
Deposition, annealing, and analysis of structures consisting of Cu/Ta/Si or
Cu/CrB2/Si will be carried out to determine Cu in-diffusion into Si. %%% The
project addresses fundamental materials science and chemistry research issues
associated with electronic/photonic materials having technological relevance,
and emphasizes the integration of research and education. The project will
support four graduate students, and 1-2 undergraduates per year conducting
summer projects or senior theses. The UIUC SURGE (Support of Under-represented
Groups in Engineering) and WISE (Women in Science and Engineering) programs will
be utilized to assist with broadening participation by under-represented groups.
Research results will be broadly disseminated by presentations at international
conferences and by publication in scientific journals. Industrial
microelectronics organizations, e.g., IBM, Intel, Novellus, or Applied
Materials, will be visited to present and discuss project results to enhance
university/industry interactions. The project is co-supported by the MPS/DMR and
MPS/CHE Divisions. ***