* 0420317
* Acquisition of an X-ray Diffraction System for Research at an Undergraduate Woman's College
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Rebecca Ambers, Sweet Briar College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2007
* USD 73,057.00

0420317&lt;br/&gt;Ambers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award, made through the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, provides support for the acquisition of
an X-ray diffraction (XRD) system, as well as a mixer/mill for sample
preparation. This equipment will be used to explore connections between clay
mineralogy and geomorphic processes that are important in understanding and
predicting landscape response to natural and anthropogenic stressors. The XRD
system is an important addition to Sweet Briar College's science facilities and
will enhance its ability to recruit and train undergraduate women to be
effective scientists through participation in hands-on laboratory projects and
research in environmental science, archaeology, and physics. One research
project enabled by this award will use XRD to determine the provenance of fine-
grained reservoir sediment within a large but well-studied watershed. This
information will be used to investigate how the primary areas of erosion in the
watershed changed over time in response to logging and storm-triggered landslide
events. A second project will explore the influence of clay mineralogy and other
petrologic and physical properties of alluvium on stream bank stability,
cohesion, and form. The focus will be on eastern U.S. streams with bank
materials having simple clay mineralogy dominated by a single mineral but will
also include some streams with mixed
mineralogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;