* 0420905
* Acquisition of a Computer Cluster for Geospace Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Amitava Bhattacharjee, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* kile baker
* 07/31/2007
* USD 261,439.00

This project will purchase a 100 node, AMD Opteron based, computer cluster for
geospace and plasma modeling. The cluster will be used by four research groups
in the University of New Hampshire Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and
Space (EOS) who study related processes with similar tools. Specifically, the
cluster will be used to model Earth's magnetosphere - ionosphere - thermosphere
system and its interaction with the solar wind and the interplanetary magnetic
field, simulations of magnetic reconnection and turbulence in plasmas, modeling
Earth's ring current, kinetic modeling of collisionless shocks and the
acceleration of particles, modeling the impact of cosmic rays on Earth's
climate, and simulations of strongly coupled dusty plasmas. The computer cluster
will significantly enhance the University of New Hampshire's ability to model
these complex and highly coupled systems. Most of the simulation codes that will
be used are already mature, and the impact of the cluster on scientific
productivity will therefore be immediate. The research to be performed on the
cluster has societal impacts because it is directly related to problems related
to space weather and it will improve our ability to forecast and nowcast space
weather, and to understand and to mitigate its effects. The National Space
Weather Program explicitly calls for the development of such capabilities. The
cluster will also make an impact on the education of students in all physical
disciplines at UNH by giving them access to a state-of-the art computing
facility. This project will thus directly contribute to the education of the
next generation of scientists.