* 0420371
* Collaborative Research:    ITWF - Creating an Inclusive Learning Environment:    Enhancing Retention of Women and Minorities in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Sandra DeLoatch, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 08/31/2009
* USD 167,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ITWF Program - FY04&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420371, PI
Sandra DeLoatch, Norfolk State U&lt;br/&gt;Title: Creating an Inclusive Learning
Environment: Enhancing Retention of Women and Minorities in Computer
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Projects:&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420365, PI
Donald Davis, Old Dominion U.&lt;br/&gt;CNS 0420371, PI Sandra DeLoatch, Norfolk
State U.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Old Dominion University and Norfolk State
University have been awarded an ITWF grant to conduct a collaborative four-year
implementation project designed to create an inclusive learning environment in
computer science and thereby increase retention of women and minority
undergraduate students. The two institutions will create an inclusive learning
environment through (a) strengthening faculty-student and student-peer
relationships using collaborative and multicultural teaching and learning
practices and (b) strengthening student self-efficacy, optimism, career
management, and collaboration and coping skills. All beginning CS students will
participate in a required, semester-long class that presents a realistic preview
of the challenges of being a computer science major, techniques and skills for
coping with such challenges, training in attitudes and beliefs that foster
persistence, and use of role models to describe the career rewards that are
possible in computer science. Faculty will be trained in "wise schooling"
techniques to foster inclusiveness. Faculty will also include pair programming
and collaborative learning in programming classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;