* 0420513
* Acquisition of a High Performance Shared-Memory Computer for Computational Science and Engineering at the University of New Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Marc Ingber, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 350,378.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of New Mexico under the direction of
Dr. Hua Guo for partial support of the acquisition of a high performance shared-
memory computer for computational science and engineering at the University of
New Mexico (UNM). This grant will be used to purchase and maintain a state-of-
the-art supercomputer to meet the research and educational needs at UNM. The new
equipment will be housed at UNM's High Performance Computing Center, accessible
by all faculty and students on campus. This equipment will greatly enhance the
computational capabilities of multiple research groups-enabling them to tackle
new and more challenging problems, particularly in bio-related areas. It will
also substantially improve graduate and undergraduate training in the area of
high performance computing by providing new research opportunities for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the University of New Mexico, there exists a
diverse group of investigators engaged in computationally intensive advanced
research projects in physics, chemistry, biology, and computer science. In
addition to these traditional domains of research, there is a growing trend
towards interdisciplinary collaborations to address complex problems in systems
biology and nanotechnology. The research described in this proposal includes
biologically-motivated research projects that span conventional departmental
boundaries such as computational biophysics and biochemistry, phylogenetics, and
virtual drug screening, as well as work in materials science and the quantum
control of complex systems. In addition, education programs in high performance
computing will be closely integrated with research in several areas to take
advantage of the equipment. The acquisition of this instrument will have a broad
and positive impact on the research and education programs at this minority-
serving University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;