* 0420859
* Acquisition of a Nanomechanical Testing Platform to Establish a User Center for Nanomecanical Characterization Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Sheila Grant, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2007
* USD 293,933.00

The Nanomechanical Testing Platform addresses the fundamental understanding of
the properties of materials at the nanometer length scale. The system includes
the Hysitron TriboIndenter as a stand-alone, nanomechanical test instrument that
utilizes a fully integrated indenter head and atomic force microscope (AFM)
combination. Other accessories integrated with the Triboindenter to support many
different nanomechanical characterization techniques for a variety of
applications include nanoDMA and modulus mapping module for investigating time
dependent properties of materials using a dynamic testing technique; TriboAE
module to monitor fracture, delamination and phase transformations that occur
under nanoscale contacts using the acoustic waves emitted during the phenomena;
Feedback Control Module will allow to operate in closed loop load or
displacement control for testing during creep or stress relaxation; Thermal
Control Heating/Cooling Stage and a Vacuum Chuck. Nano-mechanical testing in
conjunction with nano-scale surface imaging is a powerful way to analyze
extremely small volumes of materials or surfaces with a very high resolution.
The University of Missouri Columbia has identified Nano-science and Nano-devices
as a major research thrust area.&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual merit: With these
instruments researchers will be able to perform quasi-static testing to study
elastic, plastic, and fracture response of both hard and very soft materials
during indentation at the nanometer length scale. They will be able to image and
quantitatively study surface phenomena such as surface wear by rubbing and
scratching. In addition researchers can study time dependent properties of
materials over a range of temperatures. It is envisaged that the instrumentation
will be used for a wide range of current and future research in areas such as
property gradients across composite material interphases and interfaces in
welded and joined materials, surface topography in MEMS devices, adhesion and
frictional characteristics of electronic devices of micrometer length scale,
surface characterization of biological sensors, interfacial properties across
layered synthetic and biological materials, mechanical property variations
within and across phases in ceramic-polymer composites and investigation of
mechanical properties of self-assembled nanostructured materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A significant number of graduate and
undergraduate students will be exposed to the usage and application of state-of-
the-art instrumentation through classroom instruction and research. This
experience should sharpen their understanding of materials behavior. This
instrumentation will foster interdisciplinary research. The whole range of
proposed instruments will form the proposed Nanomechanical Characterization User
Center. It should be emphasized that the user facility will be open to faculty
and students of all colleges and the medical school on MU campus. The MU campus
has made vigorous efforts to recruit students from regional college programs,
including those with predominantly Black and Hispanic enrollment. Our group has
established collaborative program with Lincoln University (HBCU). The MU is also
committed to the recruitment and retention of minority and female students in
Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;