* 0420765
* MRI: Development of Instrumentation for Plasma-Assisted Liquid Phase Epitaxy of III-Nitrides
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Kathleen Kash, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 263,001.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports Case Western
University to develop a novel, plasma-assisted liquid phase epitaxy (PLPE)
system for the growth of gallium nitride and related materials. The established
methods of liquid phase epitaxy (LPE) will be combined with recently developed
plasma assisted melt growth methods to provide a system for growing device-
quality single crystal layers up to 5 cm in diameter. To accomplish this end, a
highly versatile PLPE growth system with a near-atmospheric pressure plasma
source, temperature and temperature gradient control, and provision for linear
and rotational motion will be designed and built. Some of the advantages of
Plasma Assisted Liquid Phase Epitaxy (PLPE) are: (1) they are much less
expensive to build and to run than growth systems for systems; (2) higher growth
rates and higher quality material; (3) simplicity and in environmental clean;
(4) potential for application to other classes of semiconductor materials new
possibilities for a wide variety of novel materials research. In addition, there
are potential applications for important technologies such as ultraviolet and
blue lasers, and high-temperature and high power electronics. The new
instrumentation will have broader impact on the nation's academic research
infrastructure by providing a new technology for pioneering materials growth
research. Experience has shown that the LPE process is a rapid, cost-effective
technique for investigation of innovative materials research concepts, and
therefore is especially well suited to the university research environment.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports Case
Western University with the development a novel, plasma-assisted liquid phase
epitaxy (PLPE) system for the growth of gallium nitride and related materials.
The PLPE growth system will operate with a near-atmospheric pressure plasma
source, temperature and temperature gradient control, and provision for linear
and rotational motion will be designed and built. Some of the advantages of the
new instrument are: (1) economic; (2) higher growth rates and higher quality
material; (3) simplicity and in environmental clean; (4) application to other
classes of semiconductor materials. The system will open new possibilities for a
wide variety of novel materials research. In addition, there are potential
applications for important technologies such as ultraviolet and blue lasers, and
high-temperature and high power electronics. The new instrumentation will have
broader impact on the nation's academic research infrastructure by providing a
new technology for pioneering materials growth research. It is especially well
suited to the university research environment.

