* 0420393
* Acquisition of an X-Band Satellite Data Groundstation for Regional Multidisciplinary Research, Training and Services in Maine
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Mary-Kate Beard-Tisdale, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Shelby Walker
* 07/31/2008
* USD 330,000.00

0420393 Thomas This Major Research Instrumentation award to University of Maine
(UM) provides funds for acquisition of an X-band ground station for the real-
time reception of the latest generation of earth observation satellite data. The
data provide multi-spectral visible and infrared measurements of the ocean,
coastal zones, forests and atmosphere. In collaboration with Rutgers University,
which operates a similar system, the University of Maine group plans to offer
24/7 satellite-derived products for northeast U.S. ocean observation, merging
research and operational requirements. The X-band capability significantly
improves both resolution and information over an existing L-band facility at UM,
and builds on the technical and educational expertise it has generated,
including a major cross-departmental research and teaching program. The broader
impacts of the acquisition are extensive, involving both basic and applied
research programs by state agencies, non-profit organizations and universities
in Maine and nearby states, in addition to NSF. Examples include studies of
harmful algal blooms and storm impacts in the coastal environment, and forest
vegetation and agricultural development on land. The real-time capability
provides important support to shipboard sampling programs with real-time images
of surface ocean properties. University of Maine is providing 30% of the costs
of the project from non-federal funds. This proposal is supported by the
Division of Ocean Sciences at NSF. ***