* 0420825
* MRI: Acquisition of 13.5 Gb/s Bit-Error-Rate Tester, Agilent N4901A, to Investigate Non-stationary Optical Noise Characteristics in Ultra-high Speed Optical Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Reza Khosravani, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2005
* USD 148,682.00

Funds are requested to purchase an Agilent serial BERT in order to significantly
improve the educational and research capabilities of the Communications and
Photonics laboratories at Sonoma State University.

Intellectual Merit of the Acquisition and Use of Requested Instrument - Optical
fiber communications have enjoyed an explosive growth in recent years thanks to
the excellent fiber characteristics-low loss and high bandwidth. Recently, 3.7
Tbit/s (3700 Gbit/s) transmission over transoceanic distances over a single
fiber have been demonstrated. Nevertheless, migration to ultra-high bit rate
(beyond 10 Gbit/s) single channel or ultra-high capacity multi-channel
transmission systems is shown to be challenging. One of the biggest hurdles to
overcome is the required signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver. The energy that
is carried in a bit decreases linearly as the bit-rate increases. Fiber
nonlinearity limits the maximum optical power that can be launched into the
fiber. At the same time, both electrical and optical components of the receiver
noise increase with the signal bandwidth. Therefore, the signal-to-noise ratio
at the receiver degrades quickly as the capacity increases. In this project, we
investigate the optical noise characteristics of a high capacity transmission
system, and explore techniques to reduce the noise contribution in bit-error-
rate. We will revisit the realistic.asymmetric and non-
stationary.characteristics of the optical noisewhich have been so far
overlooked. The result of this investigation potentially will have a profound
effect on noise management in optical systems and enable much higher data
transmission over the fiber.

The Photonics and the Communications laboratories at Sonoma State University
provide a unique environment to study optical noise characteristics at ultra-
high bit rates. Due to its proximity to many large photonics and
telecommunications corporations, SSU has been fortunate to receive significant
amount (over two million dollars) of support and donations from the industry.
Although our current system allows us to transmit data at 10 Gbit/s, the labs
lack the fundamental equipment to drive the transmitters and to measure the
signal quality and system performance at the receivers. Agilent N4901A is a
newly designed bit-error-rate tester that provides an accurate measurement of
the crucial parameters of the transmission system. Without this equipment, a
considerable portion of our lab will be underutilized and significant research
opportunities will be missed.

Broader Impacts of the Acquisition and Use of Requested Instrument - Agilent
N4901A would also be an invaluable educational instrument for our undergraduate
and graduate programs. Most of the optical fiber degrading effects, including
chromatic dispersion, PMD and fiber nonlinearities, are only detectable at high
bit rates. The graduate-level classes including "Optical Fiber Communications"
and "Advanced Photonics Devices" as well as undergraduate classes will
significantly benefit from the acquisition of this equipment. Moreover, female
students who represent ~70% of the student body at Sonoma State University can
take advantage of the research opportunities to become competitive on a national
level. By conducting research that is of special interest to the local industry,
acquisition of this instrument paves the way to enhance our relationship with
the industry, and improve the career prospects of the students.

