* 0420377
* MRI:  Acquisition of Instrumentation for a Materials Research and Education Center at Western Washington University
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Milton From, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 12/31/2007
* USD 398,773.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program will enable Western
Washington University to purchase of a suite of instruments to support a varied
program of research involving faculty and students in five different research
groups at Western Washington University (WWU). The instrumentation will be
housed in a new Materials Research and Education Center (MREC) and will be an
integral part of a college-wide initiative promoting cross-disciplinary research
in materials science. The instrumentation is necessary to support research in
three departments (Chemistry, Physics and Engineering Technology), ranging from
polymer science to magnetic materials. In addition, the requested
instrumentation will affect about ten other research groups and be used in about
ten undergraduate science and engineering courses. The intellectual merit of
these activities is seen in the significant contributions each makes to the
knowledge base in their respective disciplines, which is particularly noteworthy
when one considers that the research will be conducted primarily by
undergraduate students. This award will also have a broad impact in bridging the
gap between classroom and research lab. A considerable component of the project
is aimed at training students in the use of state-of-the-art instrumentation in
laboratory coursework and involving undergraduates in meaningful, cutting-edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program will enable Western Washington University (WWW) to
purchase of a suite of instruments to support a varied program of research
involving faculty and students in five different research groups at WWU. The
instrumentation will be housed in a new Materials Research and Education Center
(MREC) and will be an integral part of a college-wide initiative promoting
cross-disciplinary research in materials science. The instrumentation is
necessary to support research in three departments (Chemistry, Physics and
Engineering Technology), ranging from polymer science to magnetic thin films. In
addition, the requested instrumentation will affect ten other research groups
and be used in about ten undergraduate science and engineering
courses.&lt;br/&gt;Specific research projects that will directly benefit from
the requested instrumentation include:&lt;br/&gt; Structural studies of new
catalytic, organic electronic, and magnetic thin film systems.&lt;br/&gt;
Thermochemical characterization of polymers, nanoparticle-based biosensors,
liquid crystal systems and hydrodesulfurization catalysts.&lt;br/&gt; Sample
preparation for scanning electron microscopy imaging of nanomaterials,
biological, and geological specimens.&lt;br/&gt; Preparation of organic and
inorganic thin films and fabrication of micropatterned substrates for studies of
organic electronics and sensor applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of these activities is seen in the significant contributions
each makes to the knowledge base in their respective disciplines, which is
particularly noteworthy when one considers that the research will be conducted
primarily by undergraduate students. This grant will also have a broad impact in
bridging the gap between classroom and research lab. A considerable component of
the project is aimed at training students in the use of state-of-the-art
instrumentation in laboratory coursework and involving undergraduates in
meaningful, cutting-edge research.&lt;br/&gt;