* 0420974
* NEESR-SG: Self-Centering Damage-Free Seismic-Resistant Steel Frame Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Erik Vanmarcke, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,000,000.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will investigate a family of
innovative self-centering (SC) steel frame systems with&lt;br/&gt;the potential
to withstand the currently accepted design basis earthquake (DBE) for buildings
without damage.&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are: to develop fundamental
knowledge of the seismic behavior of SC steel frame systems;
to&lt;br/&gt;conduct integrated design, analysis, and experimental research on
SC steel frame systems, using the enabling&lt;br/&gt;facilities of the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES); to
develop&lt;br/&gt;performance-based, reliability-based seismic design procedures
and criteria for SC steel frame systems; and to educate students and
practitioners with fundamental and practical knowledge about SC steel frame
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike conventional earthquake-resistant steel
frame systems that are designed to develop significant&lt;br/&gt;inelastic
deformations under the DBE, resulting in significant damage as well as residual
drift, the innovative&lt;br/&gt;SC steel frame systems developed by the project
have the potential to avoid structural damage under the DBE&lt;br/&gt;as a
result of several features: the lateral force-drift behavior softens without
inelastic deformation of the&lt;br/&gt;structural members, and, therefore,
without the resulting structural damage and residual drift; the
softening&lt;br/&gt;behavior is created by gap opening at selected post-
tensioned connections (e.g., a separation at the beamcolumn interfaces of the
frame); the ductility capacity of the lateral force-drift behavior can be quite
large and is not controlled by material ductility capacity; and energy
dissipation under seismic loading is not from damage to main structural members,
but from energy dissipation elements that are specified in the design process
and can be replaced if damaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project scope includes
nine research tasks and a number of educational, outreach, and
dissemination&lt;br/&gt;activities focused on SC steel frame systems. The
research team will develop reliability-based seismic
design&lt;br/&gt;procedures, system concepts and details, and energy dissipation
elements for SC steel frame systems; will&lt;br/&gt;develop sensor networks to
monitor and assess SC steel frame systems; and will design prototype
buildings&lt;br/&gt;using SC steel frame systems, perform nonlinear analyses of
these prototype buildings, and conduct large-scale laboratory simulations on
specimens derived from the prototype buildings. The project requires the use of
the Real-Time Multidirectional Testing Facility for Seismic Performance
Simulation of Large-Scale Structural Systems (RTMD) NEES equipment site at
Lehigh for large-scale earthquake simulations to achieve its goals.The hybrid
(pseudo-dynamic) testing method will be utilized, and when needed, the real-time
hybrid testing method and real-time capabilities of the RTMD will be used as
well.&lt;br/&gt;The project team is multi-organizational, involving Lehigh,
Princeton, and Purdue Universities, multidisciplinary and diverse. The team
includes international participation from the National Center for Research on
Earthquake Engineering (NCREE) in Taiwan, and will be advised by a board of
individuals from&lt;br/&gt;engineering firms well known in the US and
international earthquake and structural engineering communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.. Prior research on SC steel systems
has demonstrated their potential, however,&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive knowledge of
their seismic behavior and performance is lacking. Prior NSF-funded
research&lt;br/&gt;on SC precast concrete systems has produced knowledge that is
enabling these innovative systems to move&lt;br/&gt;into practice; similar
knowledge is needed for SC steel systems. The proposed project will provide the
needed&lt;br/&gt;fundamental knowledge on the behavior and performance of SC
steel systems, as well as practical knowledge&lt;br/&gt;needed for
implementation into design, fabrication, and construction practice. The main
innovations of SC&lt;br/&gt;steel systems are: initial stiffness similar to
conventional systems, with softening under earthquake loading, but without main
structural member damage, residual drift, and the related post-earthquake repair
costs; and energy dissipation by design, not by main structural member damage.
In addition, innovative project features include the development of reliability-
based, comprehensive design procedures and criteria for SC steel systems in
parallel with the development of the systems themselves, and the development of
sensor networks for damage monitoring and assessment to avoid costly post-
earthquake inspection processes.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.. The new SC steel
frame systems have the potential to withstand the DBE without
damage,&lt;br/&gt;as well as to be economical in initial cost. Thus, by
advancing knowledge about SC steel frame systems, the&lt;br/&gt;project is
anticipated to have significant societal benefits by reducing the often-enormous
post-earthquake&lt;br/&gt;damage costs of conventional earthquake-resistant
systems. In addition, the project will impact the earthquake engineering
workforce by educating graduate and undergraduate students participating in the
proposed project, students enrolled in the course developed by the project, and
students reached by the project web site. Practitioners will be educated through
the dissemination plan and project web site.