* 0420693
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High Resolution Electron Energy Loss Spectrometer for Molecular-Level Surface Characterization
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2009
* Will Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 10/31/2009
* USD 270,172.00

High resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) is a powerful
technique for obtaining vibrational spectra of solid surfaces. When combined
with first-principles computational methods, HREELS is able to provide a
molecular-level description of surface species. The detailed understanding of
surface intermediates and processes generated from the combined application of
HREELS and theory facilitates rational design of functional materials. A
complete HREELS surface analysis system will be acquired and employed for a
variety of projects related to surface science and engineering. This system
incorporates a novel time-of-flight energy analyzer for increased throughput and
enhanced dynamic measurement capabilities, and is uniquely suited for
identification of surface molecular structures when combined with computational
chemistry tools. The research projects that will employ the HREELS system will
make impacts in numerous areas such as chemical sensors, microelectronic device
engineering, heterogeneous catalysis, biocompatible materials, functionalization
of polymer surfaces, and membrane technology. For each of these technologies,
the HREELS/theory combination will be applied to determine how surface structure
and composition control the molecular processes responsible for observed
macroscopic behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The acquired instrument will have a
broad impact, making major contributions to a key emphasis area at the
University of Colorado: the development of functional materials. Researchers
from a variety of disciplines will use the combination of HREELS and
computational chemistry to identify the molecular-level structure of functional
surfaces; the acquired instrument will thus facilitate cross-disciplinary
collaborations. Graduate students with projects having diverse application areas
will be trained in the use of both sophisticated surface analysis hardware and
first-principles theoretical techniques, and will gain firsthand knowledge of
how experiment and theory complement each other from a design perspective.
Furthermore, students participating in Colorado's Functional Materials REU
program will have opportunities to work with the instrumentation, and results
from application of HREELS will be incorporated into existing undergraduate
education and high school outreach programs. Finally, the unique dynamic
measurement capabilities of the time-of-flight energy analysis instrument module
will serve as an added attraction for drawing researchers from diverse fields,
again enhancing cross-disciplinary communication. &lt;br/&gt;