* 0420590
* Acquisition of a Computer Cluster for the Center of Applied Mathematics and Statistics at NJIT
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Daljit Ahluwalia, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 270,870.00

The Department of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) and Center for Applied Mathematics
and Statistics (CAMS) at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, under the
auspices of the MRI program, acquire a 64-node Beowulf-class computer cluster
for research in the mathematical sciences. Each compute-node of the cluster is
composed of two 2.0 GHz, 64-bit processors (AMD Opteron CPU); the cluster
includes a total of 256 GB of memory, mass storage devices, scientific software,
and hardware for a high speed Myrinet network. The machine is dedicated to the
support of research by faculty and graduate students in CAMS and DMS, and is
used for projects which involve mathematical modeling and the development of
computational techniques to study fundamental processes in physical science and
biology. Examples of these projects include: the development of efficient
molecular dynamics methods with applications to fluid flow in nano-devices and
drug molecule/protein target interactions; simulations of large interacting
systems of neurons in the visual cortex; investigations of granular systems;
studies of mesoscopic models for surface processes in biology; simulations of
surface evolution in crystalline materials; and improved numerical methods for
studying aspects of electromagnetic wave propagation.

The research activities are primarily involved with the mathematical modeling of
important processes in science and technology and hence are of benefit to
scientists and engineers in a wide variety of disciplines. For example, the
research on molecular dynamics methods is used to obtain insights in the
interactions between drug molecules and their protein targets, numerical
simulations of interacting neurons in the visual cortex can lead to an improved
understanding of high-level visual processing events, such as "edge-detection,"
and studies of surface evolution in crystalline materials aid in the design of
novel microelectronic devices. In addition, the described research promotes
interdisciplinary collaborations between applied mathematicians and scientists
in diverse areas. Graduate students and postdocs involved in the research
receive training in state-of-the-art numerical techniques.