* 0420910
* Acquisition of GIS and GPS Equipment by the Rocky Mountain Biological Lab in order to Enable High Resolution Spatially Explicit Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* John Harte, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 10/31/2007
* USD 429,695.00

\This award supports the acquisition of instrumentation that will allow
scientists to conduct spatially explicit research and to analyze spatially
explicit data. Specifically, the Rocky Mountain Biological Lab (RMBL) will
purchase a GPS system, GIS software, and robust commercial database software.
The RMBL is a biological field station that facilitates research and training.
Examples of research projects include avian and mammalian adaptations to high
elevation, animal behavior, plant-pollinator interactions, butterfly population
ecology and genetics, stream ecology, effects of global warming on montane
ecosystems, plant demography, flowering phenology of alpine wildflowers, and
insect predator-prey systems. Many research projects are of fifteen to thirty
years in duration and cover spatial scales from meters to kilometers. An
integrated GPS/GIS instrumentation system will increase the range of questions
researchers can ask and improve the quality of existing studies. More
specifically, the GPS station will allow scientists to locate research plots
with a precision of millimeters as well as conduct detailed and long-term
demographic surveys of plant populations. The GIS software will allow scientists
to perform spatial analyses to detect relationships between abiotic and biotic
variables. Additionally, by integrating the GIS environment with a robust
database, the Lab will increase the ability of researchers to collaborate by
facilitating spatial integration of historical and current research projects.
These enhanced capabilities will aid scientists in a wide range of research
activities. This instrumentation will also considerably improve the quality of
our coursework program, which offers a wide range of field courses including
conservation biology, field ecology, molecular ecology, mammology, botany,
stream ecology, ornithology, geology, and independent research. The Lab also
hosts a NSF-funded Research Experience for Undergraduates Program. Research and
education are tightly integrated at RMBL.