* 0420793
* MRI:Acquisition of an Experimental Testbed for Research and Teaching in Mobile Collaborative Agents
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Kenneth De Jong, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2008
* USD 175,000.00

This work, supporting one large project on mobile, collaborative, agent-based
computing, builds testbeds for a variety of research activities centered around
sensor networks, and ties together robotics, wireless sensor networks, and
distributed computing. The project, composed of smaller projects on distributed
robotics and computer vision, distributed sensor networks, and distributed agent
computing, enables both an increase in simulation capability and experimental
work to validate these simulations. The robotics and vision project seeks to
enable new modes of communication between distributed agents, new techniques for
context-aware recognition of people and events, and scalable means for
simulating multi-agent learning. The mobile ad-hoc/sensor network project
examines data fusion and in-network processing of sensor information with an
application of target tracking and surveillance using heterogeneous sensors,
exploring security issues related to data injection attacks in the networks
(LEAP) and energy management issues related to employing different techniques
for power saving. Additionally, the research involves a project on distributed,
mobile agent software. The research activities that will benefit from the
proposed infrastructure include projects on Distributed robotics involving teams
of heterogeneous agents Distributed visual observers, Swarm agents, Multiagent
learning, Security protocols for wireless sensor networks, Distributed
surveillance using mobile robots and sensor networks, Light-weight agent
architectures, Agent-based multicasting for distributed virtual environments,
and Dynamic reconfiguration and middleware for mobile software agents. Broader
Impact: The infrastructure supports undergraduate and graduate courses on
robotics, sensor networks, computer vision, and multi-agent technology, helping
spawn student learning and interest in these areas of technology. The results
and the software developed will be disseminated to the wider community. Fourteen
faculty members will contribute to enhance collaborations with other
institutions to address critical problems such as homeland security, healthcare,
home and factory automation, disaster recovery, and environmental and
infrastructure monitoring.