* 0420957
* MRI: Development of Nanofabrication Instrument
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Alan Seabaugh, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 250,000.00

The objective of this research is develop a nanofabrication instrument capable
of producing nanometer scale electromechanical devices and molecular wiring
structures without lithography. The instrument utilizes an electron beam
evaporator equipped to translate a stencil mask with nanometer precision with
respect to a deposition substrate. Differential etching is used to form the
nanometer-scale edge-defined features using a subsequent process technique. The
minimum feature sizes are directly determined by the nanopositioner's
translation between evaporation of dissimilar materials. The instrument
development will focus on establishing a high precision instrument. The
resolution limiting parameters to be addressed in the development are: (1)
nanometer-control of the stencil mask translation in three dimensions, (2)
collimation of the evaporated material, (3) temperature control and thermal
shielding (4) stage design and vibration control, and (5) incorporation of
feedback control in the evaporation process.

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is in the creation of a wide
variety of new nanostructures including high-aspect-ratio, nanometer-sized metal
or dielectric lines to enable the characterization of molecules, cantilevers,
and nanoelectromechanical devices with feature size and spacing controlled at
the nanometer dimension. Structures with this degree of precision are not easily
created by electron, ion, or photon lithographic techniques, or nanoimprint. The
broader impact of the proposed activity is in the close collaboration of Denton
Vacuum, the makers of the instrument, and Notre Dame. Upon completion of the
development, Denton Vacuum is prepared to produce the equipment commercially
thereby transferring the instrument to the research community.