* 0420708
* Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Research and Training in Biology and Neuroscience at Davidson College
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Karen Bernd, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 07/31/2008
* USD 237,179.00

This award supports the acquisition of a confocal microscope and imaging station
that will significantly expand several lines of research in the Biology and
Psychology research laboratories at Davidson College. Confocal microscopy will
significantly extend the research capabilities by allowing labs to generate
high-resolution images that will contribute new knowledge at genetic, molecular,
cellular, and behavioral levels. Specifically, faculty and students in five
laboratories will examine questions of how developing neurons obtain their
characteristic shapes; how cells sort and move proteins; how mitochondria form;
how damaged neurons can sprout new connections; and how proteins are altered in
ethanol resistant viruses. In addition, a confocal microscopy facility will also
significantly enhance the training of future scientists. Science faculty
actively involve undergraduate students in all aspects of the research process,
therefore, undergraduates will learn theory and practice of confocal microscopy,
which is a standard and widely used technique. Students will acquire
contemporary microscopy and imaging skills, and experience the process and
excitement of scientific inquiry first-hand. The ability to make original
contributions to the scientific literature will better train students for
careers in engineering and the life sciences.