* 0420403
* Confocal Fluorescence Microscope for Faculty Research and Undergraduate Research Training at Amherst College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Dominic Poccia, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,383.00

This award supports the acquisition of confocal fluorescence microscope. This
sophisticated microscope uses laser illumination and computer analysis to
produce three-dimensional images of microscopic specimens, including live cells.
It will be used as a research tool by at least five different investigators in
at least three academic departments. The microscope will constitute a
significant addition to the infrastructure supporting both faculty and
undergraduate research in the life sciences at the College. Using it, members of
the Biology Department will identify the location of specific molecules in
living cells from both vertebrates and invertebrates. Others will be able to
investigate the formation of the nuclear membrane in test tube extracts from
fertilized sea urchin eggs. In the Neuroscience Department, the microscope will
make it possible to investigate specific neural circuits in the brainstem. The
instrument will be used in environmental research to visualize bacterial
communities from sedimentary basins. In addition to enhancing research programs,
the confocal fluorescence microscope will be used by at least 10 senior honors
students as part of their independent research projects each year, and will
contribute to the work of at least 5 rising sophomores and juniors in intensive
research experiences on campus each summer. This program has played a key role
in efforts to engage and retain students from traditionally underrepresented
groups in the sciences, and represents one of several institution wide
strategies to address the "leaky" educational pipeline for women and minorities
interested in careers in the sciences. The confocal fluorescence microscope will
also enable faculty to supplement life sciences and environmental science
curriculum with new laboratory experiments and modules that will expose a wider
group of undergraduates to an instrument they are likely to encounter in
graduate programs in the life sciences.