* 0420577
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Conversion of Agricultural Residues Into Ethanol and Microcrystalline Cellulose
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Foster Agblevor, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2007
* USD 36,000.00

0420577&lt;br/&gt;Agblevor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research between Dr. Foster Agblevor, Department of
Biological Systems Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, Virginia and Dr. Maha Ibrahim, Cellulose and Paper
Department, National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. The PIs will study the
processing of agro-industrial wastes such as cotton gin waste, rice straw,
banana stems, and others to meet environmental protection agency standards. This
processing will simultaneously solve a waste disposal problem and generate high-
value product stream for the industry. The scientific significance of this
project is the fact that it will demonstrate environmentally friendly methods of
converting agricultural wastes into high-value products. Further, it will
address the problem of microbial toxicity and inhibition of the pretreated
biomass to microorganisms and cellulose enzymes. Developing an in situ
detoxification method for biomass pretreatment will solve a major research
problem in biomass conversion technology and could rapidly accelerate the
conversion of biomass feedstocks to various products using fermentation
technology. The research objectives are: 1. To investigate the in situ
detoxification of biomass hydrolysates. 2. To develop steam explosion method to
convert cotton gin waste and other agro-industrial residues to ethanol. 3. To
investigate steam explosion method to convert agro-industrial residues to
microcrystalline cellulose. The PIs plan to characterize representative biomass
feedstocks from Egypt and USA (cotton gin waste) for summative composition and
investigate steam explosion treatment of agricultural wastes using various steam
explosion severity parameters. They will investigate the in situ detoxification
of the steam-exploded biomass using a combination of recycled paper sludge and
cotton gin waste as well as impregnated precipitated calcium carbonate. In situ-
detoxified steam exploded material will be used for ethanol production after
enzymatic hydrolysis using cellulose enzyme. The microcrystalline cellulose
production process does not need detoxification. The major research problem
addressed is to develop a suitable severity parameter to produced desired degree
of polymerization for the cellulose. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts
of the Project: &lt;br/&gt;Combustion and incineration, the major disposal
methods of agricultural by-products, have particulate emission problems, which
require retrofitting of the processing facilities to meet new air quality
standards. For small companies, this method of disposal is cost-prohibitive and
therefore alternative disposal methods are needed. The research results are
likely to be commercialized in both the USA and Egypt. The project will also
accord the Egyptian scientists the opportunity to use some of the advanced
biomass processing facilities in the USA. The target products from the agro-
industrial waste, ethanol and microcrystalline cellulose are very important
commercial products, which have wide applications in chemical, pharmaceutical,
and food industries. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;