* 0420126
* Aradbidopsis 2010:  Tools and Technologies to Enable Genome-Wide Screens in Arabidopsis
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2007
* Joseph Ecker, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 11/30/2007
* USD 2,700,000.00

The proposed study pertains to the development of research tools and resources
for the plant biology community. Analysis of the genome sequence of Arabidopsis
thaliana revealed the existence of approximately 25,000 protein-coding genes. It
should now be possible to undertake systematic genome-wide functional screens
that assess the contribution of every gene to a biological process. However, due
to the absence of a complete set of gene-indexed homozygous mutants unbiased
genome-wide functional screens are not yet feasible. To fulfill these needs, the
aim of this 2010 project is to experimentally identity two homozygous insertion
mutants for 25,000 Arabidopsis genes, thereby creating a "phenome-ready"
genomics resource. Unbiased genome-wide screens will enable annotation of the
genome with new high-quality information about the regulation and biological
functions of any gene. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resources developed by this
project will be available to all researchers and will provide the basis for a
variety of projects that rely upon whole genome information. The data from this
project can be found at: http://signal.salk.edu, and seed will be provided to
the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (http://www.biosci.ohio-
state.edu/~plantbio/Facilities/abrc/abrchome.htm) for distribution. Another
important feature of the project is the training of undergraduate students in
bioinformatics and genomic methodologies. The long-term impact of these mutants
on agriculture is to enable construction of plants with superior agronomic
traits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;