* 0420494
* ACQUISITION OF X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY SYSTEM FOR MICROSTRUCTURE CHARACTERIZATION, ANALYSIS, AND MODELING
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Dallas Little, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2007
* USD 350,000.00

The acquisition of a state-of-the-art X-ray computed tomography (CT) system for
non-invasive microstructural evaluation of engineering materials will facilitate
understanding of the relationship between material microstructure and its
evolution and performance for multiple disciplines in engineering and science.
The proposed instrumentation will provide critical support for ongoing and
pending research projects funded through NSF and other national and state-level
agencies and contribute substantially toward additional funding and
collaboration. These projects that range from micromechanics of construction
materials to characterization of flaws in offshore sediments to analysis of
failure modes of rocks include the common need to capture material
microstructure for further analysis, simulation, and numerical model
verification. The proposed system meets this need through a unique technique for
three- dimensional (3-D) visualization of interior microstructural features in
opaque solids. The proposal includes an impact and management plan that
integrates research and educational activities and ensures proper training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit Research facilitated with the X-ray CT
system will advance the understanding of the microscopic behavior of engineering
materials and will lead to improvements in the design of materials with
microstructures tailored to achieve specific properties and performance. These
improvements can be realized for a wide range of materials, including metals,
ceramics, and composites. In addition, X-ray CT provides parameters for and
verifies the predictions of continuum performance models through microstructural
measurements. X-ray CT images can also be coupled with numerical modeling
techniques to simulate engineering processes at the microstructural level for
naturally occurring materials and particulate composites containing these
materials. The general approaches described integrate experimental
characterization, constitutive modeling, and numerical
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact The research activities that use
the X-ray CT system will advance the state of knowledge and integrate different
disciplines toward greater understanding of material behavior at multiscales.
The complex behavior of particulate composites calls for the development of an
integrated approach based on the fundamentals of mechanics, experimental
characterization from microscale to macroscale, and utilization of available
computing power to understand material behavior and predict performance. The
system provides the necessary experimental measurement and analysis capabilities
for this type of approach that promises a significant shift in engineering and
science and resulting material performance. This system will provide an
opportunity for expanded interaction with industry and government to ensure the
educational system is sensitive to workforce needs. Recruitment of high quality,
diverse graduate students will also be facilitated. Transfer of knowledge gained
through use of the X-ray CT system will take place in the classroom, through
advising of student researchers, in workshops or seminars, and through journal
publications and presentations. &lt;br/&gt;