* 0420046
* STTR Phase I: Benign Thin Film Composite Particles for Protection from UVA/UVB - Rays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Karen Buechler, ALD NANOSOLUTIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop
composite TiO2/ZnO (Titania /Zinc Oxide) particles capped with an Al2O3
nanolayer for benign protection from UVA/UVB - rays. Titania (TiO2) provides
excellent protection against UVB - rays. Zinc oxide (ZnO) protects against UVA-
rays very efficiently. The manufacture of composite particles via novel Atomic
Layer Deposition (ALD) thin film technology allows for the synthesis of
composite particles with dual effectiveness. In the first aspect of this work,
ZnO will be deposited on nanosized TiO2 particles by ALD. In the second aspect
of this work, nanolaminated films of TiO2 and ZnO will be prepared on the
surface of submicron sized spherical silica (SiO2) particles. The large
substrate SiO2 will provide a particle size for the "UVA/UVB sun blockers" that
will be large enough to prevent pore blockage in human skin. In both instances,
the composite particles will be capped with an alumina (Al2O3) nanolayer that
will allow easy dispersion of these particles in non-aqueous formulations. The
Al2O3 nanolayer will also prevent direct contact of the active TiO2/ZnO with the
skin, thus protecting the skin from potential UV-hot activated reactions. The
particles will be tested for UVA/UVB transmittance and Sun Protection Factors
(SPF) will be calculated.

The broader impacts of the technology could be the ability to produce ultrafine
particles with designed electrical, magnetic, optical, mechanical, rheological
properties, this technology could have significant commercial impact on
microelectronics, defense, hard-metals, cosmetics, drug delivery, energetic
materials, and polymer/ceramic nanocomposites.