* 0420632
* Acquisition of a Visroom for Cognitive Studies, Visualization, and Education
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Rachael Brady, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 583,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research
Insturmentation Award, Duke University's Pratt School of Engineering will
acquire a fully enclosed, six-sided, 3m x 3m x 2.7m, back projected virtual
reality environment. The VisRoom will be located in a specially constructed 30
foot cube in the atrium of the Center for Interdisciplinary Engineering,
Medicine and Applied Science (CIEMAS). The VisRoom will be the only facility of
its kind in the Southeast and the fourth such system in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the datasets scientists collect increase in size and
complexity, so increases the need for ever more powerful tools to support data
analysis and scientific communication. The tools that in the past have proved
most useful in this regard have been those that take advantage of the remarkable
information-processing ability built into human perceptual systems, particularly
vision and audition. Thus, investigators in many of the most innovative fields
of research, e.g., proteomics, genomics, seismology, neuroscience and
astrophysics, rely heavily on computationally-intensive visualization tools to
explore their data and test models. Technologies such as the VisRoom are used
not only to explore data collected through other means, but also as experimental
tools in and of themselves for investigating the many aspects of human
perception and motor control that remain poorly understood. The project
directors anticipate that providing scientists from many disciplines with access
to state-of-the-art visualization technologies will inspire them to find
creative and productive ways of incorporating the new tools into their
respective research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects curently planned for
this VisRoom include research in cognitive neuroscience, exploration of 3D
structures, and education. Specifically, visual perception studies will take
advantage of the VisRoom's ability to precisely control illumination, object
reflectances, and scene geometry to assess how systematic manipulations chage
the observers' perceptions of color. Movement studies will dynamically distort
the visual field during reaching tasks to gain insight into the role of
attention, movement planning, and movement execution. Computer scientists and
biochemists will jointly use the VisRoom to 'crawl' between two proteins to
inspect the interaction areas directly. Biomedical engineers who develop
physiological models of the heart will use the VisRoom to 'enter' the heart wall
and investigate the relationships among the different physiological processes
that govern cardiac function. Finally, middle school students will use the
VisRoom as an aid in the study of developmental biology. For example, they will
have the opportunity to interact with a virtual developing chicken embryo and
observe how, at 48 hours, the single tube of the artery system curves in 3D to
form the four chambers of the heart. In addition to providing scientists and
educators with a with a powerful new visualization tool, the project directors
anticipate that the VisRoom will act as a "watering hole," supporting the kind
of cross-disciplinary interaction that often opens up new areas of scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;