* 0420846
* Acquisition of Modern Sampling and Molecular Analysis Equipment for an Integrated Geomicrobiology/Molecular Biology Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Russell Vreeland, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 127,015.00

A grant has been awarded to West Chester University of Pennsylvania under the
direction of Dr. Russell Vreeland for support of a state of the art geological
molecular microbiology laboratory facility. This one of a kind facility combines
geological and molecular biological research equipment. Researchers plan use
this equipment to extract DNA, RNA and living microorganisms directly from
ancient rocks and crystals while keeping the samples under sterile conditions.
This project represents an improvement and expansion of the techniques
previously used by the same West Chester University scientists while finding and
describing the world's oldest living bacteria. The heart of the laboratory is a
special microscope that contains an attached microdrill able to produce a sample
of rock only 30 microns (0.00011 inches) in diameter. This microscope/drill is
able to map and photograph a rock, drill the hole and produce the sample based
on computer commands from a remote station. In this way the samples are produced
in a sterile area without human contact. These tiny samples can then be moved
directly into equipment that amplifies and sequences both large and small pieces
of DNA which the researchers will use to study the genes of bacteria that
populated Earth from time periods before the dinosaurs existed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its research functions, the facility will
provide extensive educational experience for students from several departments
at West Chester University a member of the Pennsylvania State System of Higher
Education. Located in the Biology Building the DNA sequencer and its related
equipment will be used by undergraduate students conducting research with Dr
Vreeland and other members of the Biology Department. The facility will host
several laboratory classes in Molecular Biology, Recombinant DNA technology,
Microbial Ecology, and Microbial Physiology among others. In demonstrations and
lectures reminiscent of the popular CSI TV series students from Criminal Justice
and Forensics classes will get first hand experience with DNA sampling, sample
care and acquisition and analysis of DNA data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
uniqueness of this entire facility, world renowned scientists from numerous
other universities and research facilities are already contemplating visits to
use the sterile microdrill system conduct their own research in dating ancient
salt brines, obtain rock samples for analysis and even attempt to extract DNA
from their own rock samples. This be a premier research facility likely to
attract visiting world class researchers the campus and exposing students to
state of the art scientific equipment. &lt;br/&gt;