* 0420532
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Local-Electrode Atom-Probe (LEAP) Microscope (An Atom-Probe Tomograph) For Three-Dimensional Nanoscale Characterization of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Dieter Isheim, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

The instrument to be purchased is a tomographic atom probe, which provides a
three-dimensional image of a reconstructed lattice with atomic resolution where
the chemical identity of each atom ! is identified. The specific instrument
involved is a local-electrode atom-probe (LEAP) microscope manufactured by Imago
Scientific Instruments of Madison, Wisconsin. The cost of this instrument is to
be shared between the National Science Foundation's Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program and the Office of Naval Research's DURIP program.
Specifically, the NSF is to provide $500,000 toward the purchase of this
instrument with $214,000 in cost matching funds provided by Northwestern
University. The Office of Naval Research is to provide $590,000 with an
additional $295,000 in cost matching funds from Northwestern University for a
grand total o f $1,599,000 for the instrument and ancillary equipment. This
instrument is to be the show case instrument of the Northwestern University
Center for Atom-Probe Tomography (NUCAPT), which is directed by Professor David
N. Seidman, Materials Science and Engineering Department. It will be used both
for research purposes, as described in the proposal, for a wide range of
materials , and also for the education of postdoctoral students, Ph.D. students,
and undergraduate students, REU students, in this new characterization technique
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The local-electrode atom-probe (LEAP)
microscope provides a spatial resolution in depth of 0.1 nm and a lateral
resolution of 0.2 to 0.5 nm; the latter depends on the particular
crystallographic plane, {hkl}, being analyzed. It provides a wide angle view of
the surface of a specimen, upwards of 60o to 70o, and is capable of examining a
given specimen on a routine basis to a depth of 2 micrometers. The specimen can
be pulsed at a frequency of 250,000 Hz to obtain collection rates exceeding 55
million atoms per hour. Thus, data sets of 100 million atoms are readily
obtained from a single specimen. The LEAP microscope is an ultrahigh vacuum
instrument that operates at an ambient pressure below 10(-10) torr! . A specimen
exchange systems perm its six to twelve specimens to be stored under ultrahigh
vacuum conditions, which permits the rapid exchange of specimens during the
course of a day. The LEAP microscope is computer controlled and the data
collected can be analyzed on-line, to a certain level of detail, to evaluate the
progress of a run. In addition, software has been and is being developed to
further process the collected data to obtain the maximum amount of physical
information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;