* 0420777
* US-Egypt Coopertive Research: Mitigating the Deterioration of Monuments from the Effects of Evaporating Shallow Groundwater
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* David Gold, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 35,000.00

0420777&lt;br/&gt;Parizek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support cooperative research between a U.S. team headed by Dr. Richard Parizek,
Department of Geosciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania and Dr. Abdel Raouf Abul Hassan, Geological Survey of Egypt and
Mining Authority, Cairo, Egypt. Shallow groundwater levels, coupled with
concentrations of salt, dissolved solids and biological compounds, are causing
rapid and significant deterioration or monuments and other structures at
numerous locations in Egypt. At Hierakonopolis, a variety of monuments and
materials are being degraded. The problem of rapid deterioration has become more
acute since the initiation of new irrigation practices in 1995. Year-round flood
irrigation of the fields ensures a uniformly high water table &lt;1 to 1.5m
below the surface. A major irrigation canal that is being constructed has
reached within 1.5km of the Temp-Town site on the lowest Nile terrace to the
south. Its imminent presence even closer to the site, along with rapid
reclamation of surrounding upland desert areas, is likely to cause further
damage at Hierakonopolis. This project will focus on development of practical
methods to characterize and mitigate the effects of rapid deterioration of
monuments and other structures. The Temple-Town Hierakonopolis site is the model
for this study because of the knowledge of its groundwater system gained through
recent studies led by the PIs. This study will build on a drilling and coring
project undertaken in January 2003; it includes additional water quality
measures, limited chemical testing, hydrological testing and a local seismic
survey for each borehole, prior to installation of up to eight new deeper holes
to monitor groundwater flow rates and directions at depth. Additional core
samples obtained in 2003 and new cores will be logged to establish both an
archaeological and lithological stratigraphic column. An attempt will be made to
date any suitable horizons. The drilling campaign is expected to recover core
through the Nile alluvium into bedrock at 100m depth, and further define the
distribution of potential aquifers and the clay confining beds found to date.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broad impact: The proposed study will use an
integrated combination of geological, geophysical, geochemical and hydrologic
methods to develop and validate a flow model for the Hierakonopolis site that
can be used to design a practical mitigation plan. If possible, a separate but
related set of analyses would be made in the U.S. of the biological compounds
that cause discoloration and deterioration of the base of monuments and other
structures at locations such as Hierakonopolis, Edfu, and Esna. These and
earlier findings, all incorporated into a large GIS database, will be integrated
to develop a groundwater flow model and practical mitigation strategies for the
Hierakonopolis site. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;