* 0420636
* MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Undergraduate Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Marek Matyjasik, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 71,700.00

With this grant, we will purchase a scanning probe microscope (Quesant
Instruments Model 350) for the characterization of various material systems by
atomic force microscopy. The instrument will include accessories to allow us to
image systems in liquid environments. Two specific projects will benefit
immediately from the acquisition: (1) in-situ measurements of the dissolution of
lead apatite and (2) characterization of semiconductor thin films. The former is
motivated by the common practice of reclaiming lead-contaminated soils by
immobilizing the lead in the stable lead apatite. We propose to study the
microstructural changes that occur in this mineral in acidic environments, as
acidic environments are known to increase the solubility of lead apatite. The
latter project involves a collaboration with the University of Utah where the
atomic force microscope will provide complementary information to the electronic
and optical characterization of heterogeneous semiconducting materials conducted
at that institution. An example of such a system is microcrystalline silicon,
where the size of crystalline grains can dramatically affect the electronic
properties and device characteristics. This acquisition will also benefit the
educational mission of our institution, as the instrument can be used in several
classes either for classroom demonstrations or instructional
exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this grant, we will acquire an atomic force
microscope, an instrument capable of imaging materials on the sub-micrometer
scale, for undergraduate research in physics and geosciences. This acquisition
will, by itself, significantly enhance the research capabilities of our
institution. Two faculty members at Weber State University and several
undergraduate students will use this equipment to study such problems as the
reclamation of lead-contaminated soils and the structure of materials used for
semiconducting devices, such as solar cells. The instrument will also be used
for several instructional laboratories and class demonstrations for the
geoscience and physics departments at Weber State, affecting dozens of students
in several of our courses every year. Results of undergraduate research and
materials related to this instrumentation relevant to our classes will be posted
on our websites, which reach a large number of students inside and outside our
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;