* 0420615
* Acquisition of a High-Field Multi-Nuclear FT-NMR Instrument
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Richard Luibrand, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 426,574.00

A grant has been awarded to California State University-Hayward under the
direction of Dr. Michael P. Groziak for support of a compact, high-field (400
MHz), multi-nuclear Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (FT-NMR)
instrument system. A core group of four active researcher-educators will manage
this NMR instrument system, conducting their own research dependent upon hands-
on access to just such equipment and helping other researchers both on and off
campus with NMR-related research. The instrument being acquired is the most
compact on the market, and it is equipped with a computer workstation, state-of-
the art software, and various probes for recording signals from many different
nuclei in the periodic table.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core users have set up
their research laboratories, they have attracted students to their groups, and
they have already obtained external funding for research in areas traditionally
supported by the NSF. The focus of their investigations is in the fields of bio-
organic and biophysical chemistries, where they are poised to advance scientific
knowledge and understanding. Specifically, they will be studying viral membrane
proteins and nucleic acids, new boron heterocycles and tethered nucleotides,
enzyme inhibitors, the interaction of small molecules with artificial membrane
systems, and metabolites of cytochrome P450 oxidation of organic contaminants.
The instrument will be integrated into the Department's teaching curriculum for
the purpose of training young researchers. The results of all of these research-
centered efforts will be broadly disseminated in meeting presentations and
scientific publications, and they will be highlighted on the Department's Web
site. Because of their prior extensive experience with this type of instrument,
the core users group is well qualified to maintain it and to use it to its full
capacity to support their research efforts and those of
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;California State University-Hayward is one of the
last few remaining in the CSU system to obtain this type of modern NMR
instrument. It is an Undergraduate Research Institution ranking 39th in the
nation for granting baccalaureate degrees to minority students. The presence of
this instrument on campus will stimulate an enhanced interest among a large
number of minority and female students to pursue research activities and degrees
in the chemical sciences and related fields. This expectation is supported by
the Department's graduating student track record, its ongoing participation in
several highly successful minority research programs, and by the student
composition of the University as a whole. The instrument will have an immediate
and deliberate impact upon many of the Department's research training-focused
laboratory courses, thus providing even more encouragement for students to
become involved in NMR-related research activities as upperclassmen. Finally, it
will have a significant impact upon the larger society as a whole. In
particular, the community colleges in the immediate vicinity of CSU-Hayward will
be well served by the core users when they run spectra, hold workshop training
sessions, present seminars, and provide access to this modern research
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;