* 0420766
* Methanopterin Biosynthesis in Archaea and Methylotrophic Bacteria
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Madeline Rasche, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/28/2010
* USD 608,152.00

Methane-producing microorganisms (methanogens) contribute to the degradation of
biomass in anaerobic environments and the production of methane as an energy
source and greenhouse gas. The coenzyme tetrahydromethanopterin (H4MPT) is a
tetrahydrofolate analog that plays an essential role in the one-carbon (C1)
metabolism of methane-producing archaea. H4MPT analogs have also been identified
in nonmethanogens, including methylotrophic bacteria. A more complete
understanding of the genes and enzymes involved in the pathway of H4MPT
biosynthesis will help to elucidate the biochemical basis of methanogenesis and
contribute to our knowledge about evolutionary relationships among bacteria and
archaea that use this specialized coenzyme.

Of the eighteen proposed enzymes of H4MPT biosynthesis, only five have been
characterized. During the previous funding, this project characterized two
enzymes: ribofuranosyl aminobenzene 5'-phosphate synthase (RFAP synthase), which
catalyzes the first committed step of H4MPT biosynthesis, and bacterial
dihydromethanopterin reductase (DmrA). The overall goal of this research project
is to deepen the knowledge of the biochemical basis of H4MPT biosynthesis. The
specific objectives of the research are (i) to investigate the structure and
function of RFAP synthases using site-directed mutagenesis, (ii) to compare the
evolutionarily unrelated dihydromethanopterin reductases from bacteria (DmrA)
and archaea, and (iii) to determine the specific functions of additional
bacterial genes required for bacterial dephospho-H4MPT biosynthesis.

Broader impacts: In addition to providing fundamental knowledge about unusual
aspects of methanogen biochemistry, a deeper understanding of H4MPT biosynthesis
enzymes may also assist in the development of more effective H4MPT biosynthesis
inhibitors as a strategy for decreasing methane emissions from ruminant animals.
The research will contribute to the education of two graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher. The program will also integrate research and education
by providing the foundational research project for a microbiology laboratory
course designed to increase the contributions of undergraduates, high school
students, and high school teachers to original research.