* 0420662
* Development and Applications of Aerosol Charge and Aerosol Photoionization Detectors for High Performance Liquid Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Roy Dixon, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2008
* USD 205,729.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Roy Dixon
and William DeGraffenreid in the Department of Chemistry at California State
University in Sacramento will develop an aerosol charge detector (ACD) and an
aerosol photoionization (APID)detector for high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC). In the aerosol-based detectors, the effluent from an HPLC
will be converted to an aerosol, and subsequently charged and detected. In the
case of the ACD, two approaches will be investigated: adaptation of a diffusion
charger and construction of a detector using charging from spray electrification
during the nebulization process. In the case of the APID, aerosol charging will
occur during passage through a flow tube illuminated with ultraviolet light.
Eluted compounds capable of photoionization will produce a positively charged
aerosol. The charged aerosol in both detectors will be collected on filters
connected electrically to an electrometer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
strong need for inexpensive, universal and sensitive detectors for HPLC. A
selective detector such as this with improved sensitivity over the ultraviolet-
visible absorption detector will be useful in a number of applications. The
investigators will use HPLC combined with these detectors to measure
concentrations of polar organic compounds in atmospheric aerosols, to determine
the structure and function of apolipoproteins, to investigate the ability of
novel carbohydrate-containing compounds to inhibit HIV infection, and to measure
dissolved solids in river water. Thus, these studies will have a significant
impact in atmospheric, environmental and medicinal chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;