* 0420333
* Acquisition of a Variable-Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope at Mary Washington College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Jodie Hayob, University of Mary Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 247,241.00

This award supports acquisition of a variable-pressure Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM) and an associated Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS) for
multidisciplinary use. In conjunction with the award, the Institution is
providing significant in-kind support, including funds for laboratory
renovations, technician support, service contracts, PI release time and advanced
training of eight users. The SEM/EDS instrument will be located in recently
constructed science center that houses all of the physical and life science
programs. Availability of the instrument will permit active, leading edge
research by science faculty that will improve scientific knowledge and provide
valuable experience to students. Planned research and class projects involve the
investigation of a wide variety of specimens, including animal tissues,
bacteria, viruses, microfossils, minerals, rocks, microelectronic devices,
Native American ceramics, ancient Tunisian coins, and architectural materials.
Thus, students will be able to participate in the high resolution imaging (2D
and 3D) and compositional analysis of a diverse array of materials, the study of
structure-function relationships in biological systems, structure-function-
property relationships of solids, and surface analysis of chemical systems in a
manner that is not possible with traditional light microscopy or with other
analytical instrumentation. An established Summer Science Research Program will
enable use of the instrument in training and education throughout the entire
calendar year. The instrument is expected to be the most widely used analytical
equipment on campus. The proposals describes 13 research projects that reflect
the broad range of research interests among the science faculty and students.
Faculty from six departments on campus (the four science programs, Classics, and
Historic Preservation) intend to utilize the SEM to optimize student learning in
their courses. Demonstrations and/or hands-on training with SEM/EDS techniques
will be incorporated into six biology courses, five geology courses, a physical
chemistry course, a new physics course, classical archaeology courses and
historic preservation courses. In addition, planned community outreach
activities will target local high school students to foster greater interest in
science.