* 0420348
* Acquisition of a Continuous Flow Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Charles Hopkinson, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 411,278.00

A grant has been awarded to the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) under the
direction of Paul A. Steudler for partial support to acquire a continuous flow
isotope ratio mass spectrometer (CF-IRMS) system that will support the MBL's
expanding research and undergraduate and graduate education program in the
application of stable isotopic techniques to terrestrial and aquatic ecological
research. The expanded capabilities of the new instrumentation will be focused
on four research activities; (1) Determination of aquatic system metabolism, (2)
Measurement of the composition and sources of nutrition of microbial systems,
(3) Determination of the sources and processes regulating carbon cycling and
production of atmospheric greenhouse gases and (4) Resolving the sources and
flow paths of water and nitrogen in watersheds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
CF-IRMS system will benefit the Laboratory's research program, including three
NSF Long Term Ecological Research sites at Plum Island and Harvard Forest, MA
and at Toolik Lake, Alaska, two NASA and one NSF supported program in Brazil and
as well as 17 other federally funded projects. The grant will benefit several
MBL educational and training programs: one is the Semester in Environmental
Sciences (SES) program; second is the NSF program on Research Experience for
Undergraduates; third is training of graduate students in residence and visiting
the MBL through our joint projects with PI's at US and foreign universities. New
educational activities include the Brown-MBL graduate program in Biological and
Environmental Sciences that begins in the fall of 2004. We will teach three new
workshops in the use of stable isotopes and the capabilities of the new CF-IRMS
instrumentation: one is a two-day workshop to SES students; second is a 10 day
workshop in January to Brown-MBL advanced undergraduate and graduate students
and the third is a weekend workshop for the MBL summer Microbial Diversity
course on the capabilities of the new system in elucidating the diversity and
function of microbial communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new CF-IRMS system
will have significant impacts on research, training and teaching activities.
This system will allow us to make progress on important questions in ecosystem
productivity, regional and global water balance and global climate change
issues. The new system will allow us to move from flask-level experiments to
regional estimates of productivity, to understand the processes that control the
transfer of materials such as nutrients from land to water, and to gain
information on the role of soil and aquatic microbes on the evolution of carbon
and nitrogen greenhouse gases. Knowledge on exactly what microbes are involved
in various C and N transformations in these systems is clearly tied to
developments in the methods and instrumentation that we use to study these
systems. Our understanding of the links between biogeochemical processes and
microbial species composition and function will be greatly improved by the new
CF-IRMS system.&lt;br/&gt;