* 0420703
* MRI:  Acquisition of Infrastructure for Research in Grid Computing and Multiscale Systems Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Jeffrey Trinkle, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

This project, acquiring equipment to form the core of the Rensselaer Grid, a
research testbed consistent with the capabilities of the future national
cyberinfrastructure, supports research programs in Information Technology,
Biotechnology, nanotechnology, and Homeland Security. Projects focused on the
development of grid middleware and multiscale computing technologies, and the
application of these technologies to science and engineering, advance and use
the grid. The RPI core grid consists of 3 clusters having a total of 374
processors, and a 4th cluster with 162 processors connected via dedicated 10Gbit
links. The resulting grid provides a research testbed of heterogeneous clusters
with heterogeneous connections that can provide substantial processing power to
applications. Placing emphasis on the development of middleware and simulation
technologies needed to make effective use, the planned cyberinfrastructure,
consisting of distributed heterogeneous computing clusters, provides computing
power to industry, medicine, and business. The grid computing technologies
research consists of a set of projects including the development of distributed
programming technologies, grid networking simulation and security, data flow,
extraction and control; dynamic load balancing, and support of real time
applications and devices. The multiscale computation applications include
adaptive multiscale computation tools (supporting adaptive dynamic simulation
models); multiscale methods for biomolecular structure; simulation based medical
planning for cardiovascular disease; multifunction polymeric nanocomposites;
dynamic contact tasks planning with application to disaster recovery; and the
evolution of social groups in communication networks. Encouraging collaborative
efforts with existing cyberinfrastructure investments, including NSF PACI
centers and the ETF, this campus level effort engages 38 PI faculty from 11
academic departments in science and engineering and involves 99 students. The
underlying research project, supported by scores of grants from 7 federal
agencies, NY state, and 7 companies/foundations, include 13 collaborative
universities, 6 national labs, and a state agency. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
involve: &lt;br/&gt; Making the advances widely available through open standards
and open source interoperable tools,&lt;br/&gt; Training and involvement of over
130 on-campus researchers, along with collaborating colleagues in other
universities, labs, and industry,&lt;br/&gt; Transferring direct technology to
industry, including start-ups, through well established technology transfer
programs,&lt;br/&gt; Expanding the educational programs, including new courses
related to cyberinfrastructure and multiscale systems techniques, and inclusion
of relevant projects in existing courses, and&lt;br/&gt; Demonstrating grid-
based simulations to precollege students of diverse background.&lt;br/&gt;