* 0420776
* MRI: Development of a Harmonic Rejection Optical System for the MR-CAT Beamline
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Carlo Segre, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,003.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Illinois
Institute of Technology with the construction of a crystal optic harmonic
rejection system. The system is for the Materials Research Collaborative Access
Team (MR-CAT) undulator beamline at the Advanced Photon Source (APS). This
system, outfitted with different optics, known as "beam cleaners", will enhance
the harmonic rejection of our current mirror system at low energies (below
30keV), provide harmonic rejection for x-ray absorption spectroscopy experiments
at intermediate energies (30keV to 45keV) and give us harmonic-free access to
very high energies (up to 80keV) for diffraction and pair distribution function
experiments. The design of the system is driven by the need to make alignment as
routine as changing energy, dropping in a focusing mirror or rolling in a
different detector. In addition, proper design of this instrument will reduce
vertical beam motion as the primary beamline monochromator is scanned for x-ray
spectroscopy experiments. This instrument, in one of its three modes, will find
application in nearly all of the experiments done at the MR-CAT, making what are
currently difficult experiments, requiring long alignment times or the use of a
dedicated beamline accessible to users of the MR-CAT
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Major Research Instrumentation program
supports Illinois Institute of Technology with the construction of a crystal
optic harmonic rejection system. The instrument will drop in to the Materials
Research Collaborative Access Team (MR-CAT) experimental station at the Advanced
Photon Source. The system will permit to change routinely the characteristics of
the x-rays reaching the sample, just as one change the x-ray energy, focusing or
kinds of detectors to suit the material and experiment at hand. The key elements
of the instrument are a kinematic table and ``beam cleaner'' band pass optics
which take advantage of the favorable reflectivity and alignment properties of
strongly bent single crystals of Si and Ge. The combination of this device with
the MR-CAT spectroscopy and powder diffraction beamline, including the installed
microfocusing capability, will enhance the capabilities by improving the signal
to noise in x-ray absorption spectroscopy experiments at moderately high
energies (&gt;30keV), produce a nearly fixed exit beam for spectroscopy
experiments at any energy and make practical high energy pair distribution
function (PDF) measurements at an undulator beamline. The instrumentation is
specifically designed to be moved and rapidly installed in various locations in
the MR-CAT experimental station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;