* 0420399
* Genome Arrangement and Adaptive Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Bryant McAllister, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2009
* USD 407,000.00

Genomes of organisms are subdivided into chromosomes. Comparisons among closely
related species generally reveal differences in chromosomal organization as a
result of rearrangements, yet chromosomal rearrangements in humans are
associated with birth defects and cancers. The consequences of naturally
occurring chromosomal rearrangements and the importance of genome reorganization
are essentially unknown. Rearranged chromosomes within populations represent
ideal systems for determining effects of chromosomal form on organismal
function. A latitudinal cline for a chromosomal rearrangement in the fly
Drosophila americana is an unusually tractable system for examining the
significance of chromosomal form. This project will identify DNA sequence
variation associated with alternative chromosomal forms, determine the influence
of the rearrangements on the maintenance of this variation, and reveal
differences among individuals owing to chromosomal form. These data will test
the hypothesis that the alternative chromosomal arrangements in D. americana
coordinate adaptive variation along this north-south climatic gradient.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Scientific training of students will be facilitated at
multiple levels during the project. Two graduate students will be directly
involved in data collection and analysis. Analyses of frequencies of the
alternative chromosomal forms in natural populations of D. americana will be
incorporated as an exercise in an undergraduate teaching laboratory. Students
will gain unparalleled hands-on experience by performing and interpreting
genetic analyses of genome organization.&lt;br/&gt;