* 0420382
* DEVELOPMENT OF A HOLOGRAPHIC FLUORESCENCE MICROSCOPE
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Brian Storrie, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 953,596.00

This award supports the development of a new kind of fluorescent microscope.
This microscope, dubbed the Holoskop, when developed, will allow the viewing of
microscopic specimens in 3 dimensions (3D) in real-time.

In the last decade, advances in cell science have made it apparent that there is
rapid intracellular movement of small molecules and proteins. However there is
currently no microscope available to view these events in real time. Green
fluorescent proteins obtained from jellyfish and other aquatic organisms (GFP)
have been isolated and sequenced. Thus GFP can be expressed in cells as part of
the expression of proteins of biological interest by linking the DNA from GFP
with the DNA of the protein of interest. Such expression enables one to follow
the movement of target proteins of biological importance by following the
fluorescence of the GFP tag.

These fluorescent protein construct probes, and other organic fluorescent
probes, combined with advances in optical sectioning utilizing another type of
microscopy called confocal microscopy, have revolutionized studies in 3D
localization and dynamic trafficking of proteins, ions, and messenger molecules.
In practice, the 3D imaging of probes is derived from stacks of images taken
through the z-plane in cells or tissues. Thus fluorescent molecules identifying
cells, structures or processes, which move rapidly in the x-y or x-y-z plane
during the capture of the image stack, cannot at present be adequately resolved
or studied. Knowledge of these fast processes and their interactions is of
paramount importance to understanding the myriad of events in the normal and
abnormal functioning of cells and tissues. The objective of this project is to
develop a new and demonstrably faster microscope for 3D imaging. The Holoskop
will utilize scanning holographic principles for accelerated 3D imaging without
the need for collection of image stacks.

In addition to developing an important new tool for biology, this project will
have considerable impact upon the educational and outreach activities inherent
in the universities involved in this project. The Holoskop once developed, will
aid scores of projects in a wide variety of biological science investigations
since there is currently no method that can obtain the kind of information
expected from this instrument.