* 0420592
* Dynamical Change in Global Biogeochemical Cycles Accompanying Early Animal Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Daniel Rothman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,699,430.00

0420592&lt;br/&gt;Rothman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to identify
and quantify the ways in which the evolution of early animal life influenced,
and was influenced by, changes in global biogeochemical cycles. The time
interval of interest ranges roughly from 500-600 million years ago; it began
with the earliest known microscopic animal fossils and culminated with the rapid
diversification of marine animals known as the "Cambrian explosion." Recent work
based on analyses of geochemical data indicates that these evolutionary changes
were accompanied by a major dynamical transition in the global carbon cycle.
This transition should have been accompanied by increased oxygenation of the
oceans. Because the evolutionary innovations themselves should have been favored
by increased oxygen concentrations, the Cambrian explosion may have been both a
cause and an effect of changes in global biogeochemical
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the validity of these
hypotheses by combining efforts in biogeochemical theory, geologic field
studies, organic geochemistry, and evolutionary biology. A new theoretical
formulation of the global carbon cycle provides a means of relating changes in
the carbon cycle to changes in the isotopic compositions of specific organic
compounds that can be extracted from ancient sediments. Changes in
biogeochemical cycling inferred from analysis of the geochemical data will then
be related to the fossil record of animals and the evolution of algal and other
protistan microfossils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject is central to both
evolutionary theory and Earth history. The work seeks to specify, for one of the
most important intervals in the history of life, how and why environmental
change interacted with changes in the biosphere. It promises to show us the
extent to which global biogeochemical cycles are related to specific aspects of
the biosphere they support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also includes
efforts to improve education in evolution, Earth history, and biogeochemical
cycles, with emphasis on their joint interaction. Exhibits at two museums will
contribute to the education of the general public. The interdisciplinary nature
of the project will also offer unique opportunities for the education of
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;