* 0420815
* MRI:  Acquisition of Nano-Solid Freeform Generator for Micro-optics Replication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Michael Fiddy, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/2007
* USD 430,501.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is for the purchase of (1) a
multi-degree-of-freedom solid freeform generation system for the manufacture of
micro- and nano-scale optical structures and molds and (2) a controlled-cycle
compression molding system. It is a critical component of a rapidly developing
collaborative research program in optical materials, devices, and manufacturing
processes to micro-mold advanced optoelectronic devices. The equipment will be
used for micromilling research for mold fabrication that will allow continuous
profile 3-dimensional molds, complimenting 2-dimensional lithographic molds.
Mold fabrication will be integrated with studies of material processing in
compression molding of new sol-gel and fluoropolymer optical materials. Because
geometry and material properties depend on the replication process, the
scientific research in the design and replication of micro-optical components
will dovetail concurrent metrology advances in the research program.

This equipment forms the manufacturing keystone of a large interdisciplinary
replication program spanning academic and industry institutions in the Carolinas
that will lead to a distributed Micro-Optics Replication Foundry. The Foundry
will allow industry to develop and prototype products, working directly with
faculty and students involved in pre-development research, and expose students
to manufacturing needs and the complete research and development cycle. The
molding infrastructure and capabilities will also be used for advanced
laboratory modules, continuing education workshops, and continued replication
research. The program falls at the interface between the Center for Precision
Metrology and the new Center for Optoelectronics and Optical Communications, and
will fall under the umbrella of the Carolinas MicroOptics Triangle Agreement.
This is a multi-institution agreement that aims to stimulate economic growth
through high-impact research, to provide joint access for students and faculty
to advanced one-of-a-kind facilities, and to deliver a well-trained workforce in
opto-technologies.