* 0420946
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multifunctional Integrated Dual-Beam System for Nanopatterning  and  Simultaneous Modification and Imaging of Surfaces/Interfaces with NM-Scale Precision
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Ganpati Ramanath, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of this program is to purchase a remote-ready, versatile,
multifunctional, customized state-of-the-art Nova NanoLab dual-beam system that
combines the power of e-beam writing with scanning electron microscope (SEM)
with an e-beam writer and focused ion beam (FIB) technologies, on a single
integrated customized platform. &lt;br/&gt;This tool will endow Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute with a quantum leap in its ability to pattern features,
structures and devices from its current capability of 0.5 mm to sub-20 nm
dimensions. In particular, this tool will enable the will allow fabrication and
engineering of novel nano systems, devices and structures through
nanopatterning, and support the study of surface phenomena with nm resolution
therough chiseling, modification, and probing of surfaces and nanostructures of
a wide variety of inorganic, organic and biological materials systems with up to
~10 nm resolution.. The unique capabilities of integrated high resolution
nanopatterning, selective surface modification/engineering of very fine
patterns, simultaneous nanomilling and imaging will enable key activities at the
interfaces of nano-, information- and bio-technologies. and provide services on
the tool. Additionally, we are also pleased to provide an additional $80,000
towards the acquisition of tool from RPI's portion of the Focus Center-NY (a
MARCO-DARPA-SEMI funded center of excellence for Interconnects) funds bringing
Rensselaer's direct cost sharing to ($400,016). More The multifunctional tool
will impact 11515 major research projects involving 36 faculty, 48 graduate
&amp; 22 undergraduate students including 26 women/minorities, and 15 post-docs
in across 7 departments and 52 major research centersin these interdisciplinary
areas critically need a tool that can 1) Nanopattern, 2) provide surface-
specific information with lateral resolution of ~10 nm to 0.5 ?m, and 3) locally
modify surfaces at similar length scales, to permit key advances in these
rapidly evolving fields. Such capabilities are currently unavailable at RPI, or
in the region&lt;br/&gt; The dual beam system will help several critical
interdisciplinary projects involving nanostructures and biomaterials in RPI's
NSF-funded Nanotechnology Science &amp; Engineering Center (NSEC), and those
germane to future electronics devices at Focus Center-New York, RPI (FC-NY, RPI)
and CAIST (Center for Advanced Interconnect Systems Technologies).
.&lt;br/&gt;The tool acquisition will directly benefit more than 3 In addition,
it will help attract bright undergraduate and graduate students and provide
hands-on-training on modern instrumentation to train tomorrow's science &amp;
technology leaders. The remote-ready instrument will serve as a resource for
graduate and undergraduate teaching, allow live projection of experiments in
distance-learning courses, and will be accessible to regional educational
institutions and industry. &lt;br/&gt;