* 0420338
* DISSERTATION RESEACH: Thermal Fragmentation and Genetic Differentiation of Fish Populations in a Riverine Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Michael Douglas, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2005
* USD 11,518.00

&lt;br/&gt;The great utility of running waters has resulted in the extensive
exploitation of streams and rivers throughout the world, a process greatly
facilitated by the construction of hundreds of thousands of dams globally. It is
well established that dams have a fragmenting effect on the landscape by
blocking the movement of individuals between essential habitats required to
complete their life cycle (e.g., salmon species in the Pacific Northwest).
Moreover, many dams throughout the world have dramatically modified downstream
environments by selectively releasing cold water from reservoirs in order to
establish productive trout fisheries in the tailwater reaches of the dammed
river. Our recent research in southeastern United States shows that the
conversion from warmwater to coldwater habitats can result in significant losses
to fish populations in the tailwaters, whereas the adjoining, warmwater
tributaries provide thermal refugia and contain extremely dense and diverse fish
assemblages. These results led to the hypothesis that coldwater-release dams may
have an additional fragmenting effect by restricting fish movement through the
cold tailwaters, which over time could lead to the genetic differentiation of
the tributary fish populations. We address this hypothesis by examining the
genetic structure of 3 fish species that exhibit different thermal preferences
and mobility's in a series of tributaries that are separated by different
tailwater temperatures and geographic distances. This is the first examination
of how human-induced thermal barriers to movement may shape the genetic
structure of fish populations in fragmented tributaries, and has important
implications for focusing future management and conservation efforts aimed at
improving the thermal connectivity of warmwater tributaries in tailwater
environments in order to ensure the long-term persistence of warmwater fish
assemblages.&lt;br/&gt;