* 0420538
* Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Richard Haskell, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 355,583.00

A grant has been awarded to Harvey Mudd College under the direction of Dr. David
J. Asai for the acquisition of a confocal fluorescence microscope. The
understanding of living systems depends on the ability to obtain images of cells
and tissues in four dimensions, with the timescales of the fourth dimension
ranging from molecular reactions to evolution by natural selection. High-
resolution confocal fluorescence microscopy is a powerful vehicle with which to
visualize cellular dynamics. Over the past decade, this technology has matured
so that today confocal microscopy is a widely applied standard tool of
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shared confocal microscope facility will
advance research projects aimed at the visualization of dynamic processes in a
diversity of experimental systems and timescales: (i) membrane lipids in the
cold signaling response in plants; (ii) control of cell shape by molecular
motors in ciliated protozoa; (iii) reorganization of cellular proteins that
accompanies the differentiation of corneal cells; (iv) development of new
technologies to visualize tissue remodeling; and (v) measurement of population
diversity and evolution of soft corals. Further, a key use of the facility will
be in undergraduate education, including undergraduate research projects and a
formal laboratory course in cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harvey Mudd
College is a small, highly selective, undergraduate institution that focuses on
science, engineering, and mathematics. The confocal microscope will present an
important new opportunity to engage these talented students in the process of
biological discovery. The instrument will facilitate interdisciplinary discovery
and learning (the five co-PIs are in Biology, Engineering, and Physics), enable
undergraduate research (last year there were 28 research students, of whom 16
are women, in the five laboratories), and anchor a new laboratory module in
confocal fluorescence microscopy. Surprisingly, despite the fact that confocal
microscopy is now a standard tool in biology, the confocal microscope acquired
through this award will be the first confocal microscope on the seven Claremont
Colleges, and will thus represent an important new resource for faculty and
students across the Claremont campuses. &lt;br/&gt;