* 0420506
* Collaborative Research:     ITWF:   Building Communities:   Recruiting and Retention of Underrepresented Groups in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Vladimir Uskov, Bradley University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 08/31/2008
* USD 39,888.00

Abstract Title: ITWF Collaborative Research: Building Communities: Recruiting
and Retention of Underrepresented Groups in Computer Science

CNS 0420505, PI Kamin, Univ. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign CNS 0420000, PI
Califf, Illinois State University CNS 0420458, PI Lucht, Heartland Community
College CNS 0420468, PI Mobasseri, Parkland College CNS 0420506, PI Uskov,
Bradley University CNS 0420321, PI Van Cleave, Eastern Illinois University



This collaborative ITWF project implements a set of activities designed to
increase participation of women and under-represented minorities in
undergraduate computer science programs in the state of Illinois. The project
includes high school outreach, curriculum reform, mentoring, and other
extracurricular activities. It is a collaborative project between the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois State University, Heartland Community
College, Parkland College, Bradley University, and Eastern Illinois University.
The project involves building communities among various groups within the state
to recruit, support, and retain students in computing courses and programs. The
intellectual merit of this project lies in the strong research basis for the
intervention models as well as the vertical integration of the models at a range
of secondary and post-secondary institutions within the state. The project plan
is clear and reasonable with well-defined roles for the partners. The project
builds on existing programs and partnerships within the state and includes
investigators with significant relevant experience.

The broader impacts of the project lie with the potential increasing the
participation of under-represented groups in computer science within one state.
If successful, the project may provide a sound model for similar broad-based
approaches in other states and geographical areas.

