* 0420958
* Acquistion of a High-Pressure Freezing/Freeze Substition System for Electron Tomography and Immunocytochemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert Josephs, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2007
* USD 217,546.00

This award partially supports the acquisition of a high-pressure freezing and
freeze substitution instruments for the electron microscopy (EM) Core facility
at the University of Chicago. This technology will allow biologists to perform
advanced EM by taking advantage of recent developments in immunocytochemistry
and electron tomography. Compared to standard aldehyde fixation, cryofixation
has the advantage of immobilizing cellular structures within milliseconds,
thereby avoiding common fixation artifacts such as shape changes and membrane
fusion. Cryofixation is useful for immunocytochemistry because structure can be
well preserved without loss of antigenicity. Performing cryofixation at high
pressures allows relatively thick samples to be frozen without being damaged by
ice crystal formaton. This method is particularly appropriate for electron
tomography, which enables biological structures to be reconstructed in three
dimensions at nanometer resolution. In recent years, electron tomography has
become a powerful tool for studying cellular processes such as organelle
remodeling, membrane trafficking, and mitotic spindle dynamics. Several
researchers at the University of Chicago have collaborated with groups at other
institutions to perform high-pressure freezing and/or electron tomography of
yeast, protist, and mammalian cells, and other cell biology and physiology
researchers here need these techniques to answer pressing scientific questions.
Users of the new techniques will include postdocs, graduate students, and
undergraduates in University labs, as well as undergraduates who visit the
University for summer research internships. High-pressure freezing has not been
available in Chicago or the immediate vicinity, so the requested system will
also be a valuable addition for researchers at nearby institutions. In addition,
the new equipment and methods will be incorporated into classroom teaching at
the graduate and undergraduate levels.