* 0420711
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for the UWO Aquatic Research Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Michael Lizotte, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 01/31/2008
* USD 189,628.00

This award supports the acquisition of instrumentation for aquatic research and
education at University of Wisconsin Oshkosh (UWO). The project goals are to:
(1) support aquatic biology and cross-disciplinary research; (2) provide new
opportunities for university and K-12 teaching; and (3) initiate public outreach
activities focusing on scientific approaches to understand and manage aquatic
resources. One theme linking all these goals is the use of instruments to study
and monitor aquatic systems for drinking water quality, ecological integrity,
pollution dispersal, and other public concerns. Instrumentation to be acquired
include: (1) instrument sondes, sensors, and samplers for use in experimental
enclosures, (2) laboratory instruments to provide calibration and validation for
field instruments; and (3) an artificial streams system for controlled
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities that will be
supported by these new instruments include biogeochemical studies of the Fox-
Wolf watershed (augmenting major efforts downstream to study eutrophication and
pollution in Green Bay), mechanistic studies of growth regulation in aquatic
consumers, experimental studies of wild rice critical to re-introduction
efforts, and physiological ecology studies of phytoplankton exopolymer
production. We will also use these facilities as research training tools for
university courses, undergraduate and graduate (M.S.) projects, and for science
teacher training.