* 0420005
* US-Ireland Dissertation Enhancement:   Quantum Cascade Laser Based Mid-Infrared Sensor Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Boris Mizaikoff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 05/31/2005
* USD 18,000.00

0420005&lt;br/&gt;Mizaikoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this one-year U.S.-Ireland
dissertation enhancement project between Georgia Institute of Technology and the
National Centre of Sensor Research (NCSR) at Dublin City University, the
investigators will collaborate on micro fabrication of integrated sensing
devices. Christy Charlton, a senior graduate student of Boris Mizaikoff, the
principal investigator on related NSF award (0216368), will work with the
Director of NCSR, Brian MacCraith, on the development of miniaturized mid-
infrared sensing platforms using planar waveguide technology and quantum cascade
laser light sources. This project is part of a strategic research alliance in
chemical sensors and biosensors between Georgia Tech and NCSR Dublin that
involves an exchange of faculty and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach combines theoretical design
aspects with device fabrication and experimental testing. The project focuses on
a new generation of highly sensitive molecule specific sensing devices providing
a generic modular sensing platform for development of a wide variety of infrared
sensing devices. The use of spectroscopic sensor technology is at the forefront
of current challenges for chemical, biological and biomimetic
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
integrates research and education at the international level and involves a
unique interdisciplinary education environment for the U.S. student. The
complexity of the proposed problems demands a crosscutting approach in the
fields of chemistry, materials sciences, micro fabrication, physics, theory and
spectroscopy. It takes advantage of multi-user facilities in Ireland and
extensive Irish expertise in mid-infrared sensor technology based on optical
fibers. &lt;br/&gt;