* 0420947
* Acquisition of a Servo-Hydraulic Test System and Environmental Chamber for Research and Teaching in Civil and Mechanical Engineering at Minnesota State University, Mankato
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* W. James Wilde, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2006
* USD 212,565.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This request for instrumentation funding is for an
MTS servo-hydraulic load test system and the construction of an environmental
chamber in the Construction Materials Testing Laboratory of the civil
engineering program at Minnesota State University, Mankato (MSU). The civil
engineering program at MSU began less than three years ago and has been building
up laboratories and educational equipment to enhance the research and
educational opportunities for the faculty and students in the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation requested will be used primarily for
research in materials characterization of Portland cement and asphalt cement
concrete, as well as for undergraduate and continuing education and training.
The materials characterization research will focus on three areas: a) the
properties of Portland cement and asphalt cement concrete that relate to
mechanistic design of pavements and other structures, b) evaluation and control
of evaporation of water from concrete using various curing methods, c) the
fatigue characteristics of those materials in cold-weather climates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A research focus area in each of those three topics will
be expected, beginning with the recruiting of undergraduate students interested
in research to work in those areas. With the this instrumentation, the
Construction Materials Testing Laboratory at MSU will have the capability to
compete for national research projects through the Federal Highway
Administration, the National Cooperative Highway Research Program, the
Innovative Pavement Research Foundation, and other government and non-profit
research organizations. The lab will also provide faculty with better
opportunities to collaborate with other researchers in the region and the
nation, and consequently to attract faculty and students to MSU to teach and
study. &lt;br/&gt;