* 0420923
* MRI: Development: Design and Development of Near Field Acoustic Holography (NFAH) System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Vinayak Dravid, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2008
* USD 277,000.00

This is an instrument development project at Northwestern University (NU)
supported by the Major Research Instrumentation program. A unique and patented
technique of Near-Field Acoustic Holography (NFAH) system will be developed.
This will be a novel system and will address emerging issues in imaging and
analysis of diverse "embedded" nano and microscale structures, and engineered
systems. NFAH development program will significantly contribute to achieiving
the research/educations goals of Northwestern University and collaborative
partners. There is a remarkably broad interest in applications of the proposed
development across dozens of potential faculty users, other local
academic/research institutions (Argonne, UIUC, UIC) as well as industrial
clients (JEOL, Asylum Research, Veeco, Molecular Imaging, Baxter, AMD, GE,
SEMATECH and Dow Corning). The instrument will be an integral part of NU's new
multiuser, multifunctional and full 24/7 access NUANCE (Northwestern University
Atomic and Nanoscale Characterization Experimental) Center
(www.nuance.northwestern.edu), and will be housed within the NIFTI (Nanoscale
Integrated Fabrication, Testing and Instrumentation) user facility. A fully
integrated development, implementation and usage program is planned, which draws
from 400+ existing users of NUANCE, and plans to enhance the usage through short
courses, web-based content delivery, extensive hands-on training and educational
initiatives. It will also enhance NU's nano-analytical infrastructure, and
Northwestern's mission towards the "Highest Order of Excellence", namely Life
and Biomedical Sciences and Materials Science in their broadest definition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument development project at
Northwestern University (NU) is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation
program. This project involves in-house development, of a unique and patented
technique of Near-Field Acoustic Holography (NFAH) system. This novel system
will address emerging issues in imaging and analysis of diverse "embedded" nano
and microscale structures, and engineered systems. NFAH development program will
significantly contribute to achieiving the research/educations goals of
Northwestern University and collaborative partners. There is a remarkably broad
interest in applications of the proposed development across dozens of potential
faculty users, other local academic/research institutions (Argonne, UIUC, UIC)
as well as industrial clients (JEOL, Asylum Research, Veeco, Molecular Imaging,
Baxter, AMD, GE, SEMATECH and Dow Corning).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
development project will be an integral part of NU's new multiuser,
multifunctional and full 24/7 access NUANCE (Northwestern University Atomic and
Nanoscale Characterization Experimental) Center (www.nuance.northwestern.edu),
and will be housed within the NIFTI (Nanoscale Integrated Fabrication, Testing
and Instrumentation) user facility. A fully integrated development,
implementation and usage program is planned, which draws from 400+ existing
users of NUANCE, and plans to enhance the usage through short courses, web-based
content delivery, extensive hands-on training and educational initiatives. It
will also enhance NU's nano-analytical infrastructure, and Northwestern's
mission towards the "Highest Order of Excellence", namely Life and Biomedical
Sciences and Materials Science in their broadest definition.&lt;br/&gt;