* 0420863
* MRI: Acquisition of New Single Crystal X-Ray Diffraction System for Teaching/Research Laboratory
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Tatiana Timofeeva, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 544,442.00

X-Ray diffraction analysis is essential for the direct and unambiguous
determination of the molecular and crystal structure of materials. Nowadays,
crystal structure investigations are used in numerous areas of science and
technology: analytical, organic, inorganic and organometallic chemistry,
biochemistry (in particular, in protein crystallography), solid-state physics,
mineralogy, materials and forensic science, and pharmacology. The present
project is acquiring an X-ray diffraction X8APEX system (Bruker AXS Inc., USA)
and Crystallization System for single crystal growth directly on a
diffractometer. This instrumentation will allow us to create a modern teaching
analytical and structural research. The X8APEX system is a product that
collected the best features of worldwide Bruker and Nonius development: the most
sensitive APEX CCD detector (Bruker), the most precise yet flexible Kappa
goniostat (Nonius), and state-of-the-art software. Notable features of this
system are high speed data collection, sensitivity of the area detector (which
allows work with very small and weakly diffracting samples), the opportunity to
work with unstable and low melting samples due to low temperature system, and
simplicity of application. They are studying structure-property relations in
several classes of objects such as nonlinear and electro-optical materials,
propellants, minerals and bioactive compounds.

X-Ray diffraction analysis is used to determine the structure of materials.
These investigations are used in numerous areas of science and technology:
chemistry, biochemistry physics, mineralogy, materials and forensic science, and
pharmacology. We are updating our x-dffraction instrumentation through the
acquisition of newer instrumentation that fosters ease of use, rapid data
acquisition, sensitive detection systems and state-of-the-art software. These
capabilities will let us work with materials which are often difficult to study,
including small and weakly diffracting samples, as well as unstable and low
melting samples. This will allow us to determine structure-property relations in
several classes of objects such as nonlinear and electro-optical materials,
propellants, minerals and bioactive compounds.