* 0420252
* SBIR Phase I: Casting Technology for High Temperature Titanium Alloy Lattice Block Structures
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Edward Chen, TiTech International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will produce high
temperature titanium alloy lattice block materials (LBM) via casting. Lattice
block materials are innovative periodic cellular materials that derive their
outstanding mechanical performance from a structure of highly ordered internal
triangles, rather than the properties of the parent material. To date, these
engineered materials have been successfully cast for a number of ferrous and
non-ferrous metals. For titanium alloys, only limited work has been done, mainly
on compositions that are used at moderate temperature ranges. As higher
temperature titanium alloys such as beta titanium are increasingly becoming the
materials of choice for high temperature airframe and aero engine applications.
Beta titanium alloys are extremely difficult to cast into complex and thin-
walled shapes due to factors, including a propensity for forming shrinkage at
the centerline of sections. Thus, a unique casting technology is being developed
to make it possible to produce high temperature titanium alloy LBM. Potential
applications include aircraft and spacecraft structures, including thermal
protection systems, as well as aircraft and automotive engine components.

The broader impacts derived from this technology would be Ti-LBM opportunities
for weight and cost reduction for use in in future aerospace and non-aerospace
systems. Ti-LBM can be used to replace more expensive honeycomb and sandwich
structures built up from thin sheets/foils via hot forming, diffusion bonding,
and superplastic forming. LBM made from high temperature Ti alloys would be
capable of replacing lower temperature Ni-based superalloys for significant
weight savings.