* 0420205
* SGER:  Snow Chemical Composition and Its Relation to Arctic Springtime Mercury Deposition and Ozone Depletion
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Thomas Douglas, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 03/31/2005
* USD 90,908.00

This study will involve the systematic sampling of snow in northern Alaska
during the critical springtime period when ozone depletion events (ODE) and
mercury deposition events (MDE) take place. It has been known for sometime that
unusual chemistry takes place during sunrise at high northern latitudes, in
which chemistry involving bromine leads to boundary layer ozone destruction, and
deposition of mercury. The details of the source of the bromine and the exact
chemical mechanisms are still under study. The deposition of mercury is a
potential environmental hazard, and thus it is important to understand the
details of the processes. This study will attempt to quantify the functional
dependence of mercury deposition and halogen abundance on distance from the
ocean source region, meteorology, and other factors. This project leverages the
existence of the Barrow Arctic Mercury Study (BAMS) that will provide
infrastructure and detailed chemical and physical measurements at Barrow,
Alaska, and will extend BAMS through geographical sampling of snow in the region
south and west of Barrow. In addition, satellite observations of bromine
monoxide (BrO) will be used to track the evolution of ozone depletion events and
to help plan the snow sampling periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The snow samples
will be collected along three transects between Barrow, Wainwright, and Atqasuk.
The three villages form a triangle with legs approximately 100 km long. Barrow
and Wainwright sit on the shore of the Arctic Ocean, while Atqusuk lies inland.
The hypothesis that the chemistry responsible for ozone depletion and mercury
deposition is limited by availability of bromide ion in the snow will be
rigorously tested by this experiment. Studies will be performed after sunrise,
but well before the active ozone depletion period, near equinox when depletion
chemistry is very active, and late in the spring when ozone depletion has ended
but snow remains on the ground. The snow will be sampled for a number of
quantities including mercury, ions and the deuterium and oxygen isotopic
composition of water. These measurements will allow the quantification of the
target quantities (mercury and bromide) as well as species that will aid in
correlating specific snow layers at the different
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve understanding of the
mechanism of mercury deposition and be of benefit to the inhabitants of regions
impacted by this springtime phenomenon. The spatial extent and intensity of
mercury deposition will be studied in the region. This will lead to better
understanding of the global mercury budget. The budget provides graduate student
support, and the PIs intend to make presentations on their research at the three
remote villages bounding the study region, thereby improving public
understanding of the relevant issues.