* 0420103
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Impact of Foreign Aid on Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Clark Gibson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

How does foreign aid affect politics in aid-recipient countries? Although
political reform is increasingly central to aid programs, foreign assistance
appears to be undermining democracy (e.g., Brautigam 2001; Knack 2001; Remmer
2004). Despite evidence that suggests aid leads to the erosion of democratic
institutions, remarkably little is known about the causal links. On the one
hand, aid-recipient governments may be using aid as a form of patronage (Moore
1998; Remmer 2004). On the other hand, conditions on aid may force aid-recipient
governments to treat aid donors as a constituency (Craig and Porter 2003; Knack
and Rahman 2003; Waal 1997). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this study is clear because these hypotheses have not been synthesized to
develop a coherent theory of the political impact of foreign aid. Now is a
crucial moment to examine how aid impacts domestic politics because after nearly
a decade of declining aid flows, donors are increasing their aid budgets and
explicitly are conditioning aid on democratic reforms (see Crawford 2001;
Doornbos 2001; Radelet 2003; UNDP 2002; World Bank 2003). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
In order to investigate how aid may be undermining democratic institutions, this
project proposes a country case study of Tanzania, one of the world.s largest
recipients of foreign aid. The research will consist of qualitative and
quantitative analyses. The quantitative analysis will examine if sub-national
variation in aid flows can help explain sub-national variation in citizens.
perceptions of government accountability. Completing the quantitative analysis
requires combining data on sub-national aid distribution with existing sub-
national public opinion data on perceptions of democracy and government
effectiveness. The qualitative analysis will consist of interviews with
government officials, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), and leading
opposition political figures in three regions: a region that receives high aid
flows (Arusha), a region that receives intermediate aid flows (Iringa), and a
region that receives low aid flows (Rukwa). The purpose of the interviews is to
investigate the hypothesized causal mechanisms that link variation in aid flows
to differences in perceptions of government accountability more deeply existing
survey data permits. The core hypothesis is that in Tanzania, sub-national
governments which receive larger aid flows will be less responsive to citizen
demands than governments receiving less aid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
requires conducting research for approximately one year. Two to three months
will be used to collect data on sub-national aid distribution in Dar es Salaam,
where most aid agencies and government ministries have their headquarters. Nine
to ten months will be used for regional interviews. To complete comprehensive
interviews will require spending approximately two weeks in each of the fifteen
districts that comprise the three regions and conducting between fifteen and
twenty interviews per district. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the study
will have unambiguous implications for aid program design. While existing
studies suggest that foreign aid is weakening democratic institutions, the
results of these studies do not make clear why aid may be undermining democracy
nor do they provide donors with guidance they need to redesign aid programs to
mitigate unintended political consequences and promote democratic reform.
&lt;br/&gt;Consequently, the broader impact of this project is clear: because
the results of the study will clarify the political effects of existing aid
programs, the results will provide donors with the analysis needed to make more
informed decisions with regard to the role their foreign aid plays in mediating
relations between recipient governments and their citizens. &lt;br/&gt;