* 0420133
* Food Resource Partitioning Among Sympatric Hapalemur Species: Behavioral, Mechanical, and Morphological Correlates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Nayuta Yamashita, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 78,013.00

Three species of Hapalemur (Primates) coexist in a rainforest in Madagascar,
where they subsist on different parts of an unusual food resource, bamboo. These
circumstances create an intriguing natural experiment for examining behavioral
and morphological variables that contribute to the coexistence of these species
on a similar diet. This project will specifically examine relationships between
physical parameters of diets and the form and performance of jaws and teeth
where food is first encountered. Positive relationships between these factors
will support the hypothesis that differences represent feeding adaptations that
allow the lemurs to exploit similar resources without being in direct
competition. These results can serve as a model for interpreting morphology and
dietary reconstruction of extinct primates in the fossil record, while also
addressing the extent to which dietary properties influence morphological
evolution and adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward these goals, this project
will investigate whether the observed dietary differences among Hapalemur
species are solely related to behavioral aspects of food choice or whether they
are also linked to variation in the form and performance of the masticatory
apparatus. Specifically, the project will determine: 1) whether the segregation
or overlap of Hapalemur diets can be linked to variation in plant properties, 2)
whether these plant properties are correlated with variation in dental and jaw
morphology, and 3) whether morphological differences translate into performance
differences in biting and chewing behaviors among species. Even though
divergence in form is typically used as evidence of adaptive specialization,
these morphological differences must result in differential performance if
current morphological variation is the result of directional selection. If
physical dietary properties, jaw and tooth form, and performance of the
masticatory apparatus during chewing and biting are correlated across the lemur
species, then this would suggest that differences in the ability to procure
specific foods could have contributed to reduction of feeding competition.
&lt;br/&gt;Fieldwork will involve: 1) observing feeding behaviors to identify
exact plant parts eaten and establish individual and species differences in food
ingestion and processing; 2) quantifying food properties by testing plant parts
eaten and rejected by the lemurs for toughness, hardness, and elastic modulus
using a portable mechanical tester; and 3) comparing the morphology and
performance of the jaws and teeth of Hapalemur individuals by taking tooth
impressions, measuring jaws, quantifying maximum jaw gapes, and estimating
maximum bite force capabilities on anesthetized animals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has a strong educational component that
involves supporting and training students in the host country. Malagasy students
will work with the researchers in all aspects of this project. In addition to
providing assistance in the field, each student will be supervised in separate,
parallel research projects toward completion of their Master's equivalent
degrees. The future conservation of these primates and other rare endemic
species will be led by local researchers who must be well-trained. It is the
hope of the project investigators to contribute to this effort by exposing
students to broad evolutionary questions and fieldwork opportunities that they
can then apply to their own research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;