* 0420790
* Acquisition of an ICP-Optical Emission Spectrometer for Undergraduate Research in the Natural Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Kenneth Johnson, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 106,167.00

0420790 Johnson

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program grant supports acquisition of
an inductively-coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) at the
University of Houston-Downtown (UHD). UHD is a non-Ph.D. granting and minority
serving institution. Ongoing and future undergraduate research projects at UHD
encompass a wide spectrum of geologic and environmental topics, for which ICP-
OES capabilities for trace element determinations in aqueous solutions are
essential. Specific scientific studies currently underway at UHD that will
utilize the ICP-OES include: 1) a study of the origin and evolution of sub-
volcanic magma chambers, and the tectonic implications of magmatism, in the
western United States; 2) a geochemical study of hydrothermal iron ore deposits
in the western U.S.; 3) compositional distinctions between geophagous clays
(i.e., clay deliberately consumed by humans) and non-geophagous clays; 4)
determination of heavy metal pollutants in the Houston Ship Channel; and 5)
evaluation of metal contents and metals leaching in heavily agricultural soil
profiles. One of the principal goals of the science faculty at UHD is to produce
science graduates with the knowledge and skills necessary for entry into a
graduate program, or into science-related employment, directly upon graduation.
Purchase of an ICP-OES will strengthen the science program at UHD, particularly
in the geosciences, and will allow students to gain expertise in one of the most
powerful analytical tools available today. It is anticipated that inclusion of
this technology will help promote interest in the sciences amongst
underrepresented minorities and further enhance other programs at UHD designed
to increase the number of minority students earning baccalaureate degrees in the
natural sciences.

***