* 0420938
* RUI: Vasotocin Mechanisms Controlling Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Richmond Thompson, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* J. Steven de Belle
* 06/30/2008
* USD 304,047.00

Vasotocin is a chemical produced in the brains of fish, reptiles, amphibians and
birds and is very similar to a chemical produced in the brains of mammals,
including humans, which is called vasopressin. These related chemicals influence
a variety of social behaviors, including courtship, aggression, and pair-bonding
in numerous animals, possibly even in humans. However, little is known about how
these chemicals act inside of the brain to exert their influences on a variety
of behaviors. Goldfish are an ideal species in which to study such processes
because they are very social and because the vasotocin systems in their brains
are easily manipulated, to reveal important mechanisms for how these chemicals
might work. In goldfish, vasotocin inhibits a very basic form of social
behavior, approach responses toward other fish. The present project will use
behavioral, neuroanatomical and molecular techniques to determine how and where
vasotocin acts within the brain to induce such effects and if different levels
of sociality are associated with individual differences in these brain systems.
It is predicted that vasotocin inhibits social approach behavior in this species
by activating brain systems involved in the control of body processes related to
emotional fight or flight reactions. Because the brain vasotocin and vasopressin
systems that potentially control such processes are similar in many animals,
including humans, such findings could implicate mechanisms that may be
widespread in the animal kingdom and may even represent one of the original ways
through which this chemical affected social behavior in vertebrate animals.
Therefore, these studies have the potential to increase our understanding of how
the brain systems that control social behavior may have evolve, as well as of
how specific neurochemical processes influence social behavior in modern
species. Undergraduate students, many whom are senior honor's students, will
play an important role in the implementation of studies addressing these
specific goals.