* 0420380
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Plio-Quaternary uplift and tectonism of western Mexico from geologic studies and 36Cl cosmogenic isotopes
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Kevin Righter, Universities Space Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/2005
* USD 55,298.00

0123000&lt;br/&gt;Righter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This US-Mexico award will fund a
collaborative project between Dr. Kevin Righter, of the Lunar and Planetary
Institute, in collaboration with Dr. Jose Rosas-Elguera of the University of
Guadalajara, Mexico. The researchers aim to study the Cenozoic volcanic and
tectonic evolution of western Mexico. The project will help to determine ages of
more recent volcanic activity in western Mexico, and improve our understanding
of the spatial and temporal distribution of volcanism. The Division of Earth
Sciences will also contribute partial support for this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cenozoic volcanic and tectonic evolution of western
Mexico has been influenced by two processes - extension from opening of the Gulf
of California, and compression from the subduction of the Rivera Plate beneath
the North American Plate. Although there is some evidence for uplift in western
Mexico, the timing of that uplift is uncertain. It may be young and related
entirely to the current subduction environment. Or it could date back to the
mid-Cenozoic, when the region started undergoing change as a result of the
transfer of Baja California to the Pacific Plate. In order to understand the
uplift history of this region, the researchers propose to determine regional
uplift rates in the Atenguillo region of western Mexico, using new isotopic
methods. The technique has been tested successfully on a small suite of samples.
In addition, a selected suite of very young volcanic rocks will be dated from
the western Mexico region. Results of this study will be integrated with
geologic studies of the area, and also with the results of recent and ongoing
regional plate motion and GPS studies.&lt;br/&gt;