* 0420510
* MRI: Acquistion of Telecommunications Test Equipment for Research and Training
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Wm Randall Babbitt, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2006
* USD 173,168.00

The objective of this research is to perform system-level measurements of end-
to-end performance of novel components including ultra-narrow line width laser
sources, optical signal processing and optical memory components using spatial-
spectral holography (SSH) techniques, highly-tunable light sources, and unique
ultra-dense wavelength division multiplexing (UDWDM) techniques. These novel
components leverage a rich research foundation in optical materials at Montana
State University (MSU) dedicated to the exploration of optically active crystals
and emerging organic materials. These materials and components will be used to
develop new system architectures to simultaneous exploit temporal, spatial and
spectral domains to achieve orders of magnitude increases in the capacity and
flexibility of communications networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
enables MSU to provide system-level training to undergraduate and graduate
students, postdoctoral students, and research staff in the use of state-of-the-
art optical network test equipment and methodology. MSU has a strong tradition
of combining research and teaching, engaging undergraduates through senior-level
design projects during the academic year and participation in sponsored research
in the academic year and over the summers. MSU has several active REU programs
that engage students in device and system level research activities. The MSU REU
programs actively seek out Native American students from the Tribal Colleges in
Montana, and the College of Engineering is funded by the Hewlett Foundation to
recruit and retain Native American undergraduate engineering students. This
instrumentation grant leverages these other programs, providing additional
educational opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;