* 0420504
* Acquisition of a DNA Microarray Printer and Scanner
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Lisa Bain, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 145,007.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Texas at El Paso, under the
direction of Dr. Lisa Bain, for support of instrumentation to determine altered
gene expression in a variety of organisms in response to different ecological
and physiological variables. Understanding what genes are changed helps to
better characterize effects on organismal functions such as reproduction,
growth, and development, and how these alterations will ultimately affect the
organism, population, or community as a whole. The equipment requested includes
an automated microarrayer and an array reader/scanner, plus the analysis
software. While commercially available microarrays for human or mouse genes
exist, these types of arrays are not available in alternative model species,
including many microorganisms, fish, and snakes, as well as genes for targeted
applications, such as neurobiology. Therefore, a microarray spotter and reader
are necessary for the custom construction and analysis of these types of
microarrays.

Uses of the proposed equipment would include training in bioinformatics courses
and research in ecology, microbiology, physiology, endocrinology, and
neurobiology. For example, studies attempting to discern the mechanisms of
osmoregulation and adaptation to other environmental pressures in two estuarine
fish species, using both custom-made arrays and in collaboration with the
Genipol project in Europe. Rattlesnake venom and other toxins are being
investigated to how understand how snake venom toxin composition may reflect
evolutionary species distribution. Other investigators are collaborating on the
genome project for the protist Giardia, examining how a different microorganism,
Bacillus subtilis, controls sporulation, and what genes confer chlorine
resistance to mycobacteria and enterohemoragic E. coli O157:H7. In terms of
endocrinology and neurobiology, several investigators are examining gene
expression changes in mammary glands following exposure estradiol and estrogen
receptor antagonists. In addition, several of the co-investigators are
developing statistical methodology for identifying genes that best discriminate
the different groups among individual, as well as developing a curriculum in
bioinformatics with more hands-on emphasis on microarray methods in post-genomic
analysis.

The University of Texas at El Paso is a minority-serving institution for
approximately 18,500 students (including 3,500 graduate students), of which 75%
are of Hispanic descent. Because of the high percentage of minority students and
its location on the US-Mexico border, UTEP is a national leader in the education
and training of Hispanic scientists. Support of this grant will be used to train
a number of post-doctoral associates, graduate students, and undergraduate
students on research using the instrumentation. Hand-on training will occur
specifically in our Post-Genomic Analysis class, with the students conducting a
complete, hands-on array experiment from start to finish, while two other
classes will make use of already scanned arrays, performing statistical analysis
and interpretation of data sets. With access to this state-of-the-art
instrumentation, UTEP will produce well-trained students capable of serving the
science needs of the region and the nation.

