* 0420932
* Regulation of Arabidopsis HFR1 Activity in Light Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Haiyang Wang, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 08/31/2008
* USD 339,322.00

The sessile nature of plants demands a high degree of plasticity in their growth
and development in response to the ambient environment, and light is one of the
major environmental signals that controls many aspects of plant development.
Arabidopsis seedling photomorphogenesis has been used as a model system for
molecular genetic studies to dissect the mechanisms regulating light signaling
in plants. Two blue/UV-A absorbing cryptochromes (cry1 and cry2) and five
red/far-red light absorbing phytochromes (phyA-phyE) are the primary
photoreceptors responsible for mediating Arabidopsis seedling
photomorphogenesis. HFR1, a bHLH transcription factor, acts as a positive
regulator in both phyA-mediated far-red and cry1-mediated blue light signaling.
A regulatory mechanism of HFR1 activity was suggested by the observed physical
interactions between HFR1 with COP1 and SPA1. COP1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase
targeting a subset of positive regulators of photomorphogenesis for degradation,
thus repressing photomorphogenesis. SPA1 is a negative regulator of phyA
signaling and is structurally related to COP1. It is hypothesized that COP1
ubiquitinates HFR1 in a process modulated by SPA1, and targets HFR1 for
degradation via the 26S proteasome pathway, thus desensitizing light signaling.
Experiments are designed to substantiate such a working hypothesis at the
genetic, physiological and biochemical levels. The outcome of this research is
expected to: 1) provide significant insights into the regulatory mechanisms of
HFR1 function in both phyA and cry1 signaling, a better understanding of COP1
and SPA1 function, and the role of regulated proteolysis in regulating plant
development in general; 2) provide guidance for genetic engineering to fine-tune
light-responsive growth traits (such as height, leaf area, flowering time and
sowing density) in crops of agronomic importance; 3) provide excellent training
opportunities for scientists at different levels, including postdoctoral
fellows, graduate and undergraduate/high school students/high school teachers,
with a focus on the inclusion of underrepresented groups.