* 0420906
* Development of a Safe, Virtual Imaging Instrument for Logically Destructive Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Jan Vitek, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2010
* USD 825,000.00

This proposal, developing a networked system to allow safe and rapid analysis of
network security and vulnerabilities with respect to worms, viruses, and other
malicious conduct, creates a reconfigurable facility, named ReASSURE, for
efficient reproducible, controlled, and safely contained experiments in computer
science and technology with emphasis on information assurance and security. The
new instrument will integrate functionalities in a manner that will enable high
levels of safety and efficiency in manipulating, testing, and developing
potentially dangerous experimental networking and virtual machine software while
providing computational power to remote users. Advancing the study of virtual
machine technology, the activity offers settings where potentially dangerous
experimentation with networking and VM technologies can be performed safely.
Providing as testbed networking facility, the infrastructure supports projects
that require "self-contained" computing environments in computer science
(including security), computer technology, forensics, and information
warfares.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Undergraduate classes will make
use of the instrument, and both graduate and undergraduate students will be
involved in its making. Attention will be given to women and underrepresented
groups. The testbed impacts 15 projects of 8 faculty members at Purdue and at
the CERIAS affiliates, Syracuse University, and the US Air Force Institute of
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;