* 0420158
* SBIR Phase I:     Novel Sensor for Control of Cleaning Processes During the Fabrication of Microstructures
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Bert Vermeire, Environmental Metrology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project provides a unique
and robust in-situ sensor for detection and control of impurities in
microstructures and porous layers associated with manufacturing of
semiconductor, MEMS and emerging nano devices. Use of impedance as a measure of
contamination in bulk fluids is well established. However, applying it in micro-
scale features (potentially down to a few nanometers) is novel, provides high
sensitivity, and has many promising applications. This project focuses on
development of a unique, low cost, rapid response, integrated sensor that will
detect the impurities inside microstructures directly. The project will develop
this in two embodiments- integrated with a monitor wafers moving with the
product, and as a stand-alone sensor integrated with the process tool. Direct
monitoring of residual impurities inside or on the surface of the
microstructures will allow more accurate and reliable process control. The
technology will also have similar application in some new areas such as
supercritical fluids processing where no in-situ sensors are currently
available. Because of the exceptional sensitivity and flexible layout, this
sensor will also further understanding of the mechanisms involved in chemical
transport inside microstructures.

The broader impact from this technology could be significant. The first
application, amounting to annual commercial market revenue of $9M to $30M, will
be application of the sensor to rinsing and drying of patterned wafers and
porous films in IC manufacturing. Currently, these processes are often performed
and controlled almost "blindly" based on past experience and post-process
control. With shrinking process geometries, a major processing challenge is the
presence of very small structures, often with large aspect ratios. Insufficient
cleaning and drying have significant negative effects on manufacturing yields
and device performance. On the other hand, excessive cleaning, rinsing, or
drying results in damage to the microstructures as well as wasting of chemicals,
water, energy and time - increasing processing cost. The application of the
proposed technology to rinse is expected to reduce water usage by 40-60%.
Together with the reduction in the chemical and energy, this could result in
$3-5 million savings per year in an average fabrication plant.

