* 0420616
* Acquisition of Proteomics Equipment and an MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer for Establishment of a Proteomics/Mass Spectrometry
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Anthony Ouellette, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 255,847.00

A grant has been awarded to SUNY College at Oswego under the direction of Dr.
Anthony Ouellette for the support of a new mass spectrometry and proteomics
facility. This facility will house a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization
- Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometer, equipment to separate and
analyze protein mixtures, and provide computer resources for data analysis
(bioinformatics), including protein and gene sequence database searching. The
masses of molecules and complexes can reveal much about their structure and
composition. Mass spectrometry is a powerful component of proteomics, which is a
broad area of research dealing with the complement of proteins in a given cell
at a given time (the proteome). Proteomic tools are utilized to help answer
questions in many disciplines, from ecology and evolution, to physiology and
medicine. Various investigators, including undergraduates, graduate students,
and professors, will utilize the facility at SUNY-Oswego for training, research,
and teaching, in an integrative, interdisciplinary
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a MALDI-TOF will play a
significant role in modernizing the Chemistry and Biology Departments, greatly
expand the possibilities for course and research offerings, and will strengthen
biochemistry, molecular, and cellular biology at SUNY-Oswego. The center will
provide a hub for sample preparation and analysis for a variety of molecules,
including biological macromolecules and inorganic complexes. The use of software
to analyze data will provide training in bioinformatics. The facility will be
utilized in current and planned research projects concerning metal-ion
complexes, algae toxins, antibiotics, insulin, small mammal enzymes,
microorganism fingerprinting, protein identification, model peptide
characterization, and DNA-nanotube complexes. Mass spectrometry is a powerful
teaching tool as it applies to chemistry, physics, and structural considerations
for macromolecules and complexes. Therefore, the facility will be utilized in a
variety of biology and chemistry courses, from freshmen to masters'
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing importance of mass spectrometry in a
variety of disciplines makes the impact of such a facility far reaching. SUNY-
Oswego is a public, primarily undergraduate institution with approximately 8,500
students enrolled. The creation of this facility will greatly enhance the
research and education infrastructure at SUNY-Oswego. Acquisition of the MALDI-
TOF will provide crucial support for a broad range of undergraduate research
projects and will provide opportunities for meaningful research that would not
otherwise exist. Use of this instrumentation by freshmen as well as in upper
level chemistry and biology courses and undergraduate research ensures that a
large number of university level students will benefit. Furthermore,
collaboration between the University and local high schools will make this
facility available to high school teachers and their classes. This will serve
the local community, and will we believe will encourage more students to pursue
science as a career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;