* 0420869
* MRI:  Construction of a Laboratory to Study FACTS Device Interactions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Bruce McMillin, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2009
* USD 300,000.00

This work, constructing laboratory-scale Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS)
devices and interconnecting them via a simulation engine, studies and reduces
potential deleterious effects, such as congestion or insecure operation, that
may quickly propagate across the grid in complex and dramatic ways resulting in
wide-spread blackouts. The FACTS device family of switched power electronics-
based controllers, presently constitutes one of the most promising new sets of
power controllers. These devices control the power flow through the lines of the
network by rapidly injecting independent current and voltages into the system.
This FACTS network provides a testbed for simultaneously testing both the FACTS
hardware and the distributed fault-tolerant and secure software. The FACTS
device laboratory studies reliability of the power grid, allowing experimental
verification for the dynamics and control of multiple FACTS devices within the
system. The controllers, built to regulate and manage the flow of electricity in
high power energy grids, form an essential part of the constructed scaleable
network of FACTS. Thus, various failure propagation effects in the power grid
are under study to manage and control the flow of energy. A laboratory-scale
FACTS testbed studies how devices behave under different scenarios. While
validating various algorithms using actual devices, researchers conduct
emulation experiments on real hardware to test the correctness of control
algorithms under development. FACT devices provide the necessary capabilities to
build an adaptive power grid. Presently, there is little deployment of such
devices; hence, insufficient experience with them. This project is expected to
provide such experience to the industry. Additionally, the network provides a
unique testbed with which to develop distributed embedded control
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The lab facilitates exploration
of new power control technologies that might result in better use of
transmission facilities, thus having long-term effects for the entire community.
It also provides a physical testbed for advanced courseware, enriching the
environment for both students and their advisors. The equipment will also be
used, as part of the institutions minority program, to encourage under-
represented groups to participate in the project research and will be made
available to other research collaborators at minimal cost. Visualization of the
power grid control on the web makes the work accessible to scientists and
engineers, policy decision makers, and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds requested include the equipment listed below and
associated expenses.&lt;br/&gt; UPFC, Test equipment, Xeon 4 processor,
maintenance&lt;br/&gt; Some students involved in the development&lt;br/&gt;