* 0420581
* Aquisition of a Protein Fractionation System for Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Joseph Angleson, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 08/31/2008
* USD 102,956.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Denver under the direction of Dr.
Phillip Danielson for partial support of the purchase of a Protein Fractionation
System. The accurate fractionation, quantization, recovery and characterization
of individual proteins from complex proteomes are capabilities that are
increasingly essential to the growth and success of biological research and
education. Until recently, the analysis of whole proteomes has been heavily
dependent on 2-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis (2DGE)-based approaches. This
approach required the laborious screening of hundreds to thousands of resolved
"spots" on thin gels. The identification of even a small number of proteins of
interest, can require weeks to months to complete. These more traditional
methods have several critical shortcomings. 2DGE provides poor resolution of the
small peptide hormones and larger membrane-associated proteins that are the
focus of many of researchers programs. Furthermore, 2DGE yields results that are
often difficult to quantify or reproduce. The Protein Fractionation System
provides a cost-effective solution to the traditional limitations of 2DGE-based
proteomic research. Test data from difficult samples have confirmed the
performance and applicability of the system for our research needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research programs that will benefit immediately
include NSF-funded studies of the posttranslational processing and modification
of neuropeptide hormones involved in the management of reproductive stress and
proteomic research aimed at elucidating the underlying neuroendocrine mechanisms
of mammalian feeding behavior. Other studies are examining the molecular
neurobiology of mammalian taste cells, the recycling of neuroendocrine secretory
vesicles and the degradation of misfolded proteins. Finally the Protein
Fractionation system will advance collaborative research in molecular ecology
and conservation biology conducted in collaboration with the Denver Botanical
Gardens. Beyond the benefit to basic research at the University of Denver, a
broad range of laboratory and classroom-oriented educational goals will be
advanced at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Benefits will be
particularly evident in the molecular-oriented laboratory courses that are at
the heart of the Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Arts degrees in Molecular
Biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; On a broader level, department-sponsored
biotechnology classes offered to high school students and teacher-training
workshops that promote hands-on science education at the secondary school level
will also be greatly enhanced by providing first-hand experience in one of the
most modern methods of proteomic analysis. The benefit to high school outreach
efforts will be immeasurable given that these programs target students in urban
and low-income school districts who have traditionally been underrepresented in
the natural sciences. Most importantly, exposing pre-college students to modern
technologies will have a significant and positive impact on student excitement
about science as a career. &lt;br/&gt;