* 0420604
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Multipurpose Plasma-Enhanced CVD Reactor for Nanostructure Fabrication
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Marco Arocha, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 07/31/2006
* USD 317,900.00

A state-of-the-art multipurpose plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition
(PECVD) reactor will be acquired that will enable the synthesis of highly
aligned nanomaterials. This equipment will form the basis of a nanostructured
materials fabrication (NMF) facility to expand the scope of current research
efforts in nanoscience and engineering at University of Puerto Rico - Mayaguez
(UPRM). The proposed NMF will be part of the new Materials Characterization
Center (MCC) at UPRM and will provide new and essential capabilities, in
addition to dramatically increasing research productivity. The new instrument
will give researchers the capability to study nanomaterials from their synthesis
process using experimental and modeling tools to their use in innovative
applications, including: (1) the use of nanotubes for the electrochemical
detection of biomolecules, (2) production of nanotubes with tailored properties
for hydrogen storage, (3) modeling of nanotubes-polymer matrix composites
structural and mechanical properties, and (4) the synthesis of nanonitrides
(whiskers and wires) via the VLS mechanisms.

The General Engineering Department will use this instrument in the education
and training of undergraduate students registered in the undergraduate research
courses offered by the principal investigators, as well as a workshop tool for
the graduate students involved in the projects. It will also become part of the
new graduate courses being offered in coming semesters. This equipment will be a
valuable addition to the existing Materials Science & Engineering infrastructure
at UPRM and it will clearly improve the research and education capabilities of
faculty members in the departments of General, Mechanical, Chemical and
Electrical Engineering and of Chemistry and Physics. This multi-departmental
interest will turn the NMF facility into a setting for the development of
interdisciplinary projects. Hispanic students constitute over 95% of the
Engineering students at UPRM (40% of them female). Therefore, the NMF facility
will have a significant impact on the education of minority engineering
students.