* 0420775
* MRI: Development of a Quantum Engineering Laboratory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* William Holton, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,116,256.00

This MRI proposal seeks NSF funds to develop unique cross-disciplinary Quantum
Engineering Laboratory for comprehensive characterization and development of
future generation of information devices that are based on quantum principles.
Particularly, we propose to develop new material characterization tool capable
of simultaneous millimeter-wave, magnetic resonance, and electrical experimental
measurements (correlated spin and charge transport measurements) on arrays of
single- electron quantum dots and other novel semiconductor materials.
Intellectual merit of the proposed activity. The principal features of the
proposed tool are (1) milli-Kelvin temperature and high magnetic field
capabilities, required to reach high spin polarization and a quantum regime for
single-electron information devices, and (2) capability for simultaneous
electrical & magnetic measurement, required to examine the spin physics of
charged carriers. Acquiring such a capability we will be able to understand the
fundamental quantum physics in such systems and to exploit the spin degree of
freedom for the new generation of information and communication devices that are
based on quantum principles. To achieve these goals we propose to develop the
first of its kind in the world materials characterization tool which will
utilize high homogeneity (at least 10 ppm) 9 T magnet with the cold-bore to
accommodate a top-loading sorption refrigerator with the base temperature of ca.
300 mK. It is proposed to develop a specialized top-loading insert to conduct
synchronized electrical measurements while the spin states are manipulated by
millimeter-wave pulses at 95, 130, and, possibly, 225 GHz. The instrument will
be also capable of comprehensive electrical characterization of quantum dot
materials at high spin polarization states as well as for electron spin
resonance (ESR) measurements to understand the mechanisms of relaxation and
spin-spin coupling. The broader impacts of the proposed activity. The major
impact of the proposed activity will be in enhancing the infrastructure for
research and education. Specifically, development of the Quantum Engineering
Laboratory at NCSU fits the goal of the NSF MRI program because it will serve
the following high priority areas: (1) to fill the gap between materials
characterization facilities currently available in the USA and new quantum
information devices which are theoretically proposed and which prototypes are
already fabricated and will be fabricated in the upcoming months; (2) to
facilitate the discovery of fundamental phenomena in spin-coupled and other
materials containing unpaired electron spins for quantum information processing;
(3) to foster the integration of these multidisciplinary efforts in quantum
information devices and technology and to train students in this emerging
technology; We are engaged in developing advanced instruction in this field
through providing courses in engineering and chemistry at NCSU. Specifically, it
is proposed that students and postdoctoral research associates will participate
in all aspects of the instrument development and materials research studies. To
publicize the development of next generation characterization tool it is
proposed to hold a workshop during the grant period to educate the scientific
community of this emerging technology. Twice a year, a short training course for
students at NCSU and UNC will be offered. The course materials will be made
freely available via Internet. We believe that these quantum electronic devices
will become important to our Nation and therefore are in support of the national
research infrastructure. This belief is supported by NSFs roadmap in information
science and the developing roadmap in Quantum Computing being currently prepared
by a coalition of government research funding agencies.