* 0420625
* Support for the International Union of Soil Sciences (IUSS): Activities of the President
* GEO,GEO
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Donald Sparks, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 07/31/2008
* USD 48,000.00

Dr. Donald Sparks, University of Delaware, will serve as President of the
International Union of Soil Sciences (IUSS). In this capacity he chairs the IUSS
Bureau (the collective name for the IUSS Officers); has oversight of the
management of IUSS, including its scientific activities and budget; prepares
business for and presides at all Bureau and Council meetings; assists in
dissemination of information and publications to members; represents IUSS at
various scientific and policy meetings around the world; represents IUSS at the
NAS/NRC U.S. Committee on Soil Science meetings; and is the IUSS representative
to ICSU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sparks will, in particular, provide
leadership for the planning, preparations, and convening of the 18th World
Congress of Soil Science (WCSS) in July, 2006, in Philadelphia. The IUSS and its
Congress will contribute to improved international exchange of information and
international coordination for soil sciences research that looks at the
biological, geophysical, and geochemical processes in the soil. These processes
influence soil and water conservation, soil quality, land degradation, food
sufficiency and safety, global carrying capacity, global climatic change, and
wetlands protection. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The IUSS and its members are
interested in and involved in a multitude of research initiatives that are of
national and international significance and are directly related to existing and
emerging research thrusts. These include key areas as liquid, gas and biologic
transport; geobiology; trace gas fluxes; soil microbial ecology; carbon
sequestration; molecular environmental science applications to elucidate
biogeochemical cycling, speciation, transport and fate of ions, chemicals, and
microbes through porous media; surface chemistry in relation to microbe-chemical
interactions; vadose zone hydrology; and spatial scaling from molecular to
global environments.&lt;br/&gt;