* 0420982
* Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Environmental, Biological, and Materials Research and Education at UC Merced
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Peggy O'Day, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 323,743.00

0420982&lt;br/&gt;O'Day&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund the
acquisition of a variable-pressure scanning electron microscope (SEM) for our
new Imaging and Microscopy Facility (IMF) at the University of California,
Merced (UCM), the tenth campus of the UC system and the first new UC campus in
nearly 35 years. The academic program at UCM emphasizes interdisciplinary and
multidisciplinary training in the thematic areas of environmental science and
engineering, materials science and engineering, and quantitative and systems
biology. Scanning electron microscopy serves as a basic research tool for the
characterization of solids in a wide variety of studies in environmental,
materials, and biological sciences. A versatile SEM will immediately address the
research and education needs of a majority of the science and engineering
faculty already on-board at UCM. We anticipate significant growth of our user
base over the grant period as UCM opens for students and expands its faculty. We
anticipate that this instrumentation will meet basic research and teaching
infrastructure needs in microscopy for the next 5-10 years, will assist in
recruiting the best new faculty to our university and, because of the visual
nature of microscopy, contribute greatly to outreach efforts to K-14 and the
community. A mission of UCM is to serve the rapidly growing population of the
San Joaquin Valley, which is dominantly Hispanic, has a high immigrant and
first-generation population, and is historically underrepresented in higher
education. We envision this SEM and the IMF as a nascent centralized user
facility that will be a key factor in supporting the teaching and research
mission of UCM across science and engineering, and a driver for our growth into
a mature research university.&lt;br/&gt;