* 0420794
* Acquisition of an fMRI Basic Research Imaging System at the University of Southern California
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Michael Arbib, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,240,504.00

With support from a National Science Major Research Instrumentation Award,
Professor Irving Biederman and his colleagues at the University of Southern
California will purchase a state of the art three Tesla functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) system for the scientific investigation of how
cognitive, emotional, perceptual, memory, linguistic, and motor capacities
emerge from activity of the human brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Joining Professor
Biederman and his Co-PIs Z.-L. Lu, L. Itti, A. Raine, and M. Arbib as users of
the fMRI system will be members of a variety of academic units including the
Neuroscience Program, the Departments of Psychology, Computer Science, Biology,
Gerontology, Biomedical Engineering, Kinesiology, Electrical Engineering, and
the House Ear Institute, Currently the community of interested users includes
approximately 30 faculty and over 100 graduate and post-doctoral students. This
on-campus facility will not only allow these research programs to proceed but
will provide the capability for the development of imaging expertise within this
community. The magnet will be available to researchers from other institutions
as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to probe the activity-not just the
structure-of the intact human brain has been one of the great methodological
advances of neuroscience in the past decade. The instrument will provide high-
resolution images of brain structures but its primary use will be to assess
functioning of the brain as subjects experience various stimuli or perform
various tasks while the system measures neural activity at specific brain loci
in the order of a few millimeters. Among the first of the research projects that
will be launched once the system is installed is one focusing on regions of the
prefrontal cortex known to modulate restraint and an appreciation of the
consequences of one's own actions for individuals with and without a propensity
for impulsive violence. Other studies are designed to understand how an image of
a scene, never perceived previously, could be comprehended in a fraction of a
section. Another will assess whether brain-produced opiates in areas that
mediate comprehension provide the perceptual and cognitive pleasure associated
with novel but interpretable experiences. Another study is motivated by the
finding that neurons in monkey cortex involved in the production of certain
motor movements, such as grasping, also fire when the monkey views the grasp of
another organism. This research will evaluate whether such "mirror" neurons
might be the core imitative capacity fundamental to the evolution of language.
Still another investigation will focus on where and how "episodic memory"-the
mental diaries of our lives-are produced and stored in the
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plans for the operation of the magnet, to be housed
in the Dana and David Dornsife Cognitive Neuroscience Imaging Center, will
include instructional courses designed to give hands-on training and research
experience to undergraduate as well as graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;Special
outreach programs are designed to involve qualified high school students from
the local community as part of an effort to provide opportunities for
underrepresented minorities to be counted among the next generation of
scientists advancing our knowledge of cognitive and behavioral
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;