* 0420397
* SBIR Phase II:  High Conductivity Photoprintable Conducting Polymers for Polymeric Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Brian Elliott, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 12/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
organic dispersible and photoprintable conducting polymers based on
polyethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT). PEDOT is the conducting polymer of choice
for electronic displays and devices due to its high conductivity, stability and
transparency as a thin film. However, it is only available as an aqueous
dispersion, and no one else has been able to render PEDOT dispersible in organic
solvents. It is important to make PEDOT dispersible in organics because water is
incompatible with many semiconductor processing steps. This SBIR project will
develop printable conducting polymers that are initially organic dispersible,
can be cast a thin films, and conducting patterns can be made permanently fixed
by selectively exposing the film to ultraviolet light. The material that is not
exposed to the light can be easily removed. This project will develop printable
PEDOT-based conducting polymers that contain no water, and that can be used in
the production of electronics such as organic light emitting diode (OLED)
displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project hopes to increase knowledge of
organic dispersible conducting polymers. Sample size quantities of organic
dispersible conducting polymers developed in this project will be made available
to researchers by sale through a major chemical distributor. This will promote a
more rapid dissemination of the base technology and quicken the pace of
additional discoveries and applications using our materials. The benefits of
this research to society include a reduced environmental impact due to
electronics manufacturing. The printing technology presented in this proposal
results in fewer chemical waste streams than inorganic electronics production.
Inorganic electronics fabrication facilities produce large amounts of toxic
waste including arsenic and heavy metals. The lack of ground water pollution
from toxins in the decomposition process is a plus for municipalities who
struggle with this issue today. Furthermore, this printing technology will
result in a reduction in the cost and a greater variety of electronic devices
available to consumers. This technology should have a positive impact in areas
where weight sensitivity represents a gating factor.