* 0420880
* Acquisition of Laboratory Equipment for Long-term Water Quality and Watershed Management Projects
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Willard Harman, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 115,269.00

This award supports the acquisition of an auto analyzer capable of running
numerous analytes and a microscope workstation that would bring together three
research-grade microscopes and an image analysis system compatible and
interchangeable with more than one microscope. The instruments will be housed at
SUNY Oneonta's Biological Field Station (BFS) and will be an integral part of
numerous research projects, generally oriented towards environmental,
ecological, and long-term monitoring programs in inland lakes. The instruments
will allow essential data to be collected as part of the BFS's long-term
monitoring on inland lakes (Otsego Lake and nearby ponds; Otsego County, NY).
Biology, chemistry, earth sciences and secondary science education faculty
conducting research projects focusing on invasive species ecology, particularly
dispersal of zebra mussels from lakes to streams; meiofauna communities in
nearshore habitats of lakes; microscopic food webs consisting of freshwater
protozoans (particularly Gymnamoebae), bacteria, and micrometazoans in Otsego
Lake; chironomid mouth-part deformities related to heavy metals and other
environmental pollutants; and subsurface water dynamics will benefit from access
to the instruments. The instruments will allow expansion of monitoring efforts
to include testing ecological theories with small experimental manipulations and
whole-ecosystem (e.g., whole-lake) manipulations. These projects serve the
community by using ecological theory to control cultural eutrophication, monitor
water quality, assess environmental pollutants, and possibly prevent the spread
of aquatic nuisance species. Additionally, the BFS has a strong tradition in
training students (college-bound high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students) in ecological and environmental studies. The purchase will provide
access to modern research instrumentation to many undergraduate interns, biology
education majors required to conduct and present novel environmental research,
and graduate students as they conduct independent and directed research
projects.