* 0420549
* Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Gregory Grant, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 279,983.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Tennessee in Chattanooga will
acquire a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) Spectrometer. This equipment
will enable researchers to carry out studies on a) organometallic catalysis of
stereoselective organic reactions; b) multinuclear analysis of heavy metal
thioether complexes; c) reduction of organic compounds by catalytic transfer
hydrogenation using Raney catalysts and hydrogen donors; d) the reactions
mechanism of pyridinium chlorochromate oxidation of bis-homoallylic tertiary
alcohols; and e) the effect of inhibitors on pyrimidine de novo biosynthetic
pathway enzymes

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential
to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR
studies will have an impact in organometallic synthesis, natural products
chemistry, biochemistry, complexation of heavy metals and physical organic
chemistry.