* 0420666
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Analytically Based Field Emission SEM
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Vitaly Vodyanoy, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 304,421.00

The overall goal of the proposed project is to support and expand Auburn
University's extensive range of sponsored research in the nanosciences and
provide for the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and associated analytical
needs of advanced, cross-disciplinary nanoscale research and
undergraduate/graduate level education both at Auburn University and in the
surrounding region over the next 20-plus years. This project is aimed at the
acquisition of an instrument that will serve both current and anticipated needs,
produce a major leap in research capabilities, and provide ample scope for
addition/updating of its capabilities as research and educational needs evolve
over the anticipated 20-plus year lifespan of the equipment. The proposed
instrumentation will strongly impact the performance of a wide variety of
nanoscale research that crucially depends on access to advanced field-emission
SEM instrumentation currently not available at Auburn or in the surrounding
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current analytical needs include greatly improved
energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) for full spectrum imaging and
component and phase analysis and electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) for
investigating thin film polycrystalline microstructures for crystallographic
texture, grain boundary analysis, and qualitative strain mapping. Other highly
desirable characteristics are high resolution at low energy combined with a
variable pressure chamber for biological imaging. The instrument will represent
a substantial increase in imaging and analytical capabilities not currently
available at Auburn or the surrounding area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared with
existing instrumentation at AU, this system will provide numerous major
improvements, including [1] vastly enhanced maximum resolution, more than an
order of magnitude better than the existing SEM, especially at low accelerating
voltages; [2] greatly enhanced and additional high-resolution analytical
capabilities; [3] improved stage traverse range, tilt and stability and full
stage automation; [4] radical improvement in digital imaging capabilities; and
[5] a capability for remote on-line operation,
telepresence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
proposed project is to support and expand Auburn University's extensive range of
sponsored research in the nanosciences and provide for the scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) and associated analytical needs of advanced, cross-disciplinary
nanoscale research and undergraduate/graduate level education both at Auburn
University and in the surrounding region over the next 20-plus years. This
project is aimed at the acquisition of an instrument that will serve both
current and anticipated needs, produce a major leap in research capabilities,
and provide ample scope for addition/updating of its capabilities as research
and educational needs evolve over the anticipated 20-plus year lifespan of the
equipment. The proposed instrumentation will strongly impact the performance of
a wide variety of nanoscale research that crucially depends on access to
advanced field-emission SEM instrumentation currently not available at Auburn or
in the surrounding area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;