* 0420847
* MRI:  International Data Mining Grid Testbed for Research in High Performance Data Transport, Data Integration, and Data Exploration -- Instrument Development Proposal
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert Grossman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 237,000.00

This project, developing an instrument designed to test new network protocols
and data services for long haul, high performance network called the Teraflow
Testbed (TFT), integrates distributed clusters of workstation at four locations
(Amsterdam, Geneva, Chicago-StarLight, and Chicago-UIC) using advanced 10 Gbs
photonic networks and relying on both layer 2 optical switching and layer 3
routers. The project aims at supporting development of key network technologies
important for the next step in high performance, data intensive computing.
Research ranges from both low-level network protocol to offering high level data
services. TFT will consist of distributed nodes over two continents that can
transmit, process, and mine very high volume data flows (teraflows). The testbed
will enable the development of new network protocols and innovative data
integration and data mining services for teraflows. The work involves the design
of a new class of applications that move not only the queries and computation,
but the data when required. Subsequently, testing of the protocols and services
for traditional routed networks as well as lambda grids will take place. The
following three specific research activities in the general area of lambda-grids
(posits collections of plentiful computing and storage resources richly
interconnected by dedicated dense wavelengths division multiplexing (DWDM)
optical paths) will be conducted:&lt;br/&gt; High Performance Network Transport
Protocols for Teraflows,&lt;br/&gt; High End-to-End Performance for Teraflows,
and&lt;br/&gt; High Performance Data Services for Teraflows.&lt;br/&gt;The first
supports the development of new network protocols to provide higher bandwidth
utilization and good transport performance for networks with high bandwidth-
delay product optical network links. Based on previous work on SABUL, a rate
based reliable transport protocol with high bandwidth delay, based on UDP (for
data) and TCP (for control flow), a UDT protocol is proposed to achieve high
effective throughput and still provide fairness for competing teraflows. The
second supports the integration of local input-output systems with the very high
data rate network protocols. Proposing the integration of an experimental system
of intelligent high-speed disks connected to a cluster with the TFT, methods for
relaying control information directly from the parallel I/O system to the rate
control algorithm in the new protocol will be investigated to maximize overall
performance between remote parallel disks. The third develops high performance
data services for mining teraflows that use a SOAP/XML based control channel and
a separate data channel. This activity builds a distributed peer-to-peer storage
system for the data which teraflows can easily access and identifies data mining
primitives to filter and process the teraflow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: TFT is expected to impact homeland defense, business continuity, and
disaster recovery technologies. Post docs, graduate and undergraduate students
will partake in the research. Tutorials on high performance data transport will
be given at technical conferences.&lt;br/&gt;