* 0420609
* Acquisition of a Variable Pressure SEM and Micro-CT for the University of Georgia
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Charles Keith, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 299,716.00

This grant partially supports the acquisition of a variable pressure scanning
electron microscope (VPSEM) and an X-ray computed tomography scanner capable of
imaging small samples at very high resolution (Micro-CT). The instruments will
be housed and maintained by the University of Georgia's Center for Advanced
Ultrastructural Research. The instrumentation will be used by at least 10 major
investigators for diverse studies, including: microbial mineralization, bone
bioengineering, nanofabrication of biosensors, plant organ development,
Arabidopsis mutant morphology, food-borne bacteria interactions, neuronal
dysfunction, reconstituted food products, and emulsion ultrastructure. The
instrumentation will significantly expand the Center's capabilities by providing
access to imaging conditions and modalities not currently available to
University of Georgia researchers. These two instruments share a common research
focus - namely, to provide a very broad array of scientists with the resources
they will need to explore the microstructure of specimens in the hydrated state
without suffering the artifacts commonly encountered with extensive specimen
preparation. The instruments will be available to researchers from the
University of Georgia as well as other regional institutions and will be
incorporated into the student training program of the Center which includes
formal courses in microscopy, cell biology, geology, and food sciences.