* 0420434
* ITWF:  Culture Clash! The Adverse Effects of IT Occupational Subculture on Formative Work Experiences of IT Students
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Debra Eischen, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Peckham
* 12/31/2008
* USD 311,389.00

Title: ITWF: Culture Clash! The Adverse Effects of IT Occupational Subculture on
Formative Work Experiences of IT Students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
ITWF project explores possible adverse influences of the information technology
occupational subculture on students in higher education and possible ways to
counteract them. It includes a longitudinal analysis of the occupational culture
expectations, sources of information, and perceptions of IT students over time.
Models developed from the longitudinal analysis are then tested in a cross
sectional study of diverse IT students. Finally, an inoculation intervention is
applied and assessed in a set of workshops to ascertain the extent to which
students can be prepared for the subculture stresses they might experience
during their formative work experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project lies in the strong theoretical and empirically validated
research work on occupational cultures and subcultures on which it is based. The
research culture clash approach has not been widely applied in the IT
paraprofessional experience area and thus this research offers the potential for
new understandings that may be particularly important for addressing issues
related to the under representation of some populations in the IT pipeline and
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project lie with the
potential for models that can be adapted by institutions to address possibly
disruptive effects of the IT subculture within their programs. The tools
developed and refined through the inoculation intervention component have the
potential to be of significant value to a diverse set of institutions that wish
to institute similar practices. Thus, this project expects to promote retention
of under-represented women and minority students in IT programs by improving the
outcomes and quality of their early paraprofessional experiences.&lt;br/&gt;