* 0420971
* Acquisition of Proteomics Facilities
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* David Bickar, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 07/31/2009
* USD 505,023.00

A grant has been awarded to Smith College under the direction of Professor
Stylianos P. Scordilis for support of proteomics instrumentation in the Center
for Biochemistry including a high-pressure liquid chromatography-coupled mass
spectrometer (LCMS) and a high resolution two-dimensional gel electrophoresis
system (2-D PAGE) and partial support of an instructor who will facilitate the
teaching and research uses of the new technologies, as well as their operation
and maintenance. These new capabilities will allow the faculty and students of
Smith College to separate, and completely and precisely identify proteins in
complex mixtures from whole cell, tissue or organism
extracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports students, from high school
girls attending Smith's Summer Science and Engineering Program to undergraduate
researchers, and faculty to engage in on-going interdisciplinary research that
requires mass determination of small amounts of materials (nearly one millionth-
trillionth of an ounce). Between 50-80 undergraduates within the life sciences,
chemistry, engineering and geology departments will have direct use of these
instruments annually, as will Smith faculty members and others in the Five
College Consortium. Projects utilizing this technology will include explorations
of: the gender differences in exercise-induced muscle growth and damage; the
adhesion of bacteria to cells that cause urinary tract infections; how organisms
balance oxygen utility and toxicity; how parasites evade the immune system; how
DNA is damaged; and how microbes can remediate organic matter in the soil. Other
uses of the instrumentation in existing courses will infuse these state-of-the-
art methodologies into the fabric of the Smith College Science Center research
culture and disseminate them to a wider audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
foresee that this award will have several major impacts. It will provide the
perfect medium in which to train a new generation of women scientists in state-
of-the-art proteomics technologies at Smith, the nation's largest liberal arts
college for women. Students attending our outreach programs as well as those
enrolled in our undergraduate programming will learn about this instrumentation
and be exposed to technologies usually only found at major research facilities.
The new technologies in the Center for Biochemistry will help position Smith
students and faculty to contribute at a national scale to some of the most
pressing scientific issues of our times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;