* 0420915
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Property Measurement Facility for Interdisciplinary Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Michael Klein, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 206,493.00

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program the Materials
Research Science & Engineering Center (MRSEC) at the University of Pennsylvania
(Penn) will establish a shared experimental facility (SEF) to perform
electrical, magnetic, thermal and optical measurements for interdisciplinary
research and education. The facility will house a new Quantum Design Physical
Property Measurement System (PPMS) along with an existing PPMS for which unique
magneto-optical capabilities have already been developed. The SEF will house
these instruments in a single laboratory accessible to students and post-docs 24
hours a day. The goal is to establish a community of diverse users who will
exchange ideas and expertise while working in close proximity. The proposed SEF
will be much more than the sum of its parts and will significantly leverage
existing resources. The PPMS systems can share experimental inserts by virtue of
their modular design, so the newly acquired system will not only add new state-
of-the-art capabilities for thermal transport and heat capacity, but will also
'inherit' the high-resistivity, Kerr effect, magnetization, fiber probe,
rotating insert, custom software, and operator experience that accompanies the
existing system. The second PPMS in the SEF will reduce the backlog of users by
allowing any combination of experiments to run simultaneously, and will provide
valuable instrument time for building and testing specialized home-built inserts
for custom measurements.

The intellectual merit of the proposed SEF lies in its role as a potent catalyst
for nucleating new interdisciplinary research, especially in material discovery.
Since its arrival three years ago, the existing PPMS has already stimulated
collaborative activities among researchers with a wide variety of interests.
Vigorous and unexpected programs in metallo-DNA, medical physics, carbon
nanotubes and nanofibers, magnetoresistive oxides, and conducting organics have
been established, most of which originated from exploratory measurements using
this instrument. These efforts now require more instrument time than is
currently possible, and the new materials have further created new demand for
additional capabilities not available at Penn. The proposed SEF will
significantly expand MRSEC capabilities and create opportunities in exploratory
effort in artificial multifunctional oxide thin films and novel molecular
conducting, semi-conducting and spintronic devices, as well as in other
unforeseen activities.

The broader impact of the proposed SEF lies in the services and opportunities it
offers to the science community of Philadelphia and beyond. The SEF instruments
are designed for ease of use and continuous operation, and will attract users
who might otherwise hesitate, or be denied for lack of experience, to begin a
complex measurement. The SEF will avail itself to undergraduates, summer
students, and staff from local hospitals and museums, and will also serve as the
primary physical testing resources for the visiting faculty and undergraduates
from University of Puerto Rico with which the Penn MRSEC has a NSF-supported
Partnership for Research & Education in Materials (PREM) program. The SEF
experience will give these users a sense of autonomy and excitement, and thereby
foster enthusiasm and awareness of science in the broader society.

With this grant, the Materials Research Science & Engineering Center at the
University of Pennsylvania will establish a shared experimental facility to
perform electrical, magnetic, thermal and optical measurements for
interdisciplinary research and education. The facility will house a new Quantum
Design Physical Property Measurement System and will also incorporate an
existing instrument for which unique capabilities have already been developed.
The instruments will be housed in a single laboratory accessible to students and
post-docs 24 hours a day. The goal is to establish a community of diverse users
who will exchange ideas and expertise while working in close proximity.

The requested instrument is a uniquely versatile being able to run many types of
experiments. The instrument can accept either commercial or custom-made
experimental inserts by virtue of a modular design. Since options can be shared
between the new system and the existing one, the new acquisition considerably
leverages existing resources. Researchers will be able to measure physical
properties over a wide range of temperatures, from -271 oC to 140 oC, and in
magnetic field strengths up to 9 Tesla. Many physical properties, such as
electrical resistance, optical transmission, and magnetization, are strongly
temperature- and magnetic-field dependent. The study of these properties using
the requested instrument will allow physical scientists to understand the
underlying mechanisms that control these properties, and thereby improve known
materials and invent useful new materials.

The intellectual merit of the proposed facility lies in its role as a potent
catalyst for nucleating new interdisciplinary research, especially in material
discovery. Since its arrival three years ago, the existing instrument has
already stimulated collaborative activities among researchers with a wide
variety of interests. Vigorous and unexpected programs have been established in
medical physics, nanoscience, and organic electronics, which originated from
exploratory studies in the new facility. The proposed instrument will support
these activities while also ensuring that speculative 'seed' research can still
take place for identifying future research directions.

The broader impact of the proposed facility lies in the services and
opportunities it offers to the science community of Philadelphia and beyond. The
instruments are designed for ease of use and continuous operation, and will
attract users who might otherwise hesitate, or be denied for lack of experience,
to begin a complex measurement. The facility will avail itself to
undergraduates, summer students, and staff from local hospitals and museums, and
will serve as the primary physical testing resources for the visiting faculty
and undergraduates from the University of Puerto Rico with which the Penn MRSEC
has a NSF-supported Partnership for Research & Education in Materials (PREM)
collaborative program. The experience of working in the facility will give non-
traditional users a sense of autonomy and excitement, thereby fostering
enthusiasm and awareness of science in the broader society.

