* 0420083
* STTR Phase I: Forming of Cast Titanium Structures by Transformation Superplasticity
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Edward Chen, TiTech International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project examines the
feasibility of using a casting transformation superplastic forming (TSP) hybrid
process to produce affordable, high quality titanium parts, primarily for the
aerospace industry. The project is aimed at preserving the advantages and
reducing the cost and processing time, by exploring the attributes of investment
casting and TSP. TSP is slow relative to conventional SPF, but investment
casting can provide near net shape, greatly reducing the time required for TSP
to achieve a final desired shape. Conversely, cast titanium microstructures are
only amenable to superplastic forming by TSP. In this project, blanks will be
cast and undergo TSP to selected final forms. Specimens will be inspected/tested
for dimensional control, pre- and post-TSP microstructural characterization, and
mechanical properties. The ability to produce complex titanium components by
this approach could offer a significant cost savings allowing for even more
widespread use of titanium.

The broader impacts from this technology would be a new casting process. If
successful, this technology could be used immediately to replace more expensive
SPF for forged/machined structures, as well as allowing for more sophisticated
and complex shapes. There would be a pay-off through weight reduction (thinner
walls) as well as a reduction in bulk and weight for related support structures,
increasing the thrust-to-weight ratio and overall fuel efficiency of aerospace
systems.