* 0420725
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with an Energy Dispersive Spectrometer for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Charles Mason, Morehead State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2007
* USD 263,400.00

0420725&lt;br/&gt;Jerde&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the only 4-year public
institution of higher education located in the Appalachian region of eastern
Kentucky, one of Morehead State University's (MSU) commitments is to improve the
quality of life for the local community and surrounding region. Among the many
strategies for meeting this commitment is the introduction of modern
technologies to the region, and education in the application of these
technologies. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) purchased through funding
from this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will be housed within the
Department of Physical Sciences, providing the opportunity for faculty and
students to use a major scientific instrument for education and research. Four
disciplines on the MSU campus and one outside industry have been identified that
are committed to making use of the instrument, and there are many other
potential users both on and off of campus. The acquisition of a SEM at MSU, with
its ease of use, will make research more accessible to the faculty, providing
opportunities to gain new knowledge and remain current in their chosen fields.
Research that will immediately benefit from the SEM include: petrologic studies
of mid-continental rift rocks; taxonomic investigations in entomology and
palynology; studies of art pigment degradation; metallurgical research; and
process engineering studies in the manufacture of bearings. In addition to
promoting ongoing research, there are plans to integrate this instrument into
the classroom and involve student research. Approximately 40 majors per year
graduate in the Biological and Physical Sciences, which requires a "capstone"
course that includes original research. The SEM is a perfect instrument because
of its versatility and ease of use. With the acquisition of this single
instrument, it is estimated that over 100 students per year will benefit,
whether through direct research, or exposure in various classes. In addition,
local industry will benefit, which has effects on the economy of the Morehead
area. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;