* 0420401
* Electoral Choice and Political Support in Contemporary Canada: Changing Choices and Rival Models
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2005
* Allan Kornberg, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2005
* USD 150,255.00

This project investigates factors affecting electoral behavior and support for
political parties, the political regime and community in a mature democracy,
Canada that recently has undergone a major transformation of its national party
system. The is conducted at the time of Canada's next national (federal)
election, which is anticipated in late May or early June 2004. The study focuses
on four principal topics: (i) the explanatory power of rival models of party
choice; (ii) the explanatory power of rival models of electoral participation
(turnout); (iii) the measurement and dynamics of partisan attachments, and
factors responsible for those dynamics; (iv) system-level orientations, i.e.,
evaluations of the national electoral system and the national party system,
support for national political regime and community, and factors affecting such
orientations. &lt;br/&gt;Data are collected by pre- and post-election telephone
interviews with a national sample of 2000 members of the Canadian electorate.
The sample includes an existing two-wave (2000 and 2002) national panel, which
will be augmented to yield a representative national sample of the 2004 national
electorate. Respondents will be chosen using RDD techniques, and interviews will
be conducted using a CATI system. A rolling cross-sectional (RCS) design will be
employed to map the dynamics of vote intentions and other important variables
during the election campaign. Additional survey data will be gathered by a mail
questionnaire sent to respondents in the post-election survey. The utility of
the 2004 data collection for accomplishing the goals of the project will be
significantly enhanced by availability of high quality national cross-sectional
and panel survey data gathered in earlier Canadian National Election (CNES) and
Political Support in Canada (PSC) studies. The survey instruments in the
proposed 2004 study will be designed to maximize possibilities for analyzing
individual- and aggregate-level dynamics in political beliefs, attitudes and
behavior and, hence, understanding the impact of party-system change. Every
effort will be made to distribute the data to interested users in a very timely
way. To this end, marginals and graphs showing the dynamics of the 2004 RCS pre-
election data will be posted the project website within one week after polling
day. The individual-level survey data (including the four-wave panel data),
questionnaires and technical documentation will be placed on the website within
three months after the election. A follow-up data set including information from
the mail questionnaire will be posted three months later. All data and
accompanying documents will be deposited with the ICPSR and ISR data archives
within one year after the election. Results of the study will be presented at
scholarly conferences, in papers submitted to refereed journals, and in two book
manuscripts. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Pace Bartolini and Mair (1990) and
others who have argued that the party systems of such polities are effectively
"immortal," the Canadian experience clearly demonstrates that rapid, large-scale
change in the configuration of a national party system is possible. However, the
consequences of such a change are not well understood. The Canadian case thus
provides a very useful "natural experiment" for investigating how party-system
change affects a range of important political attitudes and behavior including
those pertinent to the maintenance of the integrity of the country in its
current form. As discussed in the proposal, some observers contend that, by
altering the choice set in national electoral politics, the new party system has
reconfigured the set of forces affecting electoral choice, turnout and partisan
attachments. In addition, the effects of the new party system may well extend to
evaluations of the performance of the electoral and party systems and, possibly,
to support for the national political regime and community. The proposed
research will investigate these topics and thereby enhance understanding of the
ways in which party-system change influences public political attitudes and
behavior in contemporary mature democracies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;