* 0420374
* Biogeochemical Cycling of Heavy Metals in Lake Coeur d'Alene Sediments: The Role of Indigenous Microbial Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Brent Peyton, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2006
* USD 1,223,620.00

0420374&lt;br/&gt;Peyton&lt;br/&gt;Heavy metals are highly toxic in the
environment and their presence in sediments of Lake Coeur d'Alene (LCdA) in
Idaho is mainly the result of historical mining in the mountains upstream. The
objectives of this project are to 1) characterize the diversity of
microorganisms in LCdA sediments using modern molecular biology techniques, 2)
quantify the role of individual members of the microbial community in
biogeochemical cycling of metals (Cu, Pb, and Zn), and 3) develop a dynamic
numeric biogeochemical model of heavy metal cycling in sediment systems,
calibrated to the unique environments of LCdA. These objectives will be met
while testing the following overall hypothesis:&lt;br/&gt;A complex and dynamic
community of phylogenetically distinct and previously uncharacterized
microorganisms is present in the historically metal-contaminated sediments of
Lake Coeur d'Alene. In response to a toxic metal stress, metal-tolerant species
will dominate metal-sensitive species present in the sediments, with temporal
and spatial microbial distribution and diversity dependant on the metal type and
concentration. Dynamic biogeochemical models that incorporate chemical transport
and reaction with novel microbial stress/response relationships and community
dynamics can be used to 1) integrate complex microbial and geochemical
observations across spatial and temporal scales, and 2) better predict broad
community level response and influence on toxic metal
cycling.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed activity: This project
will significantly improve the quantitative understanding of interaction and
response of a sediment microbial community subjected to severe heavy metal
stress. Project objectives will be achieved by sampling LCdA sediments and
identifying microbial diversity based on both 16S rDNA and rpoB gene sequences.
These molecular techniques greatly facilitate the study of microbes in their
natural environments and will provide a rational platform to base observations
of community response to toxic metal additions. Shifts in microbial populations
after being subjected to metal-stress will be quantified using terminal-
restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP). Focused laboratory studies
will be used to quantify the effects of toxic metals on microbial growth and
inhibition for incorporation into the predictive model. The modeling effort will
integrate for the first time to our knowledge, syntrophic consortium
biotransformation dynamics, dose-dependent inhibition, and spatial and temporal
dynamics of redox front formation under a diffusive transport regime.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity: While the
research is focused on microbial communities in historically metal contaminated
LCdA sediment, with increased industrialization worldwide, interactions of the
environment and human contaminants have become more important issues,
scientifically and socially, to the U.S. and internationally. The project
integrates research mentoring and training of graduates, postdoctoral associate,
and a research faculty. A supplemental grant for research experiences for
undergraduates will be used to integrate undergraduate students into the
research. The results will be published in a number of quality peer reviewed
journal articles and will be conveyed to the public through presentations at
local regulatory and public meetings, and at national and international
conferences. An internet web site written for both scientists and non-technical
readers will be developed. When complete, this research will significantly
expand the fundamental and quantitative understanding of key biogeochemical
processes for metals. The project has the potential to suggest fundamental
improvements in metals-bioremediation technologies, since results will be
broadly applicable in supporting innovative biological strategies to reduce
human health risks and environmental damage from metal contaminated
sites&lt;br/&gt;