* 0420836
* MRI:     Development of a New Generation of Miniature Search/Rescue Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Georgios Giannakis, Berea College
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2010
* USD 811,350.00

This work, developing a robot platform based on the University of Minnesota
Scout robot, proposes a suite of well-orchestrated efforts to design a new Scout
robot that addresses some challenges involving flexibility for later design
upgrades and mobility over rough terrain. The efforts include a completely new
overall design with an impact on performance in terms of mobility, manipulation,
and communication capabilities, the creation of a software backbone system for
sensory processing and communication among different miniature robots in order
to create an effective team, and the development of a saddle pack structure
based in the MegaScouts platform. Expected to contribute to the field of
miniature robot design resulting in heterogeneous robot teams that will be far
more effective in tasks such as search/rescue operation, the project involves:
Development of a new Scout robot with a new smaller form factor designed with
new mobility, manipulation, and robot-linking mechanisms. A low-cost, flexible
platform will be created with multiple direct applications, including serving as
an educational tool. Creation of a software backbone system addressing
autonomous Scout operation, intelligent failure recovery, software reusability,
and automatic creation of mission scenarios. * Development of a saddle pack
system based on the MegaScout platform and used for Scout deployment and
control. * Investigation of communication methodologies applicable to the Scout
platform, focusing on transparent integration of new communication technologies
(e.g., ultra-wideband, various 802.11 standards) as these arise, without the
design of entirely new communication hardware to fit the Scouts. * Development
of multi-modal interfaces for the new Scout robot. * Experimental validation
through a series of experiments involving a large number of the new scout robots
in diverse environments to examine the relative merits and tradeoffs involved in
team- versus single-robot operations. * Transition from experimental robotics to
real world applications with the creation of a large number of low-cost (and
thus expendable) robots. The underlying small mobile Minnesota Scout robot can
be employed in a variety of applications, including search/rescue missions,
locating the source of a biological or chemical release, decontamination and
decommissioning efforts, and monitoring highly sensitive areas of populations,
such as elderly or disabled patients in residential care. Broader Impacts
involve: * Re-designing relevant courses ( Robotics, AI, Communication Systems,
introductory CS courses), * Integration of the robotics platform into various
levels of the curricula, * Outreach activities for retaining members of
underrepresented groups in CS, CE, EE, * Outreach efforts through demonstrations
at local K-12 schools and youth groups, * Seminars promoting cross-disciplinary
interaction, * Creation of web resources for web-based design and execution of
formation strategies for mobile miniature robotics teams, * Innovative use of
the algorithms and hardware in sites (elderly care centers with the goals of
improving resident's safety).