* 0420845
* MRI: Development of a 1.1-Second Drop Tower Apparatus for Fundamental Combustion and Fluid Dynamics Research
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* John Chen, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 09/30/2007
* USD 189,364.00

Proposal No. CTS-0420845 Principal Investigator: A. J. Marchese, Rowan
University

This grant is for the development of a new drop tower apparatus and associated
instrumentation that will enable researchers to perform fundamental studies in
combustion and fluid dynamics. In most practical combustion systems, high
temperature gradients combined with gravitational acceleration produce buoyancy-
induced convective flows, which complicate experiments, obscure the underlying
chemical and diffusive phenomena, and make direct numerical simulation of these
systems exceedingly difficult. By performing experiments in reduced gravity
facilities, which greatly reduce the role of buoyancy, significant advances in
combustion theory have been accomplished in recent decades. While several
facilities are available to effectively eliminate the ubiquitous presence of
gravity, many of these facilities are exceedingly expensive to operate (e.g.
orbiting spacecraft, sounding rockets, parabolic flight aircraft) and/or are not
always readily available to many researchers due to geographical and scheduling
limitations (e.g. drop towers). The proposed drop-tower apparatus will be
designed, built and maintained by a team of faculty members at Rowan University
who have substantial experience in performing microgravity combustion and fluid
dynamics experiments. Development of a drop tower apparatus at Rowan University
will enable the principal investigators to expand their research programs in
flame spread, polymer combustion, droplet combustion, thermal diffusion and
boiling heat transfer. Moreover, the facility will be made available to
researchers at Princeton, Drexel, Rutgers, NJIT, University of Delaware and
others. The commitment to build this facility at Rowan University, which
currently houses a high-quality engineering program that emphasizes project-
based learning at the undergraduate level, will further strengthen the
relationship between graduate research institutions and undergraduate
engineering institutions in the region.