* 0420124
* Do Presidents' Veto Threats Matter?
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Samuel Kernell, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2007
* USD 243,484.00

The veto is a key instrument of presidential success in dealing with an
opposition-controlled Congress. Not only does it allow the president to prevent
the opposition party from passing its legislative program, the veto can be
enlisted as a stage in a bargaining game to force Congress to accommodate the
president's preferences. Recent game theoretic research has identified
conditions in which veto-based bargaining can be extended into the realm of
presidential rhetoric specifically, veto threats. Veto threats can be effective
instruments when the president's preferences are uncertain, he is known to value
his reputation, and has publicized his threat to the extent that backing down
would harm his prestige and his party's electoral prospects. In sum, current
research has found that veto threats can under appropriate conditions matter.
This research asks a more empirical question, do presidents' veto threats
generally matter?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After developing an empirical model that
has presidents deciding to send a variable costly, this research test the
effectiveness of the more than 2,000 veto threats enlisted since 1981 on the
policy content and failure rate of legislation and the roll call behavior of
partisan legislators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research assesses a potentially
important tool of presidency agenda setting in divided government. It also
creates and provides for the dissemination of two major datasets of veto
threats. The first consists of scanned images of 2500 pages of Statements of
Administration Policy in which the president threatened to veto a bill under
consideration in Congress. The second data set represents all coded threats and
their covariates.&lt;br/&gt;