* 0420726
* Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Henry Chaney, Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 04/30/2008
* USD 245,970.00

This award partially supports the acquisition of a variable pressure scanning
electron microscope (SEM) at the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History The
instrument will be used for study of collections in anthropology, invertebrate
and vertebrate zoology, and earth sciences. During the past 20 years, the
Museum's collections, particularly those in invertebrate zoology, have undergone
rapid growth and now hold in excess of two million specimens. The acquisition of
the SEM will greatly enhance the study and accessibility of the Museum's
specimen collections at precisely the moment when its holdings are becoming more
widely used, including world-class holdings in Bryozoa, Cnidaria, Cephalopoda,
and parasites. From a broader perspective, this acquisition will significantly
enhance established Museum education and public programs, which function
synergistically with its collections and research departments. Use of this
facility will be incorporated into the biology curriculum of Santa Barbara City
College, greatly enhancing training resources. The new facility will also
interface with the general public through the use of SEM imagery presented
through the Museum's exhibit facilities, at its home campus and its satellite
Sea Center. Because of the Museum's traditional role in serving the community,
this project will have immediate and continued public appeal.