* 0420630
* MRI: Acquisition of Double-sided Sub-micron Mask Aligner
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Marc Porter, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2005
* USD 175,000.00

The objective of this research is to acquire research instrumentation for doing
research on photonic waveguides and photonic devices, integrated biosensors,
sensors for detection of toxic chemicals, organic semiconductors and neuron
regrowth. These devices demand state of the art alignment capability with both
front and back alignments. Iowa State has active research programs in each of
the above areas, but does not have back and front sub-micron mask aligner. In
this proposal, we plan to acquire a Suss MA/BA6 mask aligner capable of sub-
micron lithography and of simultaneous back and front alignment so that device
can be made on both sides of a substrate and devices in the submicron range can
be made. This aligner will complement our existing array of tools, thereby
allowing for a significant increase in our research productivity across a large
number of disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit and Broad
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument meets a critical need at the
University. No other comparable instrument is available at Iowa State. The
instrument complements the following tools we own: Alcatel Deep RIE, poly-Si CVD
furnace, Standard Si fabrication tools, Metal evaporators, Nanocrystalline Si
plasma deposition reactors, Organic LED reactors, Single cantilever AFM tool.
The instrument will allow faculty, students and research staff from Chemical
Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Materials Science and Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering, Physics, Chemistry and Biology to conduct experiments in
the fields of photonic bandgaps, directed neural regrowth, nanocrystalline Si
devices, integrated chemical and biological sensors based on OLED's and GMR
devices, thin film resonators and multi-cantilver AFM tools for combinatorial
diagnosis of surfaces. The instrument will be housed at the Microelectronics
Research Center (MRC), an inter-disciplinary center at Iowa State where all the
complementary facilities exist and are available for use by all the Iowa State
faculty, staff and students. A full-time scientist will be in charge of the
instrument and will maintain it in addition to some of the other tools. A
maintenance account will be set up to charge the users a use-fee to pay for
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;There will be significant impact on education of
students, both graduate and undergraduate. This instrument, along with the
existing instruments will be used for future experimental modules in courses
dealing with fabrication of semiconductor, photonic and MEMS materials and
devices Approximately 40 graduate students in many disciplines who use MRC
facilities, and about 15 undergraduates who do research at MRC as part of their
senior design or independent research projects will benefit from the acquisition
of this instrument. A significant number of women and minority students are
expected to participate in research activities made possible by the acquisition
of this instrument. The proposed research activity has potentially broad impacts
in the fields of electronic and photonic devices, sensors and neural science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;