* 0420576
* Acquisition of a CHN Elemental Analyzer, Particle Size Analyzer, and KappaBridge to investigate the origin of rhythmites in the Finger Lakes of New York
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Leah Joseph, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2005
* USD 152,152.00

0420576&lt;br/&gt;Curtin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) grant will be used to acquire an automated elemental
analyzer; an automated electronic particle size analyzer; and a spinner
KappaBridge for the Geoscience Department and Environmental Studies Program at
Hobart &amp; William Smith Colleges (HWS). These instruments will be used
primarily to investigate evidence of climate and environmental change archived
in Holocene laminated sediments in the Finger Lakes of New York State. High-
resolution paleoclimate and paleoenvironmental research on cm-scale laminations
will be made possible using these instruments because they are computer-
controlled, automated, and can use small sample volumes for analysis while
maintaining a high level of precision, accuracy, and sample throughput.
Specifically, the elemental analyzer will be used to characterize the total
organic matter and differentiate the source of organic matter to the lakes. The
particle size analyzer and KappaBridge will be used in concert to infer the
dynamics of sediment transport. These instruments will support a continuing
project that strives to develop a model to explain how Holocene climate change
impacted the dynamics of lake circulation and the overall hydrological balance
in the Finger Lakes during the Holocene. These instruments will also help
provide a well-equipped learning environment for undergraduate students at HWS
that revolves around lake and environmental
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;