* 0420600
* Acquisition of a DNA Sequencer for Use in Undergraduate Biochemistry/Molecular Biology and DNA Computing Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Robert Simon, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 108,664.00

A grant has been awarded to the State University of New York (SUNY) College at
Geneseo under the direction of Dr. Wendy Pogozelski for acquisition of a DNA
sequencer. The sequencer will be used to expand the number and scope of
undergraduate projects offered in DNA research and to support new curriculum
initiatives in DNA sequencing, DNA computing, and bioinformatics.

The research activities, designed for undergraduate involvement, include the
identification of regions of human mitochondrial DNA that are subject to
deletions when treated with gamma rays; comparison of the mitochondrial DNA
codes of various strains of mice; studying the genetic relationships
cannibalistic embryos in a brood of the Antarctic sea star; identifying microbes
for bioremediation in the Kyzil Kum desert of Uzbekistan, and determining DNA
sequences of long DNA strands that represent patterns or codes in DNA computing
problems. In addition, the sequencer is be used for verification of DNA
sequences and rRNA sequences in the Biochemistry Laboratory class and
Microbiology Laboratory classes at Geneseo.

These projects are of use to society in that they represent efforts in
developing new tools for biodosimetry (ways to measure accidental radiation
damage in humans), preventing depletion of Antarctic marine life, partnering
with the international scientific community for environmental bioremediation and
stabilization, developing new methods for computing in an effort to solve
computationally hard problems, and developing good models for mitochondrial DNA
diseases. In addition, they are vital tools in educating undergraduates in the
DNA sciences and preparing them for careers in scientific research.