* 0420347
* NEESR-SG; Seismic Performance of Bridge Systems with Conventional and Innovative Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2012
* Mehdi Saiidi, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 10/31/2012
* USD 2,030,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The primary technical objective of the proposed study is to
conduct a comprehensive investigation of the seismic performance of a series of
models of four-span large-scale bridge systems including the soil-structure
interaction effects at the footings and the abutments. A strong
interdisciplinary team of researchers is formed to lead the effort in the study
of the shake table response of bridge models, soil-structure interaction,
numerical simulation, innovative materials, and wireless sensors with an
overarching effort in education and outreach and utilization of information
technology. Two leading international collaborators and representatives from the
design profession will be also involved. Through the use of NEESgrid system and
its tools, the team members and their students will closely collaborate in his
multi-faceted study. Extensive numerical and physical simulation studies are
envisioned, with the former using program OpenSees and the latter using the NEES
shake table facilities at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) and the
University of Nevada, Reno(UNR). A large-scale abutment will be tested at UCSD
and four, large-scale, 4-span bridge models will be tested at UNR. The UCSD
studies will provide data that will be used in simulating the abutment input
motion in the UNR tests. Two of the bridge models will incorporate conventional
design, the third will be supported on fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) composite
piers, and the fourth will incorporate innovative column plastic hinges with
minimum permanent damage. The major gap that the proposed study will address is
experimental data and calibrated analytical studies of the earthquake
performance of bridge systems. Unlike past studies that have generally been on
components, the proposed research will include system response in addition to
component behavior. Modern wireless sensors will be further developed as a part
of this project and used in the shake table studies. The results of the study
are expected to facilitate the evaluation of existing and emerging bridge
seismic codes, provide information for performance-based seismic design, help
understand the system response, determine the effectiveness of FRP piers,
evaluate potential of wireless sensors in large-scale testing, and demonstrate
the feasibility of innovative serviceable bridge columns after strong
earthquakes. New data and metadata models are envisioned to facilitate
incorporation of the new information obtained in the project in the data
repository planned by the NEES Consortium. Broader Impact: The broader impact of
the proposed project will consist of its strong educational thrust and it
overall societal impact. Through the new knowledge generated as a results of
this project in multiple forms, the study will (1) directly train post-doctoral
fellows, graduate students, and undergraduate students at several universities
using the latest state-of-the-art technology in earthquake engineering research
and information technology,(2) educate K-12 students, teachers, and the public
about bridge earthquake engineering, (3) integrate teaching and research at
introductory and advanced college courses, (4) develop teaching modules for high
schools, (5) develop an interactive website, (6) improve basic understanding of
the societal role of earthquake engineers, and (7) motivate K-12 students to
increase the likelihood of all talented students, women, minorities, and others
to seriously consider earthquake engineering as a profession. The overall
societal impact of the proposed project will be (a)training of skilled
earthquake engineers with state-of-the-art NEES equipment to improve the human
resource pool, (b) improving public understanding and perception of the critical
role of earthquake engineering in the society, (c)generating verified
information based on research conducted by a strong team of multidisciplinary
researchers from several US and two overseas universities,(d) providing impetus
for reliable implementation of performance-based design of new and retrofit of
existing bridges in design codes to ensure safe bridges and to reduce economic
loss in future strong earthquakes, (e)increasing the awareness of the earthquake
engineers about innovative materials and their potential to keep bridges
operational even after strong earthquakes, (f)improving global understanding by
interaction and international exchange opportunities provided by this project
with international collaborators, and (g)providing opportunities for several
potential payload projects that could further enhance the growth of a number of
high caliber faculty, several of whom are recipients of past NSF Career or other
awards.