* 0420482
* MRI:  Acquistion of Tribometer for Manufacturing/Mechanical Engineering and Materials Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Philip Guichelaar, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2006
* USD 180,940.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funds for the
acquisition of a tribometer. A tribometer is a device for measuring friction and
wear of materials that are in contact. Measurement of the relative movement
between materials results in useful information for understanding basic
scientific phenomenon and to improve product performance. This particular
tribometer instrument is a micro tribometer with special capabilities to perform
measurements at the micrometer to nanometer level. This equipment will be used
for research and education programs in manufacturing, mechanical, and materials
engineering. Specific research to be performed with this instrument includes:
manufacturing and material removal, materials characterization, friction,
lubrication and wear. Measurements of mechanical and material properties will be
applied to bulk materials, thin film and surface
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This equipment will make it possible to study
phenomena at the micrometer to nanometer size scale. Many new advances in
science, engineering, and technology are occurring at this size scale. Examples
include nanotechnology, biotechnology, and microelectronics. Improved
understanding of these complex systems and processes will lead to more efficient
manufacturing systems and improved product design, in semiconductor
manufacturing, coated paper and fibers, and pumps and seals for fluid handling
systems. Faculty, students and industrial partners will jointly participate in
the use of this instrument. Students, both undergraduate and graduate, will gain
hands-on experience in using state-of-the-art instrumentation in the classroom,
laboratory, and research. Industry will benefit from the availability of this
instrument to perform measurements and access to faculty and students
knowledgeable of this area of technical specialization.