* 0420939
* Acquisition of Physiological Monitoring Equipment for Research on the stimuli in tactile, auditory, and visual domains that elicit emotional responses
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Nicholas Thompson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2007
* USD 28,599.00

With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
Award, Clark University will purchase psychophysiological measurement systems
for studies of schematic stimuli that provoke emotions. These systems, including
supporting computer hardware and software, will be used in a suite of research
projects by researchers in Clark's Social, Evolutionary, and Cultural Psychology
Program. Principal Investigator Dr. James Laird is a social psychologist with a
research speciality in embodied emotion. Among Dr. Laird's co-PIs are two other
members of Clark's psychology department-Dr. Nicholas Thompson (an ethologist
and evolutionary psychologist with a joint appointment in Biology) and Dr. Jaan
Valsiner (a cultural psychologist)-as well as a member of Clark's Department of
Mathematics and Computer Science, Dr. Lee Rudolph, who is supported by an NSF
Interdisciplinary Grant in the Mathematical Sciences. With other senior
personnel, graduate students, and undergraduates, the PI and co-PIs will use the
systems funded by the MRI award to find general features common to emotionally
provocative sign stimuli across sensory domains (vocal/auditory, visual, and
tactile domains) and to formulate mathematical descriptions of what these
features have in common.

Emotions are states of the organism that relate the conditions of its world with
patterns of urgent action. Conditions sufficient to produce an emotional
response often are a schematic subsample of the total conditions impinging on
the organism: a wink can be as good as a nod, and either (like a small twitch of
the lips or a widening of the eyes) can express or evoke emotion greatly
disproportionate to the exertion involved. The general method being developed in
the supported research is to elicit and vary emotional responses using stimuli
designed to reproduce only the sign stimuli appropriate to those responses, not
the full array of conditions that typically elicit them in nature; the rationale
for this approach resembles that behind demonstrations of sign stimuli in
ethology. To identify and quantify an emotional stimulus requires an unequivocal
method to identify and quantify emotional responses. Any definitive study of
human emotional stimuli must include physiological-behavioral measures to
supplement emotion self reports. The funded instrumentation will provide these
measures.

This project is important for several reasons. It is likely to provide empirical
results that have significance beyond academic psychology-for example, to the
practice of clinical psychology, or to the design and engineering of warning
devices; it is a testing ground for new kinds of mathematical models in
psychology; and it will play a significant role in education and training. Clark
University is one of the nation's smallest research universities. Seventeen
percent of Clark seniors graduate as Psychology majors, and the Department's
long commitment to empirical methods has made it by far the largest provider of
scientific education within the university. Clark students (and psychology
majors) are disproportionately female, and thus the Department is a
disproportionate provider of science education to women, who-because of Clark's
tradition of undergraduate participation in faculty and graduate research
projects at all levels-receive a lot of training that prepares them for a
psychological or other scientific career. This project will continue that
tradition.