* 0420462
* Development of Structure and Material Laboratories for Engineering and Technology Programs at Alabama A&amp;M Univerisity
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Mohamed Saafi, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 06/30/2005
* USD 315,868.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of Structure and Material
Laboratories for Engineering and Technology Programs&lt;br/&gt;at Alabama
A&amp;M University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
allow Alabama A&amp;M University (AAMU) to acquire a state-of-the-art equipment
and associated instrumentation to increase access and promote research, research
training, and integrated research/education activities primarily in the area of
civil infrastructure and Mechanical engineering. The requested equipment will
support activities that are in line with the research and educational goals of
the University. The new state-of-the-art structural engineering
research/education laboratories and the integrated testing system will benefit
students and faculty in the Civil Engineering Technology , Civil Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering Technology, Electrical
Engineering, Electrical Engineering Technology as well as students and faculty
from other academic departments such as Physics and Agriculture. Faculty in
these departments are actively pursuing and conducting interdisciplinary
research projects and have been successful in obtaining the support of private
industry as well as state and federal agencies. The primary areas of research,
research training, and educational activities that will be supported by the
equipment are: (i) structural testing of components and subassemblies; (ii)
earthquake engineering and smart structures; (iii) use of advanced materials and
FRP composites in civil engineering; (iv) structural health monitoring of civil
infrastructure, (v) Safety and security of critical civil infrastructure for
homeland security, (vi) use nanotechnology in civil infrastructure, and (vii)
health monitoring of mechanical and aerospace structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment and instrumentation consists of: (1) two
hydraulic actuators, Model 244.51 (220 kips each for the structures laboratory)
with servocontrolled valves capable of static, fatigue and dynamic testing; (2)
hydraulic service manifolds and hydraulic power pumps; (3) electronic control
system; and, (4) high-capacity data acquisition system unit; (5) one MTS 810
Material Testing Machine for the Materials laboratory, Model 318.25B-01 with a
load capability of 55 kN (55 kips). The MTS 810 Material Testing machine is
capable of static tensile and compression tests, fatigue and bending tests. The
MTS 810 is comprised of a load unit assembly frame, a digital controller, a
hydraulic power unit, a remote station control panel and a desktop computer.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the equipment in this project will
allow the implementation of materials and structures demonstrations, teaching
and research laboratories. The laboratories will feature experimental testing,
data acquisition and simulation systems to conduct planned tests. Students will
also improve both their creativity and analytical thinking. More than seventeen
(17) courses will be affected by the implementation of the laboratories in
addition to individual students working on their senior project. With the AAMU
School of Engineering and Technology.s new facility in place and in combination
with the proposed equipment, AAMU will be in a position to offer fully
functional facilities that will enable its faculty, graduate and undergraduate
students to carry out significant research and educational activities that
address the nation.s needs. Additionally, the newly constructed and equipped
laboratories will enable AAMU to attract significant corporate and government
research funding and draw a larger number of graduate and undergraduate African-
American students to pursue careers in engineering and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;