* 0420479
* Acquisition of High Throughput DNA Sequencing and Genotyping Instrumentation for Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Qingshun Li, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 477,783.00

A grant has been awarded to Miami University at Oxford, Ohio, under the
direction of Dr. Luis Actis for the acquisition of instrumentation for high-
throughput DNA studies using modern molecular techniques, such as automated DNA
nucleotide sequencing and fragment analysis as well as gene expression in a wide
range of organisms and microorganisms. This instrumentation also includes
hardware and software to collect, store, and analyze nucleotide sequences and
DNA fragment data using automated and manual Bioinformatics tools. The ultimate
and common goals of these studies are the understanding of the structure and
evolution of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes and their expression under
different environmental conditions. The acquisition of the state-of-the-art
instrumentation described in this project, which allows the simultaneous
processing and analysis of large number of samples, will facilitate the
achievement of the research, teaching and training goals of these
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support research and training
activities in a broad array of scientific fields including Bacterial and Viral
Genomics, Microbial Diversity, Environmental Genomics, Evolutionary Biology,
Functional Genomics, and Protein Biochemistry. These activities are conducted by
active investigators working in the departments of Botany,
Chemistry/Biochemistry, Geology, Microbiology, and Zoology. In addition,
interactions with faculty in the Computer Science department interested in
Bioinformatics and&lt;br/&gt;Computational Biology will be enhanced as a direct
consequence of this award. One of goals of these academic activities is to bring
modern multidisciplinary research approaches to study complex biological
problems at the genetic level while instructing and training faculty, staff, and
students at Miami University in the emerging fields of Bioinformatics, Genomics,
and Computational Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of the
acquired instrumentation is that it will allow Miami University to continue with
its commitment to the constant enhancement of the academic programs, which will
provide superior instructional and research experiences for undergraduate and
graduate students in current and emerging scientific fields. In addition to the
number of students who would receive an improved educational experience, the
quality and diversity of these students will be impacted by this instrumentation
and technology. Miami University is committed to attract students as well as
faculty members belonging to minority and underrepresented groups looking for
higher education in science. This instrumentation will also foster new research
programs as well as collaborations among scientist with common research
interests. Ultimately, all these activities should serve the community by
instructing and training new generations in modern technology used to study
complex and significant biological problems and processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;