* 0420055
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Policymaking Role of State Supreme Courts
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Laura Langer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 06/30/2005
* USD 11,976.00

This project examines the relationship between courts and legislatures in a
comparative perspective, considering how legislative outcomes are impacted by
the judicial branch across and within states. Specifically, this dissertation
asks three fundamental questions. First, do state legislatures alter their
behavior in anticipation of judicial response when the legislature introduces
policy and enacts legislation? Second, does legislative behavior in stage one
(i.e., introductory stage) impact behavior in the enactment stage? Third, does
court preemptive power vary across policy areas? To address these questions, the
investigator will examine the factors expected to influence legislative behavior
vis-a-vis state supreme courts, in all fifty states during 1990 to 2000.
Hypotheses about the role of state supreme courts in the policymaking arena will
be tested in both the bill introduction and enactment stages of the policy
process, and across two policy areas: 1) education policy and 2) the regulation
of Health Management Organizations (HMO regulation). Three main factors are
expected to assist the legislative branch with their assessment of whether the
court is hostile or friendly: 1) ideological distance between state legislatures
and state supreme courts, 2) likelihood of court intervention (i.e., proportion
of state supreme court docket devoted to a specific policy area), and 3)
ideological disposition of cases decided by state supreme courts (within a given
issue). The goal of this project is to provide a more complete model of the
policy process that underscores the policymaking role of the judicial branch and
recognizes the interactions among governmental branches. Fundamentally, this
research will shed light on the perennial debate regarding the impact of courts
on policy through a comparative and longitudinal examination of legislative
behavior vis-a-vis state supreme courts in two stages of the policy process
across two policy areas.