* 0420749
* Acquisition of Non Destructive Testing Instrument for Pavement Engineering Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Rajib Mallick, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2005
* USD 219,534.00

This proposal requests funding for the acquisition of a set of Non Destructive
Testing instruments, which will be used for research and research related
education in pavement engineering: A Falling Weight Deflectometer (FWD), a
Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR), and an infrared camera (IR camera). The
instruments will be used by a research team: the Worcester Polytechnic
Institute, Infrasense Inc., Massachusetts Port Authority and Maine Department of
Transportation. Planned application of the proposed instruments are in the area
of non destructive evaluation of highway and airfield pavements, development of
test protocols for determination of key properties of existing and new
materials, and for determination of effective design, construction and quality
control methods. The FWD is necessary for estimation of moduli of existing
layers. The GPR, with IR camera, is necessary for determination of pavement
layer thickness and conditions information needed for estimation of layer moduli
with FWD data. The requested instruments will also be used for undergraduate and
graduate education. One example of use of these instruments is in an ongoing
National Science Foundation project in a full-scale instrumented facility for
determination of pavement layer responses under traffic. The data obtained from
this study will be used in research as well as for teaching principles of
pavement analysis and design, and use of non-destructive testing. The total cost
of projects is about ten times the cost of the requested instrument, and
potential benefit to cost ratio is very high. The requested instruments are
critical for developing Non Destructive testing capabilities of the research
team for current as well as future research projects. Such capabilities will
enable the researchers to make significant contributions towards the development
of new knowledge in the area of highway and airfield pavements that can be used
by both civil and military organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The proposed project aims at practical application of principles of non-
destructive testing, and will directly improve understanding of concepts and
applications. Broader impacts: The work will lead to significant advances in
understanding of material properties and use of non-destructive testing for
material characterization. It will enable students of all groups and ethnicity
to understand principles and applications of non-destructive testing right in
the school, and will remove barriers for students with disabilities. Hence the
proposed project will lead to generation of new knowledge and training of
students, and hence will benefit society significantly. Project materials will
be disseminated through reports, conferences and journal
publications.&lt;br/&gt;