* 0420152
* 2010 Collaborative Research: Integrating the Unknown-eome with Abiotic Stress Response Networks in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Julia Bailey-Serres, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen J Tonsor
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,927,667.00

Long-Term Goal and Background:&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research
project is to facilitate the assignment of function to every gene in Arabidopsis
thaliana. To date, the function of the proteins encoded by more than 20% of
plant genes is completely unknown, with the function of up to 43% of these
proteins poorly characterized. The specific focus of this research is genes of
unknown function and the networks that respond to environmental stress, such as
chilling, drought, salt, flooding, high light, and oxidative environments.
Environmental stress is the primary cause of crop loss world-wide. A plant's
survival and growth is dependent on its ability to cope with environmental
stresses. It is clear that a plant's stress response results from a complex set
of changes in gene networks and metabolism. While 1000s of genes have been
linked to stress networks, in only a few cases have their biochemical and
genetic functions been elucidated. In fact, most of the stress-regulated genes
identified to date have completely unknown function(s).&lt;br/&gt;Specific Aims
and Expected Outcome:&lt;br/&gt;1. Determine the change in stress tolerance for
&gt; 1,600 plant lines with a disrupted expression of genes of unknown function.
The approach is to test plant lines for resistance or susceptibility to stresses
including water deficit, salt, high light, heat, chilling, freezing,
anaerobiosis, heavy metal and oxidative stress. The primary goal is to begin a
systematic approach to evaluate the contribution of all Arabidopsis genes to
stress tolerance. Expected outcome: Assigning a putative function to &gt; 1,600
genes with an unknown function.&lt;br/&gt;2. Determine the relationship of genes
of unknown function within a global protein-protein&lt;br/&gt;interaction
network. The approach is to determine &gt; 20,000 examples of protein-protein
interactions using a random yeast two-hybrid screening strategy. The primary
goal is to uncover links between genes of known and unknown function. Expected
outcome: A protein-protein map for Arabidopsis.&lt;br/&gt;3. Over-express &gt;
150 selected genes of unknown function in plants, test transgenic plants for
changes in stress tolerance, and search for interacting protein partners. The
hypothesis to be tested for each gene is that its over-expression can alter a
particular stress response. Expected outcome: Identifying proteins of unknown
function with a central importance in stress response and their protein
partners.&lt;br/&gt;4. Profile changes in gene expression in &gt; 20 stress-
response mutants grown under at least two different stress conditions. The
primary goal is to begin creating a network of gene expression changes that can
help better focus in-depth experiments on enzymes and regulators of potential
importance to environmental stress. Expected outcome: Identifying gene networks
involved in environmental stress.&lt;br/&gt;5. Coordinate a centralized website
for information on genes of unknown function ("unknowns")&lt;br/&gt;from
Arabidopsis and provide outreach and training activities for those under
privileged and&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented in science, on the role of science in
agriculture, the environment, and human health. Web-based resources will be
established to disseminate unpublished information and link annotation and data
to all Arabidopsis "unknowns". All plant lines and results of the project will
be released to the academic community on a biannual basis. Expected outcome: A
centralized website to enhance research on genes with unknown
function.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The two key "Broader Impacts" of
the proposed research are: 1) development and maintenance of a centralized
website for information on Arabidopsis genes of unknown function. This site will
track and disseminate information on homozygous T-DNA insertion lines for
"unknown" genes and their phenotypes, and provide gene structure, gene
annotation, protein interaction and mRNA profiling data. 2) Educational outreach
for K-12 and interdisciplinary training to postdoctoral, graduate and
undergraduates trainees. A summer outreach workshop will teach high school
students about Mendelian inheritance in Arabidopsis, the role of science in
agriculture, the environment, and human health. This laboratory-based internship
program will provide self-confidence building experiences and expose
the&lt;br/&gt;students to laboratories and scientists. Both undergraduate and
K-12 outreach and training activities will target the under privileged and
underrepresented in science&lt;br/&gt;