* 0421582
* Development of Infrared Instrumentation for High-Resolution and High-Precision Solar Magnetic Field Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Matthew Penn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 01/31/2010
* USD 1,978,755.00

The near-infrared part of the solar spectrum between 1 and 2.2 microns is one of
the best diagnostic tools for studying solar magnetic fields. At these
wavelengths, sets of spectral lines exist that enable precise measurements of
the magnetic fields across a large three-dimensional volume of the solar
atmosphere, from the photosphere, through the chromosphere, and into the solar
corona. This research project would integrate such observations with the high-
resolution and high-dynamic-range telescopic capabilities now established at two
sites: the National Solar Observatory at Sacramento Peak (NSO/SP) and the Mees
Solar Observatory (MSO) of the Institute for Astronomy (IfA) at the University
of Hawaii. The aim would be to produce a suite of instruments for precise three-
dimensional remote sensing of solar magnetic fields. Study of small-scale
magnetic features requires high spatial and time resolution observations over a
small field of view (FOV). Measurement of coronal magnetic fields demands high-
sensitivity spectropolarimetry over a large FOV, which can be achieved only with
reduced spatial and time resolution, given existing coronagraphic capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two instruments would be developed in this project to meet
these broad observational requirements: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A Facility IR
Spectropolarimeter (FIRS) for the Dunn Solar Telescope (DST) of NSO/SP. This
would be a conventional long-slit spectrograph with an innovative multiple-slit
design to enhance its efficiency. It would be operated in conjunction with the
new high-order adaptive optics (AO) system of the DST, allowing observations of
small-scale photospheric magnetic fields, as well as sunspot and active region
magnetic fields, over a large FOV with high spatial and moderate time
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; An IR Imaging Spectropolarimeter (IRIS) based
on distributed large-format fiber optics integral field units (IFU). IFU imaging
spectroscopy measures the spectra of extended two-dimensional fields without
scanning. Combined with an AO system, it can achieve the highest spatial and
time resolution possible over a substantial FOV when observing the solar
photosphere. On the SOLAR-C coronagraph at MSO, IFU imaging spectroscopy would
efficiently map the large-scale coronal magnetic fields with moderate spatial
and time resolution.