* 0421007
* A Consortium for the Acquisition of a 4Pi-Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Christoph Cremer, Jackson Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 732,624.00

This award supports the acquisition of the first commercially available 4Pi-
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope (4Pi-CLSM). The 4Pi-CLSM offers immediate
three-dimensional optical resolution in the 100 nm range. This instrument will
be housed at the Institute for Molecular Biophysics (IMB), a research unit of
the University of Maine (UM), established through a consortium between UM, The
Jackson Laboratory (TJL) and Maine Medical Center Research Institute (MMCRI).
The 4Pi-CLSM will enable axial optical resolving power that is five to seven
fold higher than that offered by conventional confocal microscopy. This
unprecedented progress in the potential to acquire quantitative structural
information from fluorescence-labelled small regions in individual cells will
enable new understanding of dynamic processes within cellular structures. The
projects have been selected to test the capacity of the 4Pi-CLSM to resolve a
diverse set of cellular structures at sufficient power to address longstanding
questions of gene expression and gene product structure and function. Several
major users propose studies that will examine the relationship of genome
architecture and control of gene expression during embryonic development in
mouse and zebrafish. The 4Pi-CLSM will enable entirely new kinds of
investigation into the relationship between chromatin structure and
transcription at the level of individual genes, permitting investigators to see
how small differences in structure and epigenetic modification control the
timing and sequence of gene activation. The relationship between the structures
of individual chromosome regions, their positioning within the nuclei of
different cell types and coordinated gene expression can be examined. Other
users will apply the instrument for the analysis of cytoplasmic and membrane
structures. These studies will examine the processes that guide protein
migration and multi-protein complex assembly, the mechanisms by which nuclear
trafficking of proteins is associated with cell cycle control and cell fate
determination. A third group of users tests the capabilities of 4Pi-CLSM to
optically resolve membrane structures and transmembrane molecules, a
longstanding challenge for optical microscopy. In consequence, the 4Pi-CLSM will
allow a wealth of biological and biophysical research applications that could
not previously be addressed with light microscopy. The participating
investigators collaborate with faculty at the three participating institutes and
train students at several educational levels. &lt;br/&gt;