* 0421325
* MRI: Acquisition of Fundamental Semiconductor Processing Capabilities for Education and Research in Hybrid Silicon/Molecule Processes and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Ludwig Bartels, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 186,000.00

The Major Research Instrumentation program provides funding for the acquisition
of a core semiconductor processing tool that is required for a semiconductor
research training facility at the University of California at Riverside (UCR).
The funds will be used for the acquisition of a chemical vapor deposition system
for research in organic/biological-silicon hybrid devices and research training
in a broad range of topics related to semiconductor processing. The new tool
from Nanomasters Inc. incorporates a dual process-chamber setup and allows for
separation of carbon-rich and carbon-sensitive processing steps. Availability of
this tool will forward a broad range of NSF-sponsored projects at UCR ranging
from research in organic device components compatible with a semiconductor-
processing environment to the development of a semiconductor-related curriculum
at a institution that is located in an area which has one of the lowest rate of
high school students continuing towards collegiate education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Major Research Instrumentation program provides
funding for the acquisition of a core semiconductor processing tool that is
required for a semiconductor research training facility at the University of
California at Riverside (UCR). The funds will be used for the acquisition of a
chemical vapor deposition system for research in organic/biological-silicon
hybrid devices and research training in a broad range of topics related to
semiconductor processing. The new tool from Nanomasters Inc. incorporates a dual
process-chamber setup and allows for separation of carbon-rich and carbon-
sensitive processing steps. Availability of this tool will forward a broad range
of NSF-sponsored projects at UCR ranging from research in organic device
components compatible with a semiconductor-processing environment to the
development of a semiconductor-related curriculum at a institution that is
located in an area which has one of the lowest rate of high school students
continuing towards collegiate education.&lt;br/&gt;