* 0421310
* MRI:    Development of An In-situ Flow Cytometer for Enhanced Aquatic Particle Discrimination
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* James Bonner, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 221,000.00

Proposal No. CTS-0421310&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: J. S. Bonner, Texas
A&amp;M University, Corpus Christi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will result
in improved in situ flow cytometry instrumentation to enable real-time particle
detection (colloidal, super-colloidal and microbial) in coastal margin
environments. Coastal margins provide ecological and economic services of vast
importance to society at large; advancing methods to ensure their sustainable
management must continue to be a research and operational priority. It is widely
recognized that real-time monitoring is needed for adequate detection of
contaminants in coastal margin ecosystems. Furthermore, because of the
complexity of interacting physical processes in these ecosystems, static
monitoring systems are unable to resolve spatial variability at scales necessary
for proper environmental management. Current flow cytometry technology allows
for particle discrimination over time at a fixed location. It does not, however,
support real-time detection over broader spatial scales. This is a critical
limitation, and one that has hampered progress in protection of marine
ecosystems from both natural and anthropogenic disturbances. The goal is to
modify the commercial FlowCAM cytometer and its procedures to allow continuous
marine monitoring over both space and time. A functional flow cytometer will be
developed that can be housed in a tube approximately 9 inches in diameter and 3
feet in length. The instrument will be fitted for use on a towable platform for
shallow marine environments. The modifications proposed here will allow: 1)
quantitative aquatic particle differentiation; 2) rapid instrument deployment
and enhanced mobility for use in shallow water environments; 3) synergy with
related coastal monitoring sensors; 4) integration with existing databases; and
5) internet capabilities with data streams to the World Wide Web. The potential
for broader impacts includes immediate alignment with an existing CRCD project
focused on creating a GIS-trained student able to use various data streams for
accurate data synthesis modeling with a final capstone course combining both
concepts into a real world situation. Further dissemination will occur through
existing channels created by the RESSACA CREST and an existing REU Site. Texas
A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi is located in south Texas where the population
demographics are heavily Hispanic, underrepresented groups will be provided
opportunity to pursue advanced degrees in science and engineering as part of
their research training and experience. The project will result in improved flow
cytometry instrumentation that advances continuous monitoring of coastal margin
environments, supporting research, education, and public policy designed to
protect coastal margin ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;