* 0421449
* Aquisition of a Digital Imaging System Will Enhance Scientific Research and Curricula at a Minority Undergraduate Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* John Wahlert, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 76,119.00

A grant has been awarded to Baruch College of the City University of New York
(CUNY) under the direction of Drs. Valerie Schawaroch and John Wahlert. The
award will be used to purchase a state of the art macro and micro digital
imaging system (MDIS) to be used in numerous investigations on fruit flies,
fossil mice and plant mites and to create online study materials for students in
basic biology courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects that will employ
the MDIS system include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I. To investigate, clearly
identify, and illustrate closely-related fruit flies that are very difficult to
distinguish from one another without microscopic examination. Three projects are
envisioned. One samples putative species from Black Rock Forest, Cornwall, New
York, whose coloration varies seasonally. The second describes new species of
flies from Madagascar and Viet Nam. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II. To investigate
evolutionary relationships of a rare extinct cricetid rodent (New World mice)
and to fully describe its skull features and teeth, in comparison with extinct
cricetids of similar geologic age. Students will dissect recent cricetids for
anatomical comparison with the fossil skulls. The UV capability of the MDIS is
especially useful in distinguishing certain tissue types and documenting
progressive stages of dissection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;III. To document the
spatial and density distribution of a predator-prey (mite) system. Data from
these experiments will be used to test a newly proposed energy flow model for
harvesting populations. The effects of UV radiation on mites from New York and
Florida populations will be compared and documented using the
MDIS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MDIS will have broad impact for the education and
training of future scientists. Undergraduate students from Baruch College, an
urban minority institution, will be able to use the MDIS for research. This will
provide the students with highly resolved, publication quality images that will
be used for dissemination of the research. The MDIS will be used to enhance and
compliment classroom instruction in such courses as introductory biology,
comparative anatomy, and genetics. MDIS images, generated in these courses, will
be posted on the Baruch College web site for use by students and interested
members of the public. Baruch College students will serve as peer mentors for
high school students at the Baruch College Campus High School and at the Newark
Museum for science projects employing the
MDIS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;