* 0421546
* Development of Instrumentation for Continuous Field-Based Measurements of Atmospheric and Oceanic Ar/N2, O2/N2, and CO2/N2 ratios and related isotopic tracers
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Ralph Keeling, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2009
* USD 644,151.00

0421546&lt;br/&gt;Keeling&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
development award to Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of
California San Diego campus provides funds for the development of a capability
to make continuous, extremely high precision measurements of atmospheric Ar/N2 ,
O2/N2, and CO2/N2 ratios and related isotopic tracers. The goal is to use the
measurement of changes in the Ar/N2 ratio, combined with other constraints on
atmospheric mixing, to remotely sense the large-scale exchanges of heat between
the atmosphere and ocean, thus providing an inexpensive complement to
observations made by ships, floats and satellites. Rapid atmospheric mixing
rates mean that a modest program of Ar/N2 observations can potentially constrain
the heat exchange integrated over wide areas, such as full ocean basins or an
entire hemisphere. The proposed approach uses two isotope ratio mass
spectrometers, one deployed at Scripps Institution and one aboard a research
vessel, to provide the geographic and temporal sampling needed to observe
predicted change in isotope ratios due to changes in heat flux. The sampling
procedures include a customized inlet system, and are designed to address
concerns identified with errors in precision associated with flask sampling. The
shipboard system will include underway collection of gases dissolved in surface
sea water, and will have ten collectors spanning masses 28 to 45, providing
simultaneous measurement of a number of important tracers. The broader impacts
of the development are in the ability to improve global climate models,
improving our ability to predict how anthropogenic inputs impact climate change.
The project will also involve students and a postdoctoral investigator in a
cutting edge research development. Scripps Institution of Oceanography is
providing 30% of the equipment costs of the project from non-federal funds. This
proposal is supported by the Division of Ocean Sciences at NSF.&lt;br/&gt;
***&lt;br/&gt;