* 0421630
* Comparative Genomics of the Compositae
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Steven Knapp, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2008
* USD 5,584,982.00

This collaborative multi-disciplinary research project will develop resources
for functional, comparative, and evolutionary genomics of the Compositae,
particularly lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and sunflower (Helianthus annuus). Six
domestication and ten escape and naturalization events are being investigated to
elucidate the genetic bases and evolutionary forces underlying the domestication
of crops and evolution of weeds. These data will build on the Compositae Genome
Project (CGP, http://compgenomics.ucdavis.edu) as well as capitalize on the
wealth of knowledge being developed for Arabidopsis and other model species.
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, (i) 450,000 EST sequences will be deposited in GenBank
and the CGP web site with an emphasis on allelic diversity (covering 18 plant
species); (ii) the study of phenotypic and molecular variation in seven genera
is being examined for patterns of selection and sequence or expression
differences associated with domestication or weed traits, (iii) quantitative
traits and gene expression patterns for seed oil profiles in lettuce and
sunflower are being detected, and (iv) gene order and chromosome rearrangements
in lettuce, sunflower, and Arabidopsis are being characterized. This research
will investigate a broad range of genes involved in evolution of cultivated
plants and weeds and will evaluate of the relative importance of changes in gene
sequence versus changes in gene expression for the evolution of different traits
such as flowering time, seed production and quality and clonal growth among
others. The genetic bases of parallel evolutionary trends (e.g. changes to short
life cycles, or changes from annual to perennial growth) will be assessed and
will provide a basis for future functional analyses.&lt;br/&gt;The data and
resources developed with this project will be readily available to the
scientific community through the CGP web site and commercial distributors of
clones and arrays. Multiple national and international interactions with the
academic and private sectors will allow for rapidly released agriculturally
useful information and genetically diverse accessions. Our project is
complementary to downstream programs in the private sector. &lt;br/&gt;The CGP
will have significant economic impact and generate permanent resources for the
Compositae, one of the largest and ecologically successful families. Lettuce is
one of the top ten US crops and sunflower ranks #14 worldwide. The family also
includes many minor crops, important weeds, and species with novel
biochemistries. The CGP funnels basic genomics information to crop improvement
by efficiently leveraging information from the sequencing and functional
genomics of model organisms. The project contributes to the genetic data being
developed across all plants. &lt;br/&gt;The CGP emphasizes multidisciplinary
teams with expertise drawn from multiple universities. The CGP integrates
genetics, biochemistry, physiology, and bioinformatics and will provide broad
training in these areas. In addition, an effective outreach program that impacts
all levels of students is in place. The CGP will provide research experience to
minorities, especially at Cal Poly Pomona and U. Mass., Boston and introduce
computer science majors to biology.&lt;br/&gt;