* 0421675
* Virtual Center for Analysis of Rice Genome Transcription
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Pamela Ronald, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,474,014.00

As the international effort to sequence the rice genome is completed, it becomes
essential to define each and every transcriptional unit (or gene) encoded in the
rice genome. Computer assisted genome annotation suggests that there may be
about 60,000 genes in the rice genome. However, it is estimated that the
combination of all experimental data available provides expression validation
for only approximately half of the predicted genes. Further, due to the high GC
content in rice gene coding regions, existing gene prediction program will
likely miss a significant fraction of the active genes. Thus there is an urgent
need for experimental verification of all predicted genes and discovery of rice
genes that were missed by current prediction programs.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will attempt to discover all possible transcription units of the just completely
sequenced Japonica rice. A high-density genome tiling oligonucleotide array
produced with the Maskless Array Synthesizer (MAS) technology will be used,
which permits reiteration of the oligo design for each subsequent array slide
production. The workflow will be optimized first with rice chromosome 10 and
then applied to all remaining chromosomes. Pooled probes derived from
representative RNA samples from both normal grown rice and those subjected to
various inductive treatments will be included to maximize transcription unit
discovery. The data will be integrated into the current and ongoing genome
annotation to test predicted gene models and to define structures of the novel
transcription units. The raw data will be deposited in the MIAME compliant GEO
database as soon as the results are subject to quality control. All the original
data, including raw hybridization data as well as gene models, will be made
available to the public through a project web site (www.plantgenomics.yale.edu)
once they are quality controlled and verified. This web site will be online at
the end of this first funding year (August 30, 2005) and the last data set will
be made available by August 30, 2007. All the new or improved rice gene models
created from this work be posted on our project web site and will also be
forwarded to the NSF-supported rice genome annotation group at The Institute for
Genome Research at bimonthly intervals for their incorporation into their public
rice gene annotation web site. The full data set will be made available to TIGR
and the public by the end of this project (August,
2007).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The experimental
identification of all Japonica rice transcription units will provide an
essential foundation for rice functional genomics and proteomics research in the
future and provide useful comparative data for other cereals. In the process of
our proposed studies, a number of postdoctoral researchers and students (both
graduate and undergraduate) will obtain training in plant genomics and
informatics. The project will work with the Peabody Museum at Yale University to
teach the general public and school children about the role of rice cultivation
in cultures around the world, and on the potential benefits of rice genomic
advances for society.&lt;br/&gt;