* 0421452
* Acquisition of a scanning electron microscope optimized for elemental analysis for geologic research and teaching at Northern Arizona University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* James Sample, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2007
* USD 237,127.00

0421452&lt;br/&gt;Sample&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from this Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant, the Department of Geology at Northern
Arizona will install a scanning electron microscope (SEM) optimized for
elemental imaging and chemical analysis of rocks and minerals. This SEM will
significantly enhance the existing geologic research capabilities in the
Department. Faculty members in the Department of Geology will manage the
facility, and a technician supported by the Department will provide maintenance
and training for researchers and students. The Department has a successful
program with 16 faculty members. Ten faculty members and their students use an
SEM as part of their research program. The SEM will be an important tool for
making more demanding analytical research (isotopic analysis by mass
spectrometry, electron microprobe analysis) efficient and thorough, and in
developing new avenues of research not practical with existing instrumentation
at NAU. These research programs include investigations of magma chamber
processes, fluid-rock interactions in fault zones at active margins, pressure-
temperature-time evolution of orogenic belts, volcanic processes and eruptive
fabrics, tectonics and sedimentary provenance of formations in the North
American Cordillera, chemical and faunal evolution of cold seep systems at
continental margins, and biostratigraphy and evolution of micro-
vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;Besides benefiting the strong research programs of
Geology faculty members and their students, the SEM will be a valuable, user-
friendly training tool for all graduate and undergraduate students interested in
quantitative analysis of geological materials. This instrument will be used in
educational and research training in at least 4 undergraduate and 12 graduate
classes, impacting dozens of students in a large geology program. The SEM will
provide the students graduating from NAU Geology with analytical skills that
will help to ensure their success as they pursue more advanced degrees. The
facility will provide important outreach capabilities for the Department to
bring more students from the large rural Arizona, Native American, and Hispanic
populations served by NAU, into a career in geoscience. In these ways, the SEM
will serve a university whose mission is to be a premier undergraduate
residential institution integrated with professional and graduate programs. The
instrument will be housed in the Department of Geology where the proximity and
fee structure will be favorable for innovative teaching- and research-related
usage. &lt;br/&gt;