* 0421120
* Acquisition of a Fluorescence Microscope and Imaging System for Faculty Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* John Ubels, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 174,298.00

This award provides support for acquisition of a sophisticated confocal-like
microscopy system consisting of a inverted fluorescence microscope interfaced
with an imaging system that employs a moving grid of illumation that allows
identification and rejection of out-of-focus light. This permits optical
sectioning and the assembly of 3-D reconstructions of imaged specimens.
Environmental control hardware will permit the imaging of live cells. The system
will be placed in an image analysis core facility, in close proximity to faculty
research laboratories and undergraduate teaching laboratories. The system will
be used for research in the following areas: the role in neuronal
differentiation of the Diaphanous-related Formins, a family of Rho GTPase target
proteins; the mechanism and regulation of intracellular transport of the
multifunctional protein galectin-3; the role of eukaryotic cytokines on growth
and structure of bacterial biofilms; the regulation of CD44 receptor expression
and trafficking by hyaluronic acid; the cellular localization and functions of a
novel cysteine protease in soybean; and 6) the analysis of tissue-specific
protein expression in duct cells of the lacrimal gland. In addition to these
research uses, the instrument will enhance research training of undergraduate
students and will have a prominent role in research design and methods courses
whose topics vary depending on the expertise and interest of the teaching
faculty. Investigative use of the system will be introduced in various other
coursesin the form of training exercises and independent student investigations.
Users will include summer research students, students enrolled in upper-division
courses, and faculty.