* 0421255
* MRI: Spinstand for Developing Next Generation Data Storage Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Venkatesan Renugopalakrishnan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2007
* USD 220,896.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, investigators seek funding to
purchase a Spinstand System an indispensable tool to test and develop next
generation magnetic and alternative recording systems. The spinstand system
consists of three parts: 1) Spinstand V2002 the latest model by the leader in
the field Guzik Corporation unlike the previous models, it uses a piezoactuator,
besides linear motors, to position a head with 1-nm accuracy along a specified
track; 2) Read-Write Analyzer RWA2004 also the latest model by Guzik Corporation
is capable of the maximum data rate of 4 Gigabit/sec (This is the record-high
number among the commercial available products.); and 3) Radio-Frequency (RF)
Shielded Enclosure by Raymond EMC necessary to protect the measurements from the
stray electromagnetic fields. The total cost for the instrumentations is
$315,565. With a rapid progress in information technologies today, it is
expected that next generation data storage systems (within the next decade)
should be capable of storing, recording and retrieving data with an effective
areal density of beyond 10 Terabit/in2 and with a data rate of more than 1
Gbit/sec. At such high data density, the entire library of the U.S. Congress can
be recorded in a device the size of a regular music CD. The requirements to the
mechanical and electrical parts of a system to test next generation recording
systems are unconventionally tight. Also, it is imperative to have the maximum
possible data rate when dealing with such massive amounts of information. The
unique Spinstand system the PIs seek to purchase is capable of testing recording
systems with such high data density. In addition, the system offers the best
data rate available in the industry today. The PIs plan to purchase the
Spinstand system with the purpose to develop next generation data storage
technologies including:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Magnetic longitudinal and
perpendicular recording for areal densities beyond
1&lt;br/&gt;Terabit/in2;&lt;br/&gt;2) Heat-assisted magnetic recording (HAMR)
for areal densities beyond 10 Terabit/in2;&lt;br/&gt;3) Patterned media for
areal density beyond 10 Terabit/in2;&lt;br/&gt;4) Unconventional Protein-based
storage for areal density beyond 10 Terabit/in2;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
list above, the last three (especially, the protein-based storage) applications
are often labeled as high-risk by companies because of their quite
unconventional nature. For economical reasons, if possible, companies prefer to
concentrate their research and development on truly incremental improvement of
the existing technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;The
research around the instrumentation is directed to develop next generation data
storage systems including both magnetic and unconventional technologies such as
protein-based storage. With the purchase of the Spinstand system, the PIs plan
to integrate the open academic environment with their experience and strong ties
to the industry to develop some of the most high-risk and innovative data
storage technologies. In this process, the PIs have a plan to integrate the
Spinstand in the state-of-the-art infrastructure they have recently built in
their institutions, Florida International University (FIU) and the University of
Houston (UH). For example, it should be mentioned that one of the main reasons
to purchase the state-of-the-art Spinstand system at FIU is to close the
experimentation loop built recently at FIU for the advanced prototyping of
Nanoscale magnetic devices. Finally, this research effort goes along with the
FIU's recent strategic decision to expand its research activities in the cutting
edge areas of science and technology. In addition, the involvement of two
universities in this research automatically broadens the field of interest in
the results coming from this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;A very broad range of applications of the proposed research
topics brings together researchers from different disciplines of science,
Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science,
Bioengineering, Physics, and Signal Processing. It is believed that this
interdisciplinary interaction will result in synergetic activities with the
ground-breaking scientific results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;