* 0421608
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Ingrid Daubechies, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 09/30/2007
* USD 92,899.00

The Department of Mathematics and Program in Applied and Computational
Mathematics proposes to purchase a computational cluster which will be dedicated
to support computational research in mathematical sciences. This research will
be concentrated in particular in the following areas: (1) new algorithms for the
separation of independent components in magnetic imaging data to study brain
function, (2) the dynamics of how bio-molecules acquire and move between
different conformations, (3) study of the analytic rank in connection with the
Goldfeld conjecture on elliptic curves (a well-known conjecture in number
theory), and (4) computer-assisted enumeration of cusped hyperbolic
3-manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of these projects require dedicated
facilities that Fine Hall does not have currently. From a scientific and
educational point of view, the proposed projects lie at the interfaces between
different disciplines: signal processing, statistics and psychology for the fMRI
project; applied mathematics and biochemistry for the second project; topology
and geometry for the 3-manifold project. Progress on these projects will impact
several communities. In addition, these projects will be part of the PIs'
continuing effort on bringing frontier research to science education in the
classrooms, as well as attracting women and other under-represented groups to
the area of mathematics. New courses and discussion sessions will be organized
so that a much larger part of the mathematical and scientific community will
have access to these research projects through the proposed facility.&lt;br/&gt;