* 0421057
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Particle Image Velocimetry System for Biofluid Mechanics Research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Steve Koenig, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 12/31/2007
* USD 202,992.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. CTS-0421057&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: M. K. Sharp, Univ. of Louisville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
is for the acquisition of a Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) system to enhance
collaborative research in biofluid mechanics among faculty in engineering and
the medical school. The PIV system will provide velocity field measurement
capabilities not currently available at the University of Louisville. The system
can be used for 2D micro PIV measurements in microscopic flow chambers, as well
as 3D (macro) PIV measurements for larger flows. The projects for which the PIV
system will be used during the grant period have biomedical applications, a
field in which the university has made a major commitment through faculty
recruiting and establishment of a Center for Bioengineering. The following
projects will benefit from the acquisition of this equipment: "Investigation of
the mechanics of flow-induced hemolysis," "Aortic flow distribution during
ventricular assistance- dependence on cannulation site, pulsatile or continuous
flow, and degree of heart failure," and "Increasing production of ATP-filled
vesicles using a microchannel." These projects represent over $4.4 million of
currently funded research by six investigators, which are training 22 students
and have spawned three patent applications. Use of the PIV system is expected
beyond the grant period not only for extensions to these projects, but also for
other investigations including flow-induced enhancement of the response of
biosensors, control of artificial hearts for reduced valve impact forces,
orientation of nanotube and crystal growth by flow, and flow and transport of
toxins in ventilation ducts. The proposed instrumentation will be shared in an
integrated laboratory, creating an environment where cross-disciplinary
communication is encouraged and facilitated for the faculty and students, while
maximizing efficient use of resources. The impact of the instrumentation will
encompass not only the research projects of the investigators, but also the
graduate and undergraduate students actively participating in them, as well as
contributing material to at least nine courses in engineering. Investigators
will develop presentations or videos for three age groups for locally active
minority and women's groups, including the National Society for Black Engineers,
the Society of Women Engineers, the Louisville Black Achievers and the UL
INSPIRE program. &lt;br/&gt;