* 0421015
* Integrated Major Research Instrumentation for Real Time Analyses Within An Experimental Watershed
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Myron Mitchell, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 388,117.00

This award partially supports the development of a fully instrumented watershed
at Huntington Forest, NY. The forest has been a focal point for ecological field
investigations in the Adirondack Mountains of New York State for more than two
decades. The project involves the acquisition of a coordinated suite of
instruments and development of a network optimized for realtime data acquisition
at the Arbutus experimental watershed. Realtime measurements will be combined
with wireless technology to enhance this outdoor facility for both research and
teaching. Teaching will include not only graduate and undergraduate students,
but also the training of high school teachers and their students. The
development of field curricula is a focal area of environmental investigations
at the SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry and collaborating
institutions. The Arbutus Watershed is the only fully operational site in the
Adirondacks that is evaluating concomitantly temporal changes in climate,
hydrology, biogeochemistry, terrestrial biota and aquatic biota. A major focus
of research at this site by scientists and students has been the development of
field instrumentation for ecological research. This new suite of instrumentation
will focus on continuous measurements of meteorological, hydrological and
biochemical parameters at key locations within the catchment and also provide a
communication network for wide range of projects including watershed hydrology,
elemental mass balances, mercury dynamics and animal telemetry. These
measurements will also be used in regional ecological analyses. New field
instrumentation will include a wireless communications system that will transmit
and/or receive data from individual sites within the Arbutus Lake watershed,
plus expand environmental monitoring and data collection, allowing for more
extensive ecological and environmental investigations. This expanded data
monitoring system will allow for more intensive investigations of physical,
chemical and biological parameters in response to environmental change.