* 0421565
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Open Architecture Cryosystem with a 9 Tesla Magnet for Education and Research in Magnetic Materials and Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* James Eckert, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 265,083.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program provides funds to
Harvey Mudd College for the acquisition of a versatile, low temperature physical
measurement system. The instrument is equipped with high magnetic field
capability and an open architecture that will provide a system adaptable to a
broad spectrum of transport, magnetization, and thermodynamic measurement
techniques. The researchers will be able to study the interaction of ultra thin
antiferromagnetic layers with ferromagnetic materials, the effect of seed layer
and capping layer on exchange coupling, the temperature dependence of the spin
diffusion length in magnetic and nonmagnetic materials, and half-metallic
ferromagnets. Harvey Mudd College is an undergraduate science and engineering
college with a tradition in training leaders in the technical fields. An
extensive research experience is considered to be an essential part of that
educational process. Undergraduate students will be trained in the
interdisciplinary field of magnetic materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program
will support the magnetic materials group at Harvey Mudd College with the
acquisition of a versatile, low temperature system. The instrument is equipped
with high magnetic field capability and an open architecture that will provide a
system adaptable to a broad spectrum of transport, magnetization, and
thermodynamic measurement techniques. The instrument will support research in
the interaction of ultra thin antiferromagnetic layers with ferromagnetic
materials, the effect of seed layer and capping layer on exchange coupling, the
temperature dependence of the spin diffusion length in magnetic and nonmagnetic
materials, and half-metallic ferromagnets. Harvey Mudd College is an
undergraduate science and engineering college with the goal of training leaders
in the technical fields. An extensive research experience is considered to be an
essential part of that educational process. Undergraduate students will be
trained in the interdisciplinary field of magnetic materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;