* 0421000
* MRI:     Acquisition of a Desktop, High-Resolution, Three-Dimensional X-Ray Computed Tomography (CT) System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* John Schmalzel, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2006
* USD 238,698.00

This proposal seeks support to acquire the SkyScan 1072 compact, desk-top X-Ray
microtomograph system for the non-destructive, high spatial resolution
(1.8mm/pixel), three-dimensional reconstruction of objects. Research
applications include particle characterization (sand, toner, etc.) and imaging
of stress-corrosion cracks in gas pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
acquisition enhances the existing imaging capabilities in the nondestructive
evaluation laboratory (NDE Lab) at Rowan University. Presently, we are able to
image test objects using the following sensor modalities - magnetic, ultrasonic,
thermal, acoustic, optical and 2-D X-Ray. We are developing digital image
processing and artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms for predicting 3-D object
profiles. These profiles are then visualized using the Virtual Reality (VR)
system. However, currently, we do not have the capability to validate the
accuracy of the sensor methods and the AI algorithms in predicting these 3-D
profiles. The proposed X-Ray computed tomography (CT) system will provide us
with exactly that capability; and serve as a validation "gold"
standard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed
activity&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition and use of a CT system that provides 3-D
reconstruction of object shapes as a validation "gold" standard significantly
benefits the design of artificial neural network algorithms that are employed to
predict 3-D shapes from conventional and emergent 2-D imaging techniques. This
procedure allows us to develop novel NDE imaging methods that can explicitly
demonstrate the various trade-offs that are involved in accurate 3-D
characterization of object shapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the
proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;The NDE Lab in the Rowan University College of
Engineering is a multi-disciplinary, collaborative research and teaching
laboratory that supports the R&amp;D efforts faculty, students (both graduate
and undergraduate) and industrial partners. The proposed acquisition will
positively impact research activities among other faculty not only in the
College of Engineering, but also across Campus. Collaborations that are underway
include the development of smart-sensors and bio-sensors -the reliability of
these devices&lt;br/&gt;will be tested using the proposed CT
scanner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previously funded research projects in the NDE Lab
have demonstrated significant educational impact. To date, the Lab has employed
32 undergraduate research assistants and 10 graduate research assistants. The
Lab has supported an average of three multidisciplinary Engineering Clinic
projects every semester since Fall 1999, impacting approximately 120 students.
So far, 9 Faculty from three engineering disciplines (ECE, ME, CEE) have
collaborated on research and education projects. We anticipate that 10
undergraduate students and 2 graduate students will use the proposed instrument
every semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;