* 0421852
* Group Polarization
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Debraj Ray, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 272,318.00

It is self-evident that in society, many if not the most important decisions are
made by groups. Group involvement is endemic, whether it be voting among large
populations or deliberation by small committees. A standard view of group
decision-making is that it facilitates exchanges of ideas and information, which
necessarily lead to better outcomes. This view stands in contrast to a striking
empirical regularity, dubbed group polarization, whereby members of a
deliberating group predictably move toward a more extreme point in the direction
indicated by the members' predeliberation tendencies. The aim of this project is
to bridge the gap between the standard naive view of group decision-making and
the empirical literature.

The project focuses on two distinct processes of group polarization. The first
process operates in group decisions over risky prospects, where group members
exhibit choice-shifts: They tend to take on more extreme levels of risk (either
riskier or more cautious), relative to the levels of risk they would accept as
individuals outside the group. The researchers propose an explanation for choice
shifts, which is based on a model of individual decision-making. Hence, the
framework they offer applies not only to choice shifts observed in groups but
also to commonly observed biases in individual decision making. The second
process analyzed in this proposal operates in groups that face a threat of
disagreement. This threat plays an important role in explaining the fact that
preference intensities matter in group interaction, and do so in non-additive
ways. The researchers propose a dynamic model of group deliberation where each
member wishes to implement a distinct policy, and the favorite policy of each
member imposes externalities on the other members. The researchers discuss how
this model can accommodate notions of `extremism' and `tolerance', and offer a
methodology to study the formal relation between these two concepts. The
proposed framework has the potential of allowing the researchers to rank
different supermajority rules by the level of `extremism' that they impose in
equilibrium.