* 0421374
* Acquisition of a 600-MHz NMR Spectrometer for Biomolecular and Materials Research
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Amy Andreotti, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 06/30/2007
* USD 957,600.00

This award provides partial support for the acquisition of a 600 MHz nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer to be used for multidisciplinary research
projects, including: (1) membrane protein structure and dynamics, (2) polymeric
and catalytic materials studies, (3) molecular mechanism of cell signaling, (4)
plant metabolite levels and metabolic fluxes, and (5) chemical reaction
kinetics. The instrument will provide enhanced sensitivity and resolution
capabilities, and advanced NMR methods not currently available to Iowa State
University researchers. The increased sensitivity and resolution of the 600 MHz
NMR will critically enable the implementation and development of novel 2D and 3D
solid-state NMR correlation techniques for studying membrane protein
conformational changes and supramolecular structures. The instrument will
dramatically advance cutting-edge research into the structure-property relations
of modern catalysts and complex polymers, and will facilitate multi-dimensional
heteronuclear solution NMR experiments that interrogate proteins involved in
biological signal transmission. Additionally, the NMR will vitalize the
construction of metabolic flux maps for plant metabolic engineering. The 600 MHz
NMR will benefit a large user base at ISU, engaged in diverse research areas
ranging from biodegradable polymers to enzyme kinetics, from plant carbohydrates
to self-assembled metal complexes. Students and faculty from smaller neighboring
institutions will participate in research and training on the high-field
instrument, as well as students from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) and Minority Engineering Apprenticeship (MEAP) programs.