* 0421404
* MRI: Acquisition of Transmission Electron Microscopy Upgrades for Interdisciplinary Materials Research and Education Activities
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Gregory Spencer, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 02/29/2008
* USD 200,000.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program provides allow Texas
State University (TxSU) to upgrade a high resolution transmission electron
microscope (HR-TEM) system recently made available through private donation. The
modernization will enable sophisticated and user-friendly microbeam diffraction,
high-sensitivity CCD camera imaging, and integrated elemental analysis
capabilities that will introduce in a cost-effective way new capabilities for
nanostructured materials characterization. This is a critically needed
instrument for nanotechnology and nanoscience research TxSU. The instrument will
benefit several departments, Chemistry, Engineering Technology and Physics, will
benefit from this upgrade. It will enhance synergetic of the industrial,
academic and international materials collaborations at the TxSU Nanomaterials
Applications Center and the TxSU Institute for Environmental and Industrial
Science. The upgraded TEM will significantly address the materials analysis
needs of an existing collaborative RUI project involving Tarleton State U,
Angelo State U and TxSU. It will be a "hands on" instrument in TxSU's
undergraduate and MS level Materials Physics and Polymer Processing &
Characterization laboratory courses, and also support relevant interdisciplinary
masters thesis projects. The upgraded HR-TEM will also be useful for
characterizing materials/devices fabricated in the TxSU microelectronic
fabrication laboratory. It will also be available to support the activities of
TxSU investigators working with high school teachers in appropriate summer
research projects, and for relevant TxSU Multicultural Engineers and Scientists
Student Chapter outreach/workshop activities. The award will have significant
impact in improving diversity in the science and engineering workforce.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program provides allow Texas
State University (TxSU) to upgrade a high resolution transmission electron
microscope (HR-TEM) system recently made available through private donation. The
modernization will enable sophisticated and user-friendly microbeam diffraction,
high-sensitivity CCD camera imaging, and integrated elemental analysis
capabilities that will introduce in a cost-effective way new capabilities for
nanostructured materials characterization. This is a critically needed
instrument for nanotechnology and nanoscience research TxSU. The instrument will
benefit several departments, Chemistry, Engineering Technology and Physics, will
benefit from this upgrade. It will enhance synergetic of the industrial,
academic and international materials collaborations at the TxSU Nanomaterials
Applications Center and the TxSU Institute for Environmental and Industrial
Science. The upgraded TEM will significantly address the materials analysis
needs of an existing collaborative RUI project involving Tarleton State U,
Angelo State U and TxSU. It will be a "hands on" instrument in TxSU's
undergraduate and MS level Materials Physics and Polymer Processing &
Characterization laboratory courses, and also support relevant interdisciplinary
masters thesis projects. The upgraded HR-TEM will also be useful for
characterizing materials/devices fabricated in the TxSU microelectronic
fabrication laboratory. It will also be available to support the activities of
TxSU investigators working with high school teachers in appropriate summer
research projects, and for relevant TxSU Multicultural Engineers and Scientists
Student Chapter outreach/workshop activities. The award will have significant
impact in improving diversity in the science and engineering workforce.

