* 0421691
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: A Computational Model of Political Attitude and Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Milton Lodge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2006
* USD 4,932.00

A more comprehensive model of human mental process is possible and necessary to
improve our understanding of ordinary citizens' political judgment and behavior.
Here, I develop a computational model of mental process, named as John Q.
Public, that incorporates both cognitive and affective mechanism, and integrates
on-line processing and memory-based model. Using the model, I will
simultaneously reproduce and explain the well-known empirical phenomena in
public opinion and voting behaviors that have been only separately and partially
accounted for empirically. That is, I will show that the well-known empirical
regularities - such as cognitive and attitude priming effect, dual-process,
question order and wording effects in survey research, and on-line processing -
are generated by a single, principled set of cognitive/affective mechanisms. By
doing so, the study also shows that the two major competitive theories of
political judgments, on-line processing and memory-based model, are in fact
interdependent and should be integrated into a more general theory. The study
also introduces a 'fully' cognitive model of strategic behavior. Specifically, I
put multiple John Q. Publics as players in a repeated social dilemma game and
try to explain, in a 'cognitively feasible' way, the dynamics of cooperation
observed in experimental data. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Can help broaden
understanding of ordinary citizens' political judgment and voting
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;