* 0421259
* MRI: Development of an Optical Tweezers-based Time-Lapse 3D Imaging Cytorheometer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Hsin-Chiao Ou-Yang, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 185,848.00

The goal of this project is to develop a new instrument for simultaneous
measurements of the structural and the mechanical properties of cytoskeletal
protein network in living cells. A working prototype oscillating optical tweezer
cytorheometer (OOTC) has already been developed from a work supported by a prior
NSF-SGER grant. The present project will be implemented by integrating the
existing OOTC with an Olympus spinning disk confocal microscope. The use of
optical tweezers to measure mechanical properties of cells has been making
significant processes recently. The proposed approach, Oscillating Optical
Tweezer Cytorheometer (OOTC), takes advantage of the coherent detection of
harmonically modulated particle motions by a lock-in amplifier to increase
sensitivity, temporal resolution and simplicity. It has been demonstrated that
OOTC can measure the dynamic mechanical modulus in the frequency range of 0.1-
6,000 Hz at a rate as fast as 100 data per second with 1 um3 spatial definition.
More importantly, OOTC is capable of distinguishing the intrinsic non-random
temporal variations from random fluctuations due to Brownian motion; this
capability, not achievable by a conventional approach, is particular useful
because living systems are highly dynamic and often exhibit non-thermal,
rhythmic behavior. However, as capable as is OOTC, unless we can simultaneously
measure the cytoskeletal structures in situ, the mechanical properties data
would be as informative as that of "Blind men and the Elephant". Simultaneous
and in situ measurements are critical because the polymeric protein network
changes shape and reorganizes its structure in time scales from a fraction of a
second to hours or days. Advanced optical fluorescent imaging techniques have
made it possible to produce 3 dimensional images of the cytoskeletal structure
and cytoplasmic components of living cells in great detail by confocal
fluorescent microscopy. Integrating OOTC with a confocal microscope will provide
eyes to OOTC so we not only feel but also see the cellular structures at the
same time. The developed instrument will be used by both undergraduate and
graduate students from the physics, biology departments and bioengineering
program for education and research. Researchers on and off campus can also use
the instrument for studying cell and tissue mechanics problems.

The goal of this project is to develop a new instrument for simultaneous
measurements of the structural and the mechanical properties of cytoskeletal
protein network in living cells. A working prototype oscillating optical tweezer
cytorheometer (OOTC) has already been developed from a work supported by a prior
NSF-SGER grant. The present project will be implemented by integrating the
existing OOTC with an Olympus spinning disk confocal microscope. Optical
tweezers, formed by focused laser beam to hold and manipulate minute organelles
in biological cells, have found effective use for measuring intracellular
mechanical properties. Using an unique lock-in signal detection scheme, an
approach similar to how a car radio pick up music sent by a distant radio
station, the proposed approach provides unprecedented sensitivity, temporal
resolution and simplicity for measuring the mechanical properties of the cell
interior with minimal invasion to living cells. However, as capable as is OOTC,
unless one can "see" the cytoskeletal structures in situ, the mechanical
properties data would be as informative as that of "Blind men and the Elephant".
Advanced fluorescent confocal imaging techniques have made it possible to
produce 3 dimensional images of the cytoskeletal structure of living cells in
great detail. Integrating OOTC with a confocal microscope will provide eyes to
OOTC so we not only feel but also see the cellular structures at the same time.
The developed instrument will be used by both undergraduate and graduate
students from the physics, biology departments and bioengineering program for
education and research. Researchers on and off campus can also use the
instrument for studying cell and tissue mechanics problems.