* 0421110
* Acquisition of a Core Scanner with X-Ray Fluorescence - Digital X-Radiography - Digital Photography Capabilities for Rapid High Resolution Core Analyses
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Shor
* 06/30/2007
* USD 435,000.00

0421110&lt;br/&gt;Giosan&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award to
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) in Massachusetts provides funds for
acquisition of a scanner that combines capabilities for rapid, non-desrtructive,
ultra-high-resolution analyses of X-ray fluorescence (XRF) bulk geochemistry,
digital X-radiography, and digital photography. The instrument will be applied
principally to the study of core samples of marine sediments, providing a unique
capability for U.S. researchers. The instrument provides rapid measurements of
chemical elements between aluminum (atomic number 13) and uranium (atomic number
92), co-registered with high resolution images of the surface and subsurface
structure of the sample. Research projects that are expected to take advantage
of the project initially include studies of climate and climate change at a
number of scales, as well as studies of ocean circulation, terrestrial
weathering, sediment source identification, and anthropogenic impacts on coastal
environments. The broader impact of the acquisition includes providing a
facility with unique capabilities for US from around the U.S, as well as
enabling a capability to study a wide array of projects with compelling societal
relevance (climate change, pollution, erosion). WHOI is providing cost-share
towards the equipment acquisition of 30% of the project cost from non-federal
funds. This proposal is supported by the Division of Ocean Sciences at
NSF.&lt;br/&gt; ***&lt;br/&gt;