* 0421461
* MRI:  Development of a Micro- and Macro- particle Image Velocimetry System for Opaque Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Robin Shandas, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2009
* USD 499,936.00

ABSTRACT

Proposal No. CTS-0421461 Principal Investigator: R. Shandas, University of
Colorado

Determination of the velocity field of opaque fluid flows is a challenge in many
areas of fluids research, ranging from the imaging of flows in complex shapes
that are difficult to render in transparent media, to the demanding constraints
of flow in the aerated surf zone. In the context f cardiovascular research, the
added requirements of measurements made in living creatures limit the choices
and capabilities of flow field instrumentation even further. This grant is to
develop a system to meet these needs, based on the synthesis of two existing
technologies, Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) and Brightness-Mode (B-mode)
contrast ultrasound echo imaging: Echo PIV. Medical B-mode contrast echo imaging
is achieved by the backscatter of ultrasound from "contrast agent", thin-shelled
microbubbles of gas that have been injected into the bloodstream. Two sequential
images are then subjected to PIV analysis, in which a cross correlation between
the two images gives the displacement of the particles, allowing a velocity
vector field to be determined based on the time between images. A prototype
system is currently in use, but the off-the-shelf components result in spatial
resolution and dynamic range inadequate for the current research program in
cardiovascular fluid dynamics at the University of Colorado (CU). Advances in
ultrasound technology will be required, but are feasible. This system will be
used in support of a range of studies of cardiovascular flow at UCHSC. In
particular, this system will enable the measurement of fluid shear near the
walls of small arteries, answering many questions about the role of shear in
vascular diseases. It will enable the measurement of the complex, time dependent
flows in the large vasculature, such as the main pulmonary artery and aortic
arch in vivo, allowing the validation of modeling efforts that seek to combine
realistic solid mechanics models of the walls with pulsatile 3-d flows. It will
also be used to increase understanding of ventricular flows, where fluid-
physics-based analysis may lead to the differentiation of changes due to age
from those due to illness. This work will be disseminated into both the
biomedical and experimental fluid dynamics communities via presentations and
publications. The PIs are recipients of an NIH training grant, and University of
Colorado is the recipient of a grant promoting underrepresented groups in
biomedical research: the combination ensures the participation of a wide range
of graduate and undergraduate students in the development of this system. Also,
this system will be used as examples in both freshman and graduate design
courses.