* 0421267
* Acquisition of a High Performance Computing Cluster for Solar and High-Energy Astrophysics Research
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Richard Miller, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 07/31/2005
* USD 102,700.00

This is a proposal to acquire a High Performance Computing Cluster (HPCC) to
facilitate the study of solar physics, solar-terrestrial physics, high-energy
astrophysics, and astrophysics instrumentation development at the University of
Alabama in Huntsville (UAH). The proposed facility would consist of a high-
performance computational engine, data storage, and archiving hardware, as well
as visualization hardware and software. The goal would be to develop a
significant facility that is freely available to senior scientists, postdocs,
and graduate students in the participating research groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposed HPCC would support the
proposers' primary science goals by enhancing efforts to simulate and model
solar and astrophysical processes, facilitating the analysis of large volume
datasets from multiple experimental programs, and aiding the characterization of
existing (and the development of future) instrumentation by providing a platform
for generating instrument simulations with high
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposers have outlined a model system to
achieve these goals that includes a multi-CPU design based on commercially
available equipment, high-speed interconnects between CPUs, large data storage
capability, archiving hardware and software, data analysis and visualization
hardware and software, and software development workstations for students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing volumes of experimental data, as
well as the complexity of ongoing and future analyses, pose significant data
analysis challenges. These factors have the potential to severely restrict data
processing throughput, instrument characterization studies, and theoretical
modeling programs. A modest investment in computing resources would make a major
impact on the scientific return of both existing and future research programs at
UAH. The proposed HPCC system is designed to address these issues and to provide
a resource that would ensure UAH's continued leadership in the study of the Sun
and the Cosmos. This new computational infrastructure would also complement the
ongoing efforts of UAH's newly established High Energy Photonics Laboratory
(HEPL) by enabling the simulation, design, calibration, and analysis of
instrumentation developed in that laboratory.