* 0421815
* Genetic and Functional Genomic Analysis of Early Events in Cotton Fiber Development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2006
* David Stelly, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* TEST user
* 05/31/2006
* USD 1,125,459.00

Cotton represents nearly half of the world's natural fiber consumption. Each
cotton fiber is a differentiated single epidermal cell of the ovule.
Approximately half a million fibers are produced per cotton boll, some forming
"fuzz" and some forming spinnable fibers. The process of turning an epidermal
cell into a fiber cell requires a change in cell fate, a fundamental biological
process involving genetic, physiological, and developmental "switches". Genetic
mutations, genotypes, pollination/fertilization, and hormonal regulation can
affect the number of cells developing into fibers or alter fiber cell
properties. However, it is unclear how these factors control gene expression
changes that orchestrate the pattern and tempo in early stages of fiber
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic and functional genomic approaches
will be employed to investigate molecular events concomitant with fiber cell
initiation. Changes in gene expression in immature ovules of isogenic naked seed
mutants will be compared with expression profiles in pollinated and un-
pollinated ovules and ovules treated with phytohormones. Both specific and
common sets of candidate genes will be identified in a variety of genetic,
developmental, and physiological conditions leading to fiber cell initiation.
Furthermore, hypotheses concerning the roles of candidate genes in fiber cell
initiation will be rigorously tested using the isogenic mutants and powerful
Arabidopsis genetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary project will have broad and direct impacts on research,
education, and the scientific community by creating genomic resources for public
use and rendering their results directly applicable to the improvement and
sustainability of the world's leading textile fiber crop. Genetic and genomic
resources such as naked seed mutants, 20,000 expressed sequence tags (ESTs),
molecular markers and oligo-gene microarrays will be released to the public
domain as soon as they are confirmed and applied synergistically to train
undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs with a special emphasis on
under-represented groups. Data dissemination will include timely release of ESTs
to GenBank and gene expression profiles to microarray data repositories such as
GEO. An integrated plan involving graduate students and postdocs will be
developed for early exposure of students and science teachers in middle schools
to biotechnology and genomics. A 3-day educational workshop will be developed to
promote public acceptance of plant biotechnology, as well as to train students
and science teachers using hands-on experiments, laboratory tours, and field
trips.&lt;br/&gt;