* 0421511
* Acquisition of Equipment and Instrumentation for Blast Mitigation Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Lelli VanDenEinde, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 09/30/2005
* USD 350,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
project is to procure instrumentation and equipment specifically for an
Explosive Loading Laboratory (ELL), which is currently under construction. The
ELL will allow for one-of-a-kind real time blast and impact testing of
structural components, assemblies, and systems of critical infrastructure such
as buildings and bridges in a controlled environment. The testing laboratory is
the first facility in the world that can accurately and repeatedly performs
simulated explosive loading tests and characterize their effects on structures
for use in developing retrofit and hardening optimization technologies without
creating actual explosions.&lt;br/&gt;During large- or full-scale testing of
structural systems or assemblies at the ELL, a large array of sensors will be
distributed in specific locations such that precise measurements can be obtained
to investigate the development of non-linear failure mechanisms. A vital element
in the development of the ELL is the procurement of robust, state-of- the-art
instrumentation and sensors that can be operated in an outdoor environment, data
acquisition systems and high performance networking capabilities. The key
components are: real-time distributed data-acquisition systems, a high-speed
digital camera, camera measurement systems, a range of conventional sensors such
as DCDTs. &lt;br/&gt;The vision is to provide the ELL with sufficient
instrumentation that can be used to integrate state-of-the-art blast engineering
experimental and computational research into educational curriculum using
internet-based technologies. The equipment requested for the ELL can be
leveraged to promote research being conducted at the Scripps Institute of
Oceanography (SIO) at UCSD, for further development of ROADNet, a network and
information management system that will deliver data to a variety of end users
in real-time. &lt;br/&gt; The state-of-the-art ELL facility, will add a
significant new dimension and capabilities to existing United States testing
facilities and promote research in Structural Engineering, Dynamic Systems and
Control, and Information Technology.&lt;br/&gt;