* 0421535
* Acquisition of a Fluorescent Activated Cell Sorter (FACS) for SDSU Biology Department
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Constantine Tsoukas, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 325,097.00

A grant has been awarded to San Diego State University under the direction of
Dr. Kathleen McGuire for partial support for the establishment of a flow
cytometry facility at SDSU through the purchase of a fluorescence-activated cell
sorter or FACS. The research of five major users in Biology currently requires
the use of flow cytometry, a technology that allows single cells to be analyzed
for a variety of traits and characteristics. An instrument that is sophisticated
enough to serve the faculty at SDSU for many years to come will be purchased and
placed in the Biology department. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This flow cytometer
will be the first instrument of its kind at SDSU and the only one available for
many of the experiments proposed by the five co-PIs of the grant. Several other
faculty in Biology will also use the instrument, for research areas as diverse
as the host specificity of different strains of Salmonella, the development of
notachords in Ascidians, and skeletal and heart muscle structure and function.
The facility will also service faculty from the department of Chemistry and
members of the newly established Center for Microbial Studies. Two unique
aspects of this facility will be its use by ecologists as well as cell and
molecular biologists and biochemists, and its use for both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells. The flow cytometry facility will also permit extensive
undergraduate and graduate student hands-on training and allow the use of the
FACS to be incorporated into both the graduate and undergraduate curriculum in
ecology, microbiology and cell and molecular biology. Because ~44% of Biology
majors and 23% of SDSU's graduate students belong to underrepresented minority
groups, their access to this facility and instrumentation will be readily
achieved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Each of the research programs outlined above
will be significantly enhanced by the acquisition of a flow cytometry facility
at SDSU, as will many other research programs across campus. The students at
SDSU will be offered, for the first time, opportunities to learn about this
important technology and will be able to gain skills that will provide them with
better job opportunities and allow them to significantly contribute in a new way
to the large biotechnology industry in the greater San Diego area and the State
of California. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;