* 0421838
* Northern Caddoan Languages Documentation Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Wallace Hooper, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2007
* USD 324,999.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Douglas Parks and colleagues will
conduct three years of continuing linguistic research documenting South Band
Pawnee, Skiri Pawnee, and Arikara. These American Indian languages belong to the
Caddoan language family that was formerly spoken on the Great Plains from Texas
to North Dakota. There are no longer any living fluent speakers of these three
languages. Only three or four elderly individuals in each tribe have a partial
knowledge of their native language. Most of the linguistic data included in the
project were recorded by Dr. Parks between 1965 and 2001. There are three
aspects of linguistic documentation in this project: creation of bilingual
dictionaries, compilation of analyzed text collections (the latter primarily
traditional stories, such as myths and tales), and writing grammars for each of
the three languages. These materials are being made available on the World Wide
Web as well as in print format. Another major focus of the project is continuing
software development begun under a previous NSF grant. That software will
facilitate the development of multimedia dictionaries, analyzed text
collections, and grammars in a single working
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental contribution of this project,
which continues a long tradition in linguistics and anthropology, is the
scientific documentation of American Indian languages. Such study contributes to
the understanding of linguistic diversity in human speech worldwide and to the
understanding of the interrelationships and historical development of American
Indian languages in North America. It also preserves a documentary record of
rapidly disappearing Native American languages. Since South Band Pawnee, Skiri
Pawnee, and Arikara are closely related to one another, comparison among them
will offer insights into the development of the Caddoan language family and,
more generally, processes of language change. Because these languages share
exceptionally complex verb structures, their documentation will provide
linguists with a large amount of new data for the theoretical study of language
history and structure. Another fundamental contribution of the project is
development of software to provide mechanical tools for linguists and other
researchers that will facilitate more rapid, more efficient, and more systematic
documentation, archiving, and analysis of endangered languages worldwide. The
multimedia components, moreover, enable linguists to compile dictionaries and
text collections that include sound recordings of the words and stories, so that
users can hear native-speaker pronunciation in addition to reading written
forms. Finally, the dictionaries, texts, and grammars provide critically needed
resources for the three tribes in their efforts to revive and teach their native
languages, and to perpetuate their cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;