* 0421377
* MRI: Acquisition of Analytical Tools for Imaging and Spectroscopy of Nanoscale Structures and Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Ilesanmi Adesida, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2008
* USD 481,836.00

1. PROJECT SUMMARY We request funds to acquire a scanning electron microscope
that will be capable of high-resolution electron imaging and cathodoluminescence
spectroscopy and imaging (CL) with 1 nm resolution. The proposed instrument will
be located in the cleanroom (Class 100) in the Micro and Nanotechnology
Laboratory at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The Laboratory is
an interdisciplinary research user facility that houses advanced equipment for
materials and device processing. The laboratory has been very successful in
facilitating cross-disciplinary research and collaborations. Over 40 faculty, 20
postdoctoral fellows, 200 graduate students, and many undergraduates have access
to the laboratory. The users span across various disciplines and departments on
campus. The user list is steadily growing as we facilitate discussions between
various groups on the versatility of nanotechnology. Personnel from neighboring
academic institutions are users of the laboratory also. The availability of the
proposed SEM+CL system is critical to many research programs active at the
University of Illinois. Three illustrative examples of these research programs
are described in detail. These are: Nanoscale Pattern Formation in Soft
Materials (John Rogers and Ilesanmi Adesida) Nanophotonics: Quantum Dots and
Photonic Crystals (James Coleman and Kent Choquette)

Silicon Bionanotechnology (Gregory Timp) Various other projects make use of the
facilities in the laboratory and among these are the projects that have recently
being started under the newly awarded NSF Center for Nano-Chemical- Electrical-
Mechanical Manufacturing Systems (Nano-CEMMS) at the University of Illinois. The
proposed research instrumentation is vital to these projects since they involve
fabrication at length scale less than 20 nm. The intellectual merit of this
proposal is in the new science and innovations that will be facilitated. The
proposed instrumentation will enable imaging and spectroscopy at the nano-
regime; understanding phenomena in organic and inorganic structures and systems
at this scale will open a vista to new applications. The proposed
instrumentation will facilitate collaborations across various disciplines and
the research will lead wide-ranging applications in medicine, food, environment
and electronics. For the broader impact, the proposed instrument will see
significant use in graduate/undergraduate research and education programs.
Minority and under-represented students will be recruited through various
mechanisms involving our campus-wide Summer Research Opportunity Program (SROP)
and through our collaborative programs with minority serving universities in
Centers such as the Nano-CEMMS. Faculty from these schools will have access to
the laboratory through these Centers also. Programs for k-12 teachers to conduct
summer research in the laboratory with access to the research instrumentation is
in place. Self-operation of the equipment by all qualified researchers
regardless of institutional/departmental affiliations or source of funding is
encouraged so as to enhance their education. With the availability of the
proposed instrumentation, we envisage an increase in usage by and collaborations
with industry. The total estimated cost of acquiring the proposed instrument is
$688,338. Of this amount, we are requesting $481,837 from the National Science
Foundation. The University of Illinois will provide cost sharing of $206,501
(30.0 %) of the total cost of the instrument.