* 0421846
* Scientific Computing Research Environments in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Rosemary Renaut, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2007
* USD 80,298.00

The support from this grant provides the funds for the Department of Mathematics
and Statistics at Arizona State University to purchase a Linux cluster of high
performance PCs. This equipment is to be used for computationally intensive
scientific research and discovery by departmental faculty and graduate students
in applied and computational mathematics. Their projects are broad in scope with
applications in geological and biological sciences, medical imaging, and
semiconductor manufacturing. Moreover, while the specific problems derive from
several scientific domains, there are many commonalities in the simulation and
modeling required for their investigation. Investigators in this department are
solving medical and seismic imaging problems which lead to a need to solve
inverse problems. A good example of a relevant inverse problem is the use of
positron emission tomography to provide a noninvasive image of an organ of the
body by collecting data external to the body. Seismic imaging similarly relies
on an inverse process to obtain an image of the deep core of the Earth. In such
cases it is crucial to provide computational techniques that lead to the most
accurate and reasonable interpretation of measured data which encodes the
unknown image. Researchers at ASU are designing novel algorithms which lead to
increased precision for detecting structure from such images. Examples in which
such techniques can be significant would be in the early detection of brain
abnormalities, or structural changes in the Earth that may lead to increased
likelihood of strong seismic activity, and hence earthquake prediction. The
large computing cluster is required in order to carry out more realistic
simulations and for reconstructions of real three-dimensional data. Another
crucial area of their research is the rather different industrial realm -- both
in sophisticated simulations for semiconductor design and in factory product
supply and delivery, examples in which appropriate mathematical models provide
opportunities for large cost saving. The above indicates some of the current
focus areas of the investigators, and thus constitutes just a window on some
activities that become feasible in the near future with the acquisition of this
equipment.