* 0421005
* MRI Acquisition Proposal: Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Erik Hobbie, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 554,203.00

This award provides funds for acquisition of two mass spectrometers to be used
to measure isotopic composition of samples containing carbon, hydrogen,
nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur. The instruments will satisfy needs of diverse
research and educational programs at the University of New Hampshire (UNH).
Funding for several automated peripheral devices will permit extension of the
instruments' capabilities to include sample types such as water, carbonates,
trace gases, and volatile organic compounds. The systems will be placed in a new
facility at the Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and Space (EOS). A
dedicated will be hired to ensure the smooth operation of the facility.
Operation and maintenance of the instrumentation will be overseen by a lab
manager who will also be responsible for training of new users. The users will
include researchers in microbial ecology, forest ecology, marine ecology,
ecosystems science, hydrology, biogeochemistry, atmospheric science, and
paleoclimatology. Such research benefits from the ability to track chemical
elements through complex biogeochemical processes by using variations in
isotopic ratios to monitor specific, isotopically fractionating processes in the
environment. The new instrumentation will allow faculty and students to benefit
from recent technological advances in mass spectrometry and sample preparation
that have increased the speed, accuracy, and resolution of determination of
stable isotope ratios. Such advances now allow scientists to explore the Earth
system in increasing detail, leading to new insights into the mechanisms by
which ecosystems are influenced by the climate, and by each other. The new
facility will enhance the infrastructure for research and teaching by
permitting, for example, incorporation of new modules in several existing
courses, and development of a new course on applications of isotopic
measurements in ecology, biogeochemistry, and global environmental change. This
new course will complement an existing course in isotope geochemistry. A planned
web site will be used to publicize the facility to potential users and to
provide information about the potential to use isotopic data in modeling of
ecosystems at scales from that of the molecule to that of the ecosystem.