* 0421856
* 20-Hydroxyecdysone Suppression of Juvenile Hormone Response
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2014
* Subba Palli, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2014
* USD 928,294.00

Title: 20-hydroxyecdysone suppression of juvenile hormone action&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Subba Reddy Palli&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Ecdysteroids and juvenile
hormone (JH) are major hormones that regulate various developmental events
during an insect's life cycle. The diverse biological effects of ecdysteroids
are mediated by ecdysone receptor (EcR) and its heterodimeric partner,
ultraspiracle (USP). The molecular mechanisms of JH action are not well
understood. The biological effects of JH and ecdysteroids suggest a cross talk
between these two hormones. JH response elements (JHRE) identified in the
promoter region of JH- and 20-hydroxyecdysone (20E)-responsive JH esterase (jhe)
gene and ecdysone receptor (EcR) deficient Drosophila melanogaster cell line
(L57) were used to develop a robust system. In L57 cells, a reporter gene placed
under the control of JHRE is induced by JH, and the JH-induced expression is
suppressed by 20E in a dose- and time-dependent manner. The nuclear proteins
isolated from L57 cells specifically bound to JHRE and this binding was
prevented by pretreatment of nuclear proteins with 20E. This 20E suppression of
JH-induced gene expression is mediated through EcR. Preliminary studies showed
that EcR does not directly bind to JHRE containing promoter. Ligand binding but
not DNA binding of EcR is required for 20E suppression of JH action. These
results suggest that the EcR suppresses JH-induced gene expression though a
"nonclassical" mode of action, i.e., without binding to ecdysone response
elements directly. This is the first example of a system where a nonclassical
action for EcR is suggested. This system will be used to study the mechanisms
involved in the nonclassical action of EcR and its cross talk with the
components of JH signal transduction cascade. The two specific objectives of
this proposal are (1) to study the mechanism for 20E suppression of JH response
and (2) to identify and characterize proteins that are important in cross talk
between 20E and JH. Mutations to select amino acids in the ligand binding domain
of D. melanogaster EcR will be used to verify nonclassical action of EcR. RNA
interference (RNAi)-mediated silencing of usp, Drosophila hormone receptors 38
and 78, and Seven-up genes will be employed to study their role in 20E
suppression of JH response. A yeast two-hybrid assay will be used to identify
proteins that interact with EcR. The EcR-interacting proteins will be
characterized through (i) RNAi-mediated silencing of their expression in L57
cells, (ii) pull down and two-hybrid assays, (iii) studies on expression of RNA
in D. melanogaster tissues and (iv) analysis of JH and 20E response in D.
melanogaster mutants for genes coding for the identified proteins. &lt;br/&gt;