* 0421043
* MRI: Development of a Filament Stretching Rheometer and Shear Micro-Rheometer with Optical Access for Measurements of Complex Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Anthony Dinsmore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 07/31/2007
* USD 406,999.00

Proposal No. CTS-0421043&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: H. Winter, University
of Massachusetts Amherst&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is for the development
of two novel instruments. An optical micro-rheometer and a filament stretching
rheometer will be designed to simultaneously measure the evolution of stress and
material structure as a function of time and accumulated strain in shear and in
uniaxial extension. The optical micro-rheometer combines stress measurement with
simultaneous observation of light scattering, microscopy, fluorescence, and
birefringence from the sample. The filament stretching rheometer is capable of
measuring the response of complex fluids to a transient extensional flow
starting from an imposed initial microstructural deformation, alignment and
morphology. Both instruments are designed for studies on very small samples that
are required for collaboration with polymer chemists who typically prepare their
most advanced materials as small samples only. Experiments with the proposed
instruments will generate a deeper understanding of the behavior of complex
materials such as liquid crystalline polymers under shear, crystallizing
polymers as a function of molecular topology, phase separating polymer blends in
shear, self assembling micellar systems in shear and extension, and particle
topology in particle gels. The properties of these complex materials are
strongly affected by the deformation and alignment of their microstructure in
addition to their molecular composition. The study of rheology attempts to
relate the local state of stress in such complex materials to the local
deformation rate, elapsed time, and accumulated strain through a series of
carefully designed experiments. Specifically for the new experiments,
simultaneous measurement of stress and structure are expected to lead to
conclusive information about flow-induced transitional states. Among the broader
impacts of this work is to facilitate the development of new products, which
depends on the availability of suitable materials. Therefore it is essential to
develop new instruments that further our ability to create and understand new
materials. In addition, the availability of the proposed instruments as a multi-
user facility will have great impact on the education of all researchers
involved. Once the instruments are completed, broader interaction and cross-
fertilization of ideas will be enabled. Regular interdisciplinary research
meetings will involve both graduate and undergraduate students. While the new
instruments allow graduate students to perform their advanced research,
undergraduate students will particularly profit from learning the proposed
optical methods that will allow them to perform very advanced materials research
on complicated topics through visual observation before their analytical skills
have been developed to a comparable level. This will introduce students at an
early state of their education to the excitement of discovery. &lt;br/&gt;