* 0421366
* MRI:  Acquisition of Magnetic Field System with SQUID for Material Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Jeremy Qualls, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 236,834.00

&lt;br/&gt;In this Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) proposal, the
University of Texas-Pan American (UTPA) is requesting funding to acquire a high
field magnet system. Acquisition of this system will advance the understanding
of novel molecular materials and improve educational opportunities for Hispanic
students at UTPA. Molecular materials are of intense worldwide interest,
initiating a renaissance in the field of magnetism and transport studies. These
systems have been considered by many to be the materials of the future due to
their wide range of properties and the relative ease to tailor those abilities.
The intellectual merit of this work includes understanding the underlying
crystal structural relationship to observed electronic and magnetic properties
in three classes of molecular conductors with potential for device construction
and development of basic science. This work will collectively merge aspects of
material science at UTPA while integrating and training students. The broader
impact of this project includes: 1.) enhanced cooperation between scientists and
engineers at UTPA and other institutions without such capabilities 2.) promotion
of graduate and undergraduate education of Hispanic students interested in
material science, and 3.) the development of instructional strategies for
scientists and engineers teaching in a predominantly Hispanic institution. The
high magnetic field system will allow for long-term usage beyond the lifetime of
the grant and its automated software allows for relative ease of student
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this Major Research
Instrumentation Program (MRI) proposal, the University of Texas-Pan American
(UTPA) is requesting funding to acquire a 17 Tesla superconducting magnet system
with vapor helium recovery capabilities and a SQUID insert. A number of high
field techniques, including torque and SQUID magnetometry, AMRO, quantum
oscillatory phenomena such as De Haas-van Alphen and Shubnikov-de Haas effects,
will be employed using the requested magnet system to systematically probe the
electrical transport and magnetic properties (including pressure and temperature
dependence). Three classes of molecular systems will be investigated; this
includes organic charge transfer salts (CTS), low dimensional molecular magnets
(MM), and nanoporous metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). Two systems, CTS and MOFs
are currently being produced at UTPA, whereas the MM systems are being
synthesized at Eastern Washington University. This proposal provides the
infrastructure necessary to investigate the underlying crystal structural
relationship to observed electronic and magnetic properties in molecular
systems. Acquisition of this system will allow for the advancement of the
understanding of magnetic and transport behavior in novel molecular materials
and significant improves the educational and training opportunities for Hispanic
students at UTPA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;