* 0421088
* MRI:  Acquisition of Major Instrumentation: Deep Reactive Ion Etching
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Zlatko Sitar, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports
North Carolina State University with the acquisition of a state-of-the-art
reactive ion etcher with the flexibility of an inductively coupled plasma. This
instrumentation provides the institution with the ability to independently tune
the chemical and physical etching mechanisms affording unparalleled ability to
pattern anisotropically, rapidly, and selectively. Four general subject areas
critical to the current and future research programs at NCSU will be enabled
through this acquisition: (1) advanced integration strategies, (2) nano-scale
patterning for nanoscience research, (3) microelectromechanical systems (MEMS),
and (4) wide band-gap semiconductor research. Eleven faculty are designated as
primary users with collective research groups comprising 50 graduate students
and $5 millions in annual research expenditure. This instrumentation will
benefit the associated research activities, and importantly, new and highly
collaborative future programs will be developed and supported. This capability
is expected to impact both the relevance and the sophistication of graduate and
undergraduate student research. With these tools, the university will have a
unique opportunity to influence a large number of students' education by
teaching them how to use leading-edge capabilities to leverage their research,
and offer hands-on experience to what will undoubtedly become a key tool of
future nano-scientific
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the
Major Research Instrumentation program North Carolina State University with will
acquire a state-of-the-art reactive ion etcher with the flexibility of an
inductively coupled plasma. This instrument allows layers of material ranging
between nanoscopic and millimeter thicknesses to be etched in the absence of
liquid solvents. As an alternative to liquid etchants, reactive gas species in
the plasma state accomplish this material removal. An important consequence of
this mechanism is the ability to produce highly anisotropic structures, or
features such as narrow pillars and ultra-thin walls. Such structures are
critical to the fabrication of next generation nanoscale,
microelectromechanical, optoelectronic and highly integrated devices which
cannot be fabricated otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;Given the international environment of
system and device-based research there exists a critical requirement for this
equipment at North Carolina State University. Establishing this capability will
help NCSU to maintain its position as a leading technical research institution.
Faculty from three colleges and 11 departments are identified as primary users
thus guaranteeing an academically diverse user base: collectively these users
manage a research group comprising 50 graduate students and $5 millions in
annual research expenditure. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument will complement
the existing set of microelectronics processing and fabrication equipment on the
NCSU Centennial campus, and with NCSU's recent designation as affiliate of the
National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network, access to a broad section of the
scientific community will be ensured&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;