* 0421946
* SBIR Phase II:    Hydrothermal Growth of Ultra-High Performance Nd:YVO4 Laser Crystals
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Henry Giesber, ADVANCED PHOTONIC CRYSTALS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 07/31/2007
* USD 409,807.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will focus on
the development of a commercial process for the growth of Neodymium Yttrium
Vanadate (Nd: YVO4) single crystals for use in solid-state lasers. This research
will generate the commercially viable conditions for growth of large boules of
single crystals suitable for use in diode pumped solid-state lasers. The
hydrothermal method is a low temperature growth technique that leads to crystals
containing less thermal strain, much fewer defects and greater homogeneity than
conventional methods. These defects combine to cause considerable optical loss
and concomitant reduction in performance. The hydrothermal technique has slower
growth kinetics and requires chemical development for economically viable
growth. In the Phase I project, preliminary growth conditions that lead to
suitable single crystals were identified. These conditions include approximate
thermal ranges, a variety of starting materials, seed crystals and mineralizer
concentrations. In the Phase II project growth conditions will be systematically
optimized to provide suitable transport rates and crystal quality. Once an
acceptable growth is developed, the resulting boules will be evaluated for
performance efficiency and loss.

Commercially benefits will emerge as the company introduces new higher
performance crystal materials to the market that cannot be grown by existing
crystal growth methods. In addition, new laser materials will be donated to
Clemson University for design of new laser devices and cavities supporting the
University's participation in the emerging photonics Coalition of the Carolinas
that includes Clemson, the OptoElectronics Center at UNC-Charlotte, COMSET at
Clemson University, and the Carolina MicroOptics Consortium.