* 0421272
* MRI:  Acquisition of an X-ray Diffraction Instrument:  Developing an Interdisciplinary Research/Teaching X-ray Diffraction Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Zhi Wang, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2005
* USD 148,421.00

0421272&lt;br/&gt;Putirka&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California State University,
Fresno is one of the largest universities in the CSU system, and the only
prominent university in California's Central Valley. As such, we carry a
responsibility to the community to train scientists and address regional
environmental problems. The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) instrument that will
be acquired with this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will support a
number of scientific problems that involve the identification of fine-grained
materials, including, but not limited to, the following: 1) Regional geology and
volcanic history of the north-central Sierra Nevada. Mapping and preliminary XRD
studies suggest that matrix mineral abundances in volcanic rocks can be key to
the correlation of volcanic units and the identification of distance from now-
eroded vents. 2) Asbestiform minerals in the Sierra foothills and coastal CA.
Ultramafic rocks are common throughout CA, and asbestiform minerals of the
amphibole group form hazardous dusts during excavation and commercial
development. XRD will be used for hazards assessment where construction of such
areas is ongoing. 3) Igneous barometery and the refinement of unit cell
parameters of clinopyroxenes. Rietveld analysis of natural clinopyroxenes will
be used to better understand how Na is charge-balanced in natural
clinopyroxenes, and in this way refine our attempts at estimate crystallization
pressures for igneous rocks. 4) The study of soil mechanics, groundwater flow
and soil contamination through the analysis mineral content. Abundances of clay
minerals and gypsum are suspected to affect the hydrology of agricultural soils,
and may also affect the absorption of contaminants in soils; XRD analysis of
agricultural samples will be key to understanding water and contaminant
transport. 5) The analysis of dust particles produced from dairy operations.
Dust particles (sometimes referred to by their micron size as PM-5 or PM-10) are
now recognized as a significant health hazard in CA. Dairies are suspected to be
significant producers of dust particles, but their quantity and mineral content
is unclear. XRD analysis of dusts collected at dairies will allow a
determination of what kinds of dust particles are created, and the fraction of
the total dust contributed by such operations. Finally, our powder XRD will
provide valuable research experiences for CSU Fresno and CSU Stanislaus
undergraduates. Students are attracted to the sciences when they participate in
research, and when such work involves the use of technical instruments. Basic
XRD techniques are very easy to learn, and allow both undergraduates and M.S.
students to participate in any number of problems of great concern to central
valley residents. XRD activities will be incorporated into several existing
courses at CSUF, including a new course: "X-ray methods in the Material
Sciences". The broader impacts of this instrument acquisition are also
considerable. The XRD will establish several exciting research linkages between
at least three different departments at CSU Fresno, and between the Earth and
Environmental Science department at CSU Fresno and the "Physics and Geology"
department at CSU Stanislaus. Acquisition of the requested XRD instrument is
critical to furthering our research capabilities and realizing our student
recruitment goals.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;