* 0421090
* NEESR-SG:  Physical modeling of 3D Tsunami Evolution Using a Landslide Tsunami Generator
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Hermann Fritz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2008
* USD 450,019.00

Tsunamis can be generated directly by seismic impact. However, in some seismic
events tsunamis have been observed to be triggered by the massive failure of the
sea floor in the form of giant submarine landslides. According to the National
Geophysical Data Center and World Data Center for Solid Earth Geophysics as well
as Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, in the Pacific Ocean alone, 65
tsunami events attributed to submarine landslide caused a total number of 14,661
deaths. Our ultimate long-term goal is to develop a fundamental understanding of
the mechanism of tsunamigenic landslides and subsequent tsunami generation,
propagation, and run-up, which would allow for improved assessment and possible
mitigation of the landslide and tsunami hazard. Unfortunately, the field data
from real world observations are limited to very few cases, while the most
important part of this data related to the tsunami generation stage is almost
completely missing. The goal of the proposed research is to compensate for this
lack of data by the physical modeling of 3-dimensional tsunami evolution using a
novel landslide tsunami generator which will complement the existing NEES
tsunami facilities. Towards this goal, the following subset of objectives will
be achieved in the proposed research: Objective 1. Model Similitude: The
governing model similitude, defining the design parameters for the proposed
landslide tsunami generator, will be determined using dimensional analysis.
Objective 2. A Novel Landslide Tsunami Generator: The proposed novel computer
controlled pneumatic landslide acceleration mechanism, will enable individual
control of the dynamic landslide parameters such as landslide location, geometry
and acceleration. Objective 3. Landslide Parameters: To design of the
experimental program we propose to determine the geometries and velocities of
tsunamigenic landslides from the case histories. However, in order to cover the
whole range of possible parameter combinations we are planning to use the novel
analytical and numerical models of the shear-band propagation mechanisms of
tsunamigenic landslides. Objective 4. Experimental Program: In the proposed
experiments we shall measure the characteristics of the subaqueous landslide
motion and the near-field tsunami generation, propagation and run-up in three
dimensions. In addition the resulting landslide deposits will be mapped and
their thickness recorded. Objective 5. Validation of the Proposed Mechanisms:
The measured landslide and tsunami characteristics will be compared to the
existing real world observations providing a validation for physical, analytical
and numerical models used in this research. This will justify the use of these
models in the development of fundamental understanding of the coupled landslide
and tsunami mechanisms and allow us to develop recommendations for the future
experimental and theoretical research. Expected Intellectual Merit of the
Research: The proposed research will advance knowledge and understanding of
landslide generated tsunamis . one of the most devastating natural hazards.
Originality of the proposed work is based on its interdisciplinary nature, which
combines experimental and theoretical Fluid, Soil and Fracture Mechanics
approaches. The project is a joint effort between three Georgia Tech faculty
members who combine expertise in fluid mechanics, physical modeling and tsunami
hazards, soil mechanics and geotechnical engineering, rock and fracture
mechanics. Expected Broader Impact of the Research: Understanding of landslide
and tsunami mechanisms has broad implications not only to engineering but also
to human endeavors. It will enhance both assessment and mitigation of tsunami
and landslide hazards. The novel landslide generator developed in this research
will complement existing NEES tsunami facilities both in the present and future
studies. The funds provided from this proposal will be used to educate and
support two graduate students. The results of this research will be incorporated
into existing undergraduate and graduate level courses, and a new graduate
course on Natural Hazards will be jointly developed by PIs. The results will be
disseminated to a broad scientific and engineering audience through publications
in high-impact professional journals and via presentations at national and
international meetings. K12 audience will be reached by popular lectures and
Internet postings emphasizing the important role of Civil Engineering profession
in mitigation of natural hazards.