* 0421112
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Field Emission Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Education in Nanomaterials and Biological Structures at Tulane University
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 433,152.00

The scanning electron microscope system will be used to carry out a wide range
of innovative research projects ranging from the understanding of nanomaterials
to the fine structures inherent in biological systems. In the nanomaterials
research, the instrument will be used to examine the structure of thin films and
extended hierarchical structures. These studies will lead to the development of
new catalysts and membranes, photovoltaic and thermoelectric devices, and in the
development of lightweight composite structures. The studies will also lead to
new avenues to manufacture nanostructured materials. In biology, the research
will help define the fine structures of freshwater fishes, such as tail
neuromasts in darters and lip-surface anatomy in suckers, in order to refine
their taxonomy and systematics. This work will lead to a better understanding of
freshwater fish biodiversity in North America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed instrument acquisition will greatly improve the infrastructure for
research and education at Tulane University. It will be housed in the
Coordinated Instrumentation Facility (CIF) at Tulane, which is a facility that
operates and maintains university-wide shared instrumentation. The instrument
will be available to the entire university community and will enhance excellence
in graduate and undergraduate education at Tulane. The proposed instrument will
be used in training and class demonstrations and will provide research
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students. This acquisition
will play an important role in encouraging the participation of underrepresented
groups in the areas of science and engineering, through such existing programs
as the Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LAMP), the Tulane/Xavier
combined degree program, and the Graduate Alliance Program (GAELA). In addition,
this acquisition will help to attract high-quality students and faculty to
Tulane University.&lt;br/&gt;