* 0421099
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computing Cluster for High-End Applications in Science and Engineering (CHASE)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Peter Pulay, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2008
* USD 233,334.00

This project, from an institution in an EPCoR state, seeking a high performance
computing cluster for high-end applications, aims at supporting research in
middleware development for large scale, data intensive applications, and several
scientific disciplines including computation chemistry, material science, DNA
analysis, multi-scale modeling, and networks. Research activities
include:&lt;br/&gt; Development of middleware tools (Array Files) for managing,
locating, and indexing data for large-scale out-of-core computational chemistry
applications.&lt;br/&gt; Developments in Computational Chemistry: a parallel
distributed memory system and an efficient parallel version of the Fourier
Transform Coulomb (FTC) method for large-density functional
calculations.&lt;br/&gt; Studies in material science using a density-functional
theory (DFT) computational approach (nanostructures of FE and piezoelectric
oxides and semiconductor nanomaterials).&lt;br/&gt; DNA Sequence design for
biotechnology and nanotechnology applications (to accelerate search for large
sets of non-crosshybridizing DNA sequences).&lt;br/&gt; Multi-scale modeling:
computation of electronic and optical properties of nanodevices and crack
propagation in alloys and metals.&lt;br/&gt; Others: Finite modeling of volcano
and tectonic deformation, next generation networking, geospatial DB, and data
mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Greatly increasing the opportunity
for collaboration and training, the cluster would serve as a valuable asset for
researchers and their students across several disciplines in an EPSCoR state.
The DNA sequence library will be made publicly available. Moreover, the
infrastructure provides momentum to areas in curriculum development associated
with computational science.&lt;br/&gt;