* 0421441
* Acquisition of a LaserScissor Workstation for Studies in Reproductive Biology and Research in Superconductivity
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Dessie Underwood, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 07/31/2008
* USD 205,587.00

This award supports the acquisition of a laser capture microscope to be used by
several investigators at California State University, Long Beach for non-contact
laser capture of tissues, cells, and chromosomes. The instrument will also be
used in physics as a patterning tool on high temperature superconducting thin
films and devices. Specific research projects include: (1) fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) studies aimed at examining the identity and stability of
chromosomes involved in lagging during spermatogenesis and those that form
micronuclei in the sperm bundles of a butterfly (Eucheira socialis), (2)
investigations of structure-specific gene expression in seasonally-regressed
ovaries of Siberian hamsters (Phodopus sungorus), and (3) patterning of high
temperature superconducting cuprate thin films and devices to investigate their
conductive properties using variable temperature scanning laser microscopy. All
faculty teach and conduct research at the minority-serving institution of CSU
Long Beach. They have active research programs that involve primarily
undergraduates. Using lasers for microdissection and patterning is a relatively
new advance in microscopy and as of yet there are few institutions with such
equipment. The laboratory work entailed in this project will provide valuable
training for students with state-of-the-art equipment.