* 0421023
* MRI: Acquisition of Equipment for Thermal and Optical Studies of Sol-gel Materials Containing Rare Earth Ions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Daniel Boye, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 119,953.00

Sol-gel synthesis provides a low temperature means for preparing optically
transparent amorphous materials that are safer, more energy efficient and more
cost effective to produce than traditional glasses made by thermally quenching
molten material. One attractive aspect of sol-gel synthesis is that the optical
properties of a dry gel that has been annealed to temperatures near ~1000 C
approach that of a melt glass of similar composition. Sol-gel materials doped
with rare earth (RE) ions are used in many optical applications including
lasers, environmental and biological sensors, solar concentrators, active
waveguides, phosphors and other photonic materials. The incorporation RE ions in
sol-gels is interesting from a fundamental standpoint because information about
the nature of the host, and how the host and RE exchange energy, may be gained
by studying the host's influence on the optical properties of the RE ion. A more
complete understanding of the relevant energy transfer interactions is needed.
Previous work has concentrated on spectroscopic studies of either dried gels or
fully annealed glasses. In contrast, this project proposes to correlate optical
behavior with changes in the RE environment as the material is processed from
dried gel to glass. Thermodynamic measurements during the evolution of the sol-
gel materials will provide information about the host composition and structure,
and an applied external electrical field will be used to modify the RE local
environment by controlling the presence and motion of free ions within the
material. With this information, it is hoped that the optical properties can be
improved so that these materials may find greater practical application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This undergraduate research project will study
sol-gel materials containing rare earth (RE) ions. The sol-gel process is a low
temperature method for preparing transparent media that may easily be doped with
a variety of optically active elements. Sol-gel materials doped with RE ions are
used in many applications including lasers, environmental and biological
sensors, solar concentrators, active waveguides, phosphors and other photonic
materials. Two issues have been identified that limit the fluorescence yield of
sol-gel materials doped with optically active RE ions: the presence of hydroxyl
groups provides non-radiative pathways via multi-phonon relaxation, and the
clustering of RE ions facilitates both energy migration and cross relaxation.
This project will follow new lines of inquiry to address these important
problems. Thermodynamic measurements during the evolution of the sol-gel
materials, such as simultaneous differential scanning calorimetry and
thermogravimetric analysis, will provide information about the host composition
and structure as a dry gel densifies upon heating. Further, an applied external
electrical field will be used to modify the RE local environment by controlling
the presence of free ionic components. At all stages in the synthesis process,
RE spectroscopy will be used to probe the materials, providing information that
complements the knowledge gained from the thermal and electrical experiments.
After the sol-gel materials are fully densified, the nature of energy transfer
interactions among RE ions will be investigated with time-resolved spectroscopic
measurements and with spectral hole burning, a high resolution saturation
spectroscopy technique. It is hoped that through these studies the quantum yield
and other optical properties of these materials can be
improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;