* 0421152
* MRI: Acquisition of a Low Energy Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Robert Hull, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 624,750.00

This project will commission a new low energy electron microscope (LEEM) design
that represents a major advance in commercially available instrumentation, and
that will enable break-through advances in understanding of fundamental
mechanisms of semiconductor and metallic thin film and cluster growth. LEEM
employs imaging of reflected electrons from an ultra-low energy (c. 0 - 10 eV)
beam to study the structure of surfaces and near-surface regions through a set
of high spatial resolution contrast modes. Spatial resolution perpendicular to
the sample surface is at the atomic-scale, while in the plane of the sample
surface it is about 5 nm. The instrument at UVa will also enable multiple
additional imaging and diffraction modes, including photoemission electron
microscopy (PEEM), mirror electron microscopy (MEM), and low energy electron
diffraction diffraction (LEED). This will enable an instrument with unparalleled
capabilities for real-time nanoscale studies of structure, chemistry and
reactions at surfaces and during growth of thin epitaxial films. The instrument
will be equipped with a set of in-situ deposition and surface modification
capabilities in an ultra high vacuum sample chamber area, and will be combined
with an ultra-high resolution focused ion beam (FIB) source for nanoscale
modification of local topography, crystallography, and chemistry. The initial
research foci of this instrument will include fundamental studies of: Epitaxial
growth of semiconductor clusters upon patterned surfaces with potential
nanoelectronic applications; Growth of ultra-thin metallic layered structures
and tunneling junctions for novel magnetoresistive and spintronics applications;
Optical acceleration of chemical reactions for low temperature chemical vapor
deposition (CVD) growth; The interplay of different solid states of matter
(crystalline, amorphous, nanocrystalline and quasicrystalline) in the growth of
metallic alloys; Mechanisms of carbide formation by surface reaction; and
Atomistic mechanisms of corrosion. The instrument will also have broad impact
upon the research and educational infrastructure at UVa and beyond. It will be
integrated into several existing and planned courses in our undergraduate and
graduate curricula, and will provide a key component for real-life
demonstrations of nano-scale and atomic-scale mechanisms on surfaces and thin
films for a set of existing and planned courses in surface science and
nanotechnology. In addition, a close collaboration with researchers at IBM will
provide close industrial research collaborations and perspective for these
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will commission a low energy
electron microscope (LEEM) of an advanced new design. The LEEM operates by
imaging of electrons of very low energy which have been reflected from a sample
surface, thereby producing images which can detect atomic changes in topography
on the surface. The instrument will be equipped with an ultra-high vacuum sample
chamber to allow atomic control of sample surfaces, thereby enabling direct
imaging of atomic processes at surfaces, including growth of thin films,
chemical reactions, and corrosion mechanisms. In essence, it allows us to watch
the fundamental processes by which nature assembles and modifies the atomic
structure of the surfaces of materials. This has broad ramifications for
enhanced understanding of many processes of fundamental and practical
importance. For example, initial applications of our instrument will be studies
of accelerated chemical reactions at surfaces, assembly of new nanoelectronic
architectures, exploration of materials for advanced magnetic devices, design of
new ultra-strong magnetic materials, and fundamental mechanisms of corrosion.
The instrument will also play a key role in our undergraduate and graduate
education programs. By incorporation into several existing and planned courses,
it will provide real-life demonstrations of atomic-scale mechanisms on surfaces
and during thin film growth. Another cornerstone of this project is close
collaboration with researchers at IBM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;