* 0421394
* MRI:  Development of an Ultra High Speed Camera Capable of Simultaneous Full-Field Deformation and Temperature Measurements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Viswanathan Madhavan, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 172,190.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds to develop a new
type of ultra high-speed camera that will be used for simultaneous full-field
deformation and temperature measurements. The camera will be developed by adding
two commercially available dual-frame image-intensified cameras and two high
power pulsed lasers to a new type of modular ultra high speed non-intensified
camera system developed through a prior Major Research Instrumentation grant.
This will permit ultra high-speed full field temperature measurement using the
two-wave Laser Induced Fluorescence technique, simultaneously with Digital Image
Correlation based deformation measurement. This system will be used to
experimentally quantify the average strain rate and temperature fields in the
primary and secondary shear zones in metal cutting, and to study the dynamics of
these fields under a range of commercial cutting conditions.

This Major Research Instrumentation award will add to the capabilities of the
first and only ultra high-speed camera in the state of Kansas and its
availability for use will strengthen the research and education infrastructure
of the state. This equipment can be used in any field where high-resolution
ultra high framing rate thermographic images are needed, or whenever
simultaneous deformation and temperature frames are needed. This concept is
currently being patented and it is anticipated that this instrument will be
marketed as a commercial product and used by researchers in a variety of
different areas. The broader impacts potentially also include the benefits of
better understanding of the temperature field in metal cutting, which is of
prime importance in tool wear and product quality, and the creation and
dissemination of improved models of metal cutting that can be used in education.