* 0421973
* SBIR Phase II:   Creating Accessible Science Museums for Blind and Visually Impaired Visitors with User-Activated Audio Beacons
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Steven Landau, Touch Graphics
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 03/31/2007
* USD 521,310.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
the effectiveness of a new system for guiding visitors in science museums and
other public spaces. Touch Graphics will design, implement, and evaluate an
apparatus that will allow any museum visitor to dial in to, and then interact
with, a computerized attendant, using the visitor's own cell phone or one lent
to him/her. A special feature will allow blind and visually impaired users to
navigate independently by following sounds from environmental audio beacons that
they will control by pressing keys on their phones. Once a visitor arrives at
the requested exhibit component, his or her phone will serve as an audio
explainer and control interface. While the development of this concept has been
motivated by the desire to accommodate the needs of visually impaired museum-
goers; in Phase II, the small business will configure the system as a mainstream
audio guide product that includes optional accessibility features. The small
business will create an experimental installation of the envisioned system in a
large science museum in New York City, where it will undergo two rounds of human
subject testing. As part of this installation, an interactive touch model of
rockets that are part of the museum's collection will be designed, fabricated
and tested to study the effectiveness of users' cell phones as an accessible
control interface for individual exhibit components. The project will also be
complemented by a parallel study in which user-activated audio beacon technology
is deployed in a different context; a phone-based navigation tool will be
implemented and tested as a travel aid for blind and visually impaired bus
riders in Austin, Texas who need to find public access
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This user-activitated audio-beacon technology
has the potential to improve access to important public resources, particularly
science museums for individuals who have been excluded due to disabilities. It
seeks to provide opportunities for the blind and visually impaired to experience
the enrichment and entertainment offered at hundreds of facilities around the
country. These institutions offer opportunities for informal science education
that can inspire people to pursue careers in science and technology, and the
Nation as a whole stands to benefit when more qualified young people are
encouraged to enter these crucial fields. Improved science literacy for all
citizens, young or old, is an important goal that this project seeks to promote.
&lt;br/&gt;