* 0421046
* Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Interdisciplinary Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* William L'Amoreaux, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 479,752.00

This award supports the acquisition of a confocal laser scanning microscope
(CLSM) imaging system with spectral imaging to augment the current research
activities of a diverse faculty within the City University of New York (CUNY)
centered at the College of Staten Island. The instrument will be part of a
college-wide Advanced Imaging Facility whose mission is to serve the college and
the greater New York City metropolitan area. The CLSM will support the
activities of a diverse consortium of researchers and educators in biology,
chemistry, and materials science. An essential module of the research efforts at
the College of Staten Island is to analyze the functional aspects of
interactions of macromolecular assemblies within the context of living cells and
organisms. Initially, at least seven researchers have identified confocal
microscopy as a key tool for enhancing their research efforts. Interaction
between these faculty have begun in attempts to answer hypotheses related to,
but not limited to: molecular interactions related to endosome formation during
phagocytosis, creation of novel nanodevices using biological macromolecules as
templates, and cell signaling events regulating mitochondrial calcium
homeostasis. Related to this are the structural analyses of proteins modified by
covalent addition of transitional metals, development of responsive microgels
based on polysaccharides and polypeptides, and the investigation of biopolymers
that enable fruits to be resilient and resistant to pathogenic attack,
especially under conditions of environmental stress. This instrumentation will
also support a number of educational activities both at the College of Staten
Island and within the City University of New York. This includes use in an
Advanced Microscopy course, Instrumental Methods in Chemistry, and undergraduate
research activities through Independent Studies and Honors Thesis programs.
Additionally, the instrument will support research activities in the College of
Staten Island's NSF-funded REU program on Polymers and Biopolymers as well as
the Center for Environmental Science. As the Departments of Biology and
Chemistry have an established interdisciplinary approach to research and
teaching, the instrument will also be used in graduate education and training in
the NSF-supported IGERT program on Nanostructural Materials and Devices and
undergraduate education in the Merck-AAAS funded program on development and in
vivo utilization of novel bioconjugates to investigate transportation
mechanisms.