* 0421577
* NEESR-SG:    Seismic Behavior, Analysis and Design of Complex Wall Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2013
* Dawn Lehman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2013
* USD 1,693,423.00

SEISMIC BEHAVIOR, ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF COMPLEX WALL SYSTEMS:&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Reinforced concrete structural walls are used commonly as the
primary lateral-load resisting system for&lt;br/&gt;new and retrofit
construction. However, despite the heavy reliance on wall systems by
practicing&lt;br/&gt;engineers, recent efforts to develop performance-based
design methods have not yet begun to address&lt;br/&gt;structural walls. Today,
engineers have few resources to consult regarding the simulation of wall
response&lt;br/&gt;using practical linear and nonlinear numerical models or the
prediction of wall damage (e.g., concrete&lt;br/&gt;crack width and concrete
spalling) as a function of engineering demands (e.g., inter-story
drift).&lt;br/&gt;In part, the inadequacy of available performance-based design
tools for walls is a result of limitations in&lt;br/&gt;the available
experimental data. Prior to the NEES initiative, experimental facilities were
such that only&lt;br/&gt;simplified loading conditions, loading histories,
boundary conditions, and geometries could be employed&lt;br/&gt;in the
laboratory. Additionally, instrumentation was such that experimental data
typically include wall&lt;br/&gt;displacements and end rotations, average strain
measurements and a few analog images showing damage&lt;br/&gt;progression. Only
a few existing experimental data characterize the response of walls with
complex&lt;br/&gt;geometries or subjected to bi-directional load histories. None
of these data sets include high-resolution&lt;br/&gt;strain fields for use in
validating advanced simulation tools, nor do any of these data sets include
highresolution digital images that can be used to quantify damage. No
experimental investigations consider&lt;br/&gt;boundary conditions that simulate
soil and foundation deformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here will advance the understanding of,
and simulation tools for, the seismic&lt;br/&gt;performance of slender walls
through experimental and analytical investigations of wall systems with
1)&lt;br/&gt;configurations used in modern design, 2) load distributions that
are representative of earthquake loading,&lt;br/&gt;3) and consideration of
soil-structure-interaction effects. The advanced experimental capabilities of
the&lt;br/&gt;UIUC MUST-SIM NEES facility will permit realistic simulation of
these complex conditions.&lt;br/&gt;Instrumentation developed as part of the
MUST-SIM facility makes possible high-resolution monitoring&lt;br/&gt;of test
specimen displacement fields and such data are necessary to enable the proposed
model&lt;br/&gt;development effort. These data will be used to advance the
state-of-the-art for simulation of reinforced&lt;br/&gt;concrete structures
through the development of fiber-shell elements that can be used to simulate
the&lt;br/&gt;inelastic response, including localized damage mechanisms, of
three-dimensional walls. Results of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed experimental
investigation and parametric studies using the high-resolution numerical
models&lt;br/&gt;will be used to advance the state-of-the-practice for design of
wall systems including the development of&lt;br/&gt;elastic and simplified
inelastic modeling techniques that are appropriate for use with
commercial&lt;br/&gt;software. Additionally, experimental and simulation data
will be used to develop performance-based&lt;br/&gt;design tools that account
for modeling uncertainty and link engineering demand parameters and
damage&lt;br/&gt;states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT&lt;br/&gt;The
structural engineering profession recognizes that the limitations identified
above represent a&lt;br/&gt;significant gap in the development and
implementation of performance-based seismic design provisions.&lt;br/&gt;To
facilitate the transfer of the research result to practice, an External Advisory
Panel has been assembled&lt;br/&gt;for the project that includes prominent
structural engineers and members of structural engineering&lt;br/&gt;societies.
An interactive website will be developed to disseminate research results to
earthquake&lt;br/&gt;engineering professionals, educators and students to allow
real-time viewing of experimental tests. In&lt;br/&gt;addition to educating
today's engineers, the research team will use the research process and results
to&lt;br/&gt;educate future engineers using the tele-observation capabilities at
the NEES facility and education&lt;br/&gt;modules in design and analysis
classes. The project team will leverage its own diversity and
established&lt;br/&gt;programs in the colleges of engineering to reach a diverse
student population. In addition to these&lt;br/&gt;activities, the team will
work with college of engineering at UW, UICU and MUST-SIM group to
reach&lt;br/&gt;K-12 students with activities such as Engineering Open House.