* 0421478
* Acquisition of Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometers for Global Change Training and Research
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Richard Gill, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 579,984.00

A grant has been awarded to Washington State University under the direction of
Dr. R. Dave Evans for partial support of the purchase of two stable isotope mass
spectrometers for global change training and research. Quantifying natural
variation in the different isotopes of an element is now central in many studies
of global change biology. It was once thought that the relative abundance of
different isotopes of an element was constant, but technological advances and
the development of stable isotope mass spectrometers have shown that natural
variation in the relative abundance occurs because of differences in reaction
rates in physical and biological transformations. Washington State University
has identified the area of global change as a research priority, yet the latest
generation of stable isotope mass spectrometers is not available on campus. This
proposal assembles a research team composed of eight PI's and senior personnel
from five departments and two colleges whose common theme is the use of stable
isotopes to quantify responses to global change at the physiological, community
/ ecosystem, and geosphere / biosphere / atmosphere scales. We propose to
purchase two isotope ratio mass spectrometers and supporting peripherals to
facilitate our research.

The new equipment will immediately increase productivity of the research group.
Currently investigators must submit samples to off-campus facilities where
analyses may take six months, and many of the capabilities in this proposal are
simply not commercially available. It will also enhance research training by
allowing students to analyze their own samples, rather than taking a "black-box"
approach by submitting them to other labs. The new equipment will also foster
collaborations among three other research cores on campus; the Laboratory for
Atmospheric Research, Laboratory for Biotechnology and Bioanalysis, and the
plant growth facility.

The research group will take advantage of existing programs at the University,
College, and Departmental levels to recruit under-represented minorities into
their research laboratories. The group has already demonstrated their commitment
to this; 100 % of the post-doctoral associates, almost 70 % of the graduate
students, and almost 40 % of the undergraduate students that would benefit from
this proposal are members of under-represented groups. Undergraduate and
graduate courses will benefit by incorporating stable isotope analyses and
theory into their laboratory courses. Finally, the reduced costs make it more
likely that researchers and students will take advantage of the facility.