* 0421896
* Understanding Global Tensions: A Sociology and Political Science Workshop Proposal, Istanbul, June 2004
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Katherine Meyer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 03/31/2006
* USD 99,723.00

The PIs will hold a three-day workshop to assess the state of social science
knowledge about the role of global-level processes and institutions in shaping
the character, causes, and consequences of global tensions broadly defined. The
workshop will focus on the Middle East.as both a site and a source of global
tensions. It will be organized by the Mershon Center at Ohio State University
and the United Nations Development Program Center at Bogazici University in
Istanbul, Turkey. The workshop will hosted by Bogazici University. Workshop
sessions will center on the global system itself: what is its structure, how is
it changing, and how do its features and trajectory affect global tensions. An
international group of social scientists conducting research on different
aspects of globalization and global conflict will articulate research priorities
that will provide the basis for future collaboration especially the formation of
international research teams. Workshop participants will be social scientists
from the U.S., Europe, and the Middle East. The workshop will be
interdisciplinary with participants drawn mainly from Sociology and Political
Science--two disciplines centrally engaged in the study of globalization, social
movements, and political violence. Participants will summarize the current state
of knowledge in their particular area of research about globalization and its
impact on global tensions, identify cutting edge research questions relating to
global tensions, and outline a future research agenda to advance social science
understanding of global tensions. The ultimate goal is to encourage the
development of research projects that examine global factors that contribute to
conflict and tensions within and among states. Workshop sessions will be divided
into three sections: The Global System and Global Tensions, Global and Local
Synergies and Flashpoints, and Developing a Research Agenda for Understanding
Global Tensions. This project's broader impacts are four-fold: First, the papers
and discussions in this workshop are of great interest and immense importance to
scholars, policymakers, and students interested in understanding the causes,
character, and consequences of contemporary global tensions. Second, the
recommendations of the workshop participants for productive and promising ways
to conceptualize and study global tensions will strengthen future research and
scholarship in this area. Third, the gender, national, ethnic, methodological,
and disciplinary diversity of workshop participants will serve not only to
provide a broad array of ideas and approaches to understanding global tensions,
but will provide many opportunities for future collaborations among colleagues
working in different disciplines and national settings; our decision to hold the
workshop in Istanbul was, in part, to facilitate the participation of
international scholars who might find it difficult to attend a workshop held in
the U.S. Finally, the international diversity of workshop participants will
contribute to social science research capacity building in NSF's three priority
areas: people, ideas, and tools.