* 0421676
* Use of Interfering RNAs to Identify Gene Function in Medicago Truncatula
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* James Gantt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2010
* USD 2,117,256.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt; Grain and forage legumes are grown on some 180 million Ha,
or about 15% of the Earth's arable land and account for 27% of the world's
primary crop production. Legumes are distinguished by their ability to form
symbiotic associations with both rhizobial bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi. In
the rhizobial association, the bacteria fix atmospheric nitrogen, providing the
major source of biologically available nitrogen in the biosphere. The fungal
symbiosis results in improved phosphorous acquisition. Nitrogen and phosphorus
are the major mineral nutrients required for plant growth. Despite the
agricultural and ecological importance of legumes, relatively little is known
about the genes that are involved in the development of bacterial or fungal
symbioses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The legume research community has developed
many resources around the model legume Medicago truncatula. These include a
large collection of ESTs (expressed sequence tags) from which many of the genes
that are active in roots during symbiosis have been identified. Efficient
transformation protocols have been developed and a genome sequencing project is
ongoing. These resources and techniques will be combined with RNA interference
(RNAi) technology to silence gene expression and identify genes involved in the
plant-microbe symbioses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of sequence databases
and gene expression studies will be used to identify genes that are possibly
involved in symbiosis and 1,500 of these will be targeted for silencing via
RNAi. Silencing will be carried out in transgenic roots and the effects on
symbiosis will be examined. The results will be reported to the research
community through a publicly available project web-site. The gene-targeting
sequences will be made available at Clemson University Genomics Center without
restriction to the research community in an easy to use, multifunctional
vector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project integrates a variety of
scientific fields including molecular biology, microbiology, plant biology and
bioinformatics. The research also employs one of the latest and most powerful
genomic technologies, RNAi, which is being used in a variety of applications
from investigations into basic biology to the development of human therapeutics.
The research team will introduce selected undergraduate students to many aspects
the research which will expose them to the excitement of modern biological
research. Additionally, collaborators at Gustavus Adolphus College, an
undergraduate institution, will develop a laboratory course that follows the
general protocols described in the research proposal. The materials and
protocols that are developed through the research project are an excellent
resource for this effort. The outcome of this effort will be the description of
a series of experiences that undergraduate students in plant biology, plant
molecular biology, or plant physiology can obtain in one semester
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resources Generated: Publicly accessible
database of root and symbiotic phenotypes and traits. Information on genomic
experiments will be located at &lt;br/&gt;MtDB[http://medicago.org] , the
Concensus Legume database www.legumes.org
and&lt;br/&gt;[http://decifr.ccgb.umn.edu].&lt;br/&gt;