* 0421935
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Sivaguru Sritharan, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2005
* USD 46,809.00

The training of both undergraduate and graduate mathematics students can hardly
be considered complete nowadays without their being exposed to the areas of
applied mathematics and numerical analysis, and becoming familiar with computer
simulations of the real world based on advanced mathematical models. In order to
enhance training in this direction, the Department of Mathematics at the
University of Wyoming will purchase a computer cluster that will be used for
student training and research in several areas, including the simulation of
fractal interface growth by interacting particles approximations, modeling of
aircraft engine tonal noise under uncertain input, development of three-
dimensional flow models for near-critical fluids, and analysis of parallel
algorithms for massive graphs and convection-dominated reaction-diffusion
problems. These projects are expected to advance the state of the art in a
number of fields of high interest in the mathematical/numerical analysis
community, such as: spectral element methods, large-scale solution of complex-
valued linear systems, domain decomposition methods, analysis of stochastic
processes and uncertainty, numerical simulation of such processes driven by Levy
noise and spectral analysis of discrete Laplacian operators. They will entail
the development of new computational algorithms, both sequential and parallel;
new analytical/numerical models for the study of complex fluid physics including
near-critical fluid flow and reaction-diffusion flow in porous media; new
applications of stochastic analysis and uncertainty quantification; and
innovative techniques for the study of large, complex network problems such as
those arising on the Internet. The impact of this research will span several
scientific disciplines, consistent with the University of Wyoming identification
of interdisciplinary computational science as a critical area in its academic
plan for 2004-2009. Existing research links between the Department of
Mathematics and the Departments of Mechanical Engineering, Chemical and
Petroleum Engineering and Computer Science will be enhanced by the presence of
the cluster. The impacts also extend to problems of large social and
technological interest. Aircraft noise modeling tools are of utmost importance
in the design of current large transport aircraft and avoid the need for multi-
million-dollar wind tunnel and flight experiments. Simulation of fractal
interface growth is a first step toward the control of cutting-edge
technological processes such as chemical vapor deposition. A better
understanding of critical fluid flow is expected to have an impact in the areas
of enhanced oil recovery and advanced materials manufacturing. Massive graph
algorithms are needed to speed up processing of digital data in fields such as
GIS, the World Wide Web and DNA banks. The use of bio-barriers to restrict flow
of pollutants in porous media addresses a major nation-wide environmental
concern. The acquisition of the cluster is coupled with a plan to develop a
curriculum in computational science and high performance computing. The projects
provide ideal topics for class learning and thesis research. They are expected
to greatly enhance the training of mathematics students in the use of modern
distributed parallel computers, as well as expose them to current areas of
research in applied mathematics.