* 0421304
* Acquisition and testing of the ImageStream 100 (beta model): Improving quality and expanding the scope of the Integrated Primate Biomaterial and Information Resource.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jeanne Beck, Coriell Institute for Medical Research
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 492,493.00

With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
Award, Dr. Robert Hanner and his colleagues at the Coriell Institute for Medical
Research and Drexel University will purchase complimentary state of the art
cellular imaging systems for both adherent cells and cells in flow. Previous
imaging techniques at the Institute lacked both the resolution and high
throughput capabilities needed for the advancement of the NSF-funded Integrated
Primate Biomaterials and Information Resource (IPBIR), which faces obstacles in
developing new protocols needed to culture a diverse array of nonhuman primate
tissues. New technologies for imaging cells in flow, complimented with high
throughput robotic confocal microscopy of adherent cells, will advance the state
of the art in primate tissue culture and cellular characterization of the rare
and difficult to obtain samples in the IPBIR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with
a team of cell biologists, Dr. Hanner and Co-PI Dr. Jeanne Beck will supervise
and administer the systems in many studies that will help examine the structure
of cultured cells and refine the optimal requirements for their culture. These
systems will provide a large group of researchers with high content screening
capabilities. High content screening (HCS) and quantitative fluorescence
microscopy have revolutionized cell biology. HCS is defined as the automation of
cell biological investigation of arrayed cells including key operations of
experimental design, sample preparation, image acquisition, archiving,
processing and analysis, and cellular knowledge mining. The phrase 'high
content' refers to processes that are defined spatially and temporally in the
context of the structural and functional integrity of each individual cell
within an array of cells. A key feature of this emerging center of excellence
for cellular imaging is the ability to produce quantitative data, allowing the
instrument to be used for a wide range of scientific
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data obtained from the instrumentation will
be made available as part of the IPBIR catalog, documenting the biomaterials
made available to the scientific community by the Resource, beginning in 2005.
This catalog (www.ipbir.org) will provide both raw and processed data to
researchers, educators, and others who are interested in the data that is
gathered. The raw data could be used for scientific studies involving data
mining under a 'systems biology' approach. The processed data, in the form of
individual high-resolution images would enable educators to teach students
basics of cellular morphology and provide real world examples of cellular
expression and differentiation patterns. The IPBIR catalog is maintained and
supported by the Coriell Institute for Medical
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is important for several reasons. It
will provide first-class high-throughput cellular imaging capabilities for
researchers at an institution with demonstrated ability to conduct cutting-edge
cell culture and characterization. The systems will also play a significant role
in training the next generation of scientists by actively involving graduate
students from Drexel University's Bioinformatics Program, as well as
undergraduates from Rutgers, Rowan and Wilson Colleges. Research involving this
instrumentation will ensure the optimal development and use of the
infrastructure already invested into IPBIR, promoting the availability of highly
characterized primate cells worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;