* 0421849
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Global Optimization of Transferable Molecular Step Potential Functions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* J. Richard Elliott, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 31,413.00

0421849 &lt;br/&gt;Elliott&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a collaborative research between Dr. Richard Elliott, Department of
Chemical Engineering, Akron University, Akron, Ohio and Dr. Mehmet Camurdan,
Chemical Engineering Department, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey and Dr.
Metin Turkay, Industrial Engineering Department, Koc University, in Istanbul,
Turkey. The objective of the research is to develop a general tool for inferring
molecular interaction parameters based on physical property data for vapor
pressure, density, diffusivity, vapor-liquid equilibria, and liquid-liquid
equilibria. Characterizations of physical properties like these play a major
role in chemical process analysis and simulation and chemical product design.
Characterizing these properties in terms of transferable molecular interactions
will permit predictions of properties and structure-activity-relations for new
compounds. Molecular dynamics simulation of the detailed molecular structure,
including branching, rings, and bond-angles, is used as the basis for
distinguishing isomeric and steric effects. Based on these predictions,
engineers will be able to identify favorable prospective compounds "in silico,"
prior to experimental synthetic efforts. Intellectual Merits: The methodology of
the research is based on Discontinuous Molecular Dynamics and Thermodynamic
Perturbation Theory (DMD/TPT). DMD/TPT breaks the molecular potential down into
discrete steps, similar to a square-well potential but with more than one
attractive well. Through TPT, the characterization of the attractive potential
is reduced to an approachable global optimization problem. The depths of the
steps are simply continuous parameters and the deviations in the predicted
physical properties comprise the objective function. The selection of optimal
step widths necessitates a degree of integer programming. The optimization of
site diameter carries a significant penalty in requiring a fresh simulation.
Developing a strategy for global optimization of this system presents a novel
challenge for optimization methodology. Although DMD/TPT is particularly well
suited to this kind of optimization at this time, it is also possible through
derivative and histogram reweighting methods to probe the sensitivity of
physical properties to parameters in continuous potentials. As researchers using
continuous potentials make progress, they will come to see the need for a
reliable and efficient methodology for optimizing transferable potential
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These will include integrated research
and education and international exchange. The PI is the co-author of a text on
Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, and has already integrated results of
related previous NSF support, and his teaching should evolve to include product
design requiring extensive molecular insight. It is anticipated that there will
be progressively greater importance for chemical product design in the
curriculum. This collaboration will demonstrate a paradigm for international
research that substantially leverages the interests and capabilities in both
sides.&lt;br/&gt;