* 0421588
* BE/CBC: Biocomplexity Associated with the Response of Tundra Carbon Balance to Warming and Drying Across Multiple Spatial and Temporal Scales
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,399,961.00

This research examines how biological and physical processes interact to control
carbon uptake, storage and release in Arctic tundra ecosystems and how the self-
organizing nature of these interactions varies across multiple spatial and
temporal scales. Approximately 25% of the world's soil organic carbon reservoir
is stored at high northern latitudes in permafrost and seasonally-thawed soils
in the Arctic, a region that is currently undergoing unprecedented warming and
drying, as well as dramatic changes in human land use. Understanding how changes
in annual and inter-annual ecosystem productivity interact and potentially
offset the balance and stability of the Arctic soil carbon reservoir is of
utmost importance to global climate change science. If there is a net loss of
soil carbon to the atmosphere in the form of greenhouse gases (namely CO2 and
CH4), greenhouse warming could be enhanced. This non-linear, potentially
positive feedback response could very quickly cause Arctic terrestrial
ecosystems to function in a manner not known to us from the late Holocene and
with globally significant implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities in
this research benefit from a foundation and wealth of international and national
carbon cycle research undertaken in northern Alaska and other Arctic regions
over the past three decades. The group will initiate a comprehensive study
involving an integrated framework of multi-scale aircraft and satellite remote
sensing, micrometeorological and CO2 and CH4 flux measurements and hydro-
ecological process model simulations over a 350km North-South transect spanning
the dominant Arctic topographic and land cover units of northern Alaska. The
study region encompasses many long-term measurement sites that have been in
place for 5 to 10 years. They will expand these observations to include an
extensive soil moisture manipulation involving a 60 hectare tundra
flooding/draining experiment near Barrow Alaska on the Arctic Coastal Plain. The
objective of this study is to quantify linkages between soil moisture and carbon
uptake, storage and release over multiple spatial (microbial to landscape) and
temporal (minutes to decades) scales. Only by increasing the spatial extent of
our experimental manipulations and the duration of our observational time series
can we better understand and predict the effect of scale on the complex coupling
within Arctic ecosystems; namely, how small scale processes participate as
components of higher scale phenomenon and how higher scale phenomenon constrain
the former lower scale processes. This knowledge will improve our understanding
of the current behavior and potential response of arctic tundra to global
change, resulting in better predictions of feedbacks to climate and the global
carbon cycle. &lt;br/&gt;