* 0421210
* MRI: Acquisition of a Low-Mass Particulate Matter Measurement and Composition Determination System for Use in Transportation Emissions Research
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Gregory Davis, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal No. CTS-0421210 Principal Investigator: G. W. Davis, Kettering
University

This grant is for acquisition of equipment to measure particulate matter
emissions in engine exhaust. Particulate matter (PM) exhaust emissions from
engines used in transportation cause adverse health affects to humans and
animals. Historically, PM emissions were measured using a gravimetric approach
in which a diluted exhaust sample is drawn through a filter where the
particulate matter is trapped and weighed. However, as engines produce less PM,
it has become increasingly difficult to accurately measure the mass of PM
emissions produced using the traditional gravimetric approach. Furthermore, the
components of PM, particularly the levels of soluble organic fraction (SOF),
cause increased levels of tissue irritation in animals. The composition of the
PM also affects the design of exhaust after-treatment systems used to trap or
convert this material before it is exhausted. The traditional gravimetric
approach does not provide any information regarding the composition of the PM
sample. Recently developed instrumentation now allows accurate measurement of
ultra low mass emissions levels and the determination of the major components of
the sample. The equipment to be acquired consists primarily of a partial flow
dilution tunnel and a low mass PM analyzer with separate measurement of soot,
SOF and sulfates. The acquisition of this instrumentation will allow the
Advanced Engine Research Laboratory (AERL) to conduct research into the effects
of alternative fuels and after treatment systems in the reduction of engine
emissions. Anticipated research projects include determining the effects of the
use of biomass based fuel in jet engines, measuring the reduction in emissions
from two- and four-stroke snowmobile engines when using biomass derived fuels
and lubricants, and the effect of different fuels and operating conditions on
the composition of PM exhaust emissions from both spark-ignited (gasoline) and
diesel engines. This system will have a major impact on the research training of
engineers employed in the automotive industry. Kettering University, formerly
General Motors Institute, is a recognized leader in transportation research and
education. It is a non-Ph.D. granting institution, and over the past five years
is generally within the top five grantors of BSME degrees in the U.S. The AERL
actively engages undergraduates in transportation research. Many technical
presentations and publications have been co-authored by undergraduates during
the past four years. All mechanical engineering undergraduates conduct
experiments in this laboratory. Finally, the AERL will use this system as part
of an ongoing effort to recruit under-represented groups into engineering, by
encouraging them to participate in hands-on experiments in the AERL.