* 0421086
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Lithography Enabled SEM and Nanoimprinter for the Fabrication of Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Mark Lonergan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 402,085.00

This award is to the University of Oregon to acquire a thermal field emission
scanning electron microscope configured for dedicated electron beam lithography
and a nano-imprint lithography system. This highly complementary equipment will
be housed in the Center for Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon
(CAMCOR), which serves the research community in Oregon and the Pacific
Northwest. The instrumentation will have a broad impact by greatly enhancing the
regions infrastructure for the top-down lithographic fabrication of
nanostructures. The equipment will immediately impact seven materials-related
research groups in chemistry, physics, and engineering departments at the
University of Oregon, Oregon State University and Portland State University. The
research of these groups are addressing fundamental principles underlying
molecular motors, charge transport through nanostructures, and the flow of light
at the nanometer scale, as well as methods for the fabrication of functional
micro- and nanostructures for applications in sensing and distributed energy and
chemical systems. These studies will all ultimately contribute to the
development of new types of functional materials and devices. The
instrumentation will also be used in a number of specialized undergraduate and
graduate level programs focused on materials chemistry and physics underlying
the operation and fabrication of semiconductor devices.

This award is to the University of Oregon to acquire a thermal field emission
scanning electron microscope configured for dedicated electron beam lithography
and a nano-imprint lithography system. This equipment is used for the
fabrication and reproduction of well defined structures with nanometer scale
features. Such structures will be used by researchers throughout the region in
their efforts to understand nanoscale matter. The fundamental understanding of
such matter will contribute to advancing the state-of-the-art in a variety of
applications ranging from new types of electronic and optical devices to
efficient chemical manufacturing methods. The equipment made possible by this
award will have a substantial impact on educating undergraduate and graduate
students at the chemistry, physics, and engineering interface through its use in
original scientific research, laboratory-based courses, and undergraduate summer
science experiences.

