* 0421427
* Acquisition of Equipment to Enhance Gene Expression Analysis Capacity at Kansas State University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jan Leach, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 353,504.00

A grant has been awarded to Kansas State University under the direction of Dr.
Karen A. Garrett for partial support of acquisition of equipment to enhance gene
expression analysis capacity. Understanding complex biological processes
requires analysis of the expression of the thousands of genes involved. This
high-throughput gene expression profiling is now feasible through microarray
technology. Over 40 laboratories at KSU include gene expression studies as part
of their research and education programs. In response to the needs of KSU
researchers, this grant will add three pieces of equipment to the KSU Gene
Expression Facility to expand gene expression profiling capabilities. 1) A gene
array analysis system that allows KSU researchers working with cells or tissues
derived from model organisms to make use of high quality commercial arrays. 2) A
ChipWriter/Colony Picking System that provides state-of-the-art gene array
preparation technology and enables KSU researchers working with species that
require custom arrays with subsets of genes, to print their own arrays from
clones. 3) A hybridization station that will provide greater control over the
critical hybridization step to reduce variability between samples and thus
increase the statistical power of experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects at
KSU that require this new equipment include several of which are part of the
NSF-supported Kansas Ecological Genomics initiative. This unique initiative has
drawn together scientists from ecological and molecular disciplines to apply
functional genomic approaches to the study of organismal response to global
environmental change. Other areas of research that will especially benefit from
this technology include plant and animal biology with a focus on host-
parasite/pathogen interactions and research with emphases on tissue development,
hormonal and drug effects, mutations, and cancer. KSU has and is further
developing strong bioinformatics support for the analysis of gene expression
data. Acquisition of this equipment will broaden the training of undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists, strengthen this research area at
KSU, help to attract and recruit excellent faculty and students, and provide an
additional attraction for the recruitment of the best women and minorities at
all levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshops to educate users of the equipment
will be taught regularly. The PIs and other researchers involved in this project
are active participants in programs aimed toward the recruitment of women and
minorities to the sciences, including NSF GROW (Girls Researching our World),
NSF ADVANCE Institutional Transformation program, K-BRIN (Kansas Biomedical
Research Infrastructure Network), SUROP (Summer Research Opportunities for
Undergraduates) and K-State DSP (Developing Scholars Program). In addition to
the support this new equipment will provide to basic research, it will also
support research contributions to the improvement of agricultural systems, human
health, and ecosystem management.&lt;br/&gt;