* 0421109
* MRI:"Acquisition" of Rice Computational Research Cluster (RCRC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Eliza Burgund, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project, acquiring a large scale (512 processors) Linux computational
cluster, provides a research instrument for computing intensive research and
education projects that can help advance knowledge and understanding in a
diversity of fields, while enabling technologies in systems and compilers,
multiscale computational biology, biophysics, bioengineering, earth sciences,
and psychology. Sharing benefits of terascale computational power with 32
investigators and 50 NSF-funded projects, this advanced high performance
computing instrument, also promotes cross-disciplinary collaboration between
tool-building teams and scientific computing teams in bio-computing,
geodynamics, and magnetic resonance analysis. Software tool-building addresses
performance issues, caching and clustering schemes for dynamic web sites, and
designing improved TCP/IP interfaces. Eliminating the need for many, separate
ad-hoc clusters in different departments, the cluster services, among others,
the following specific computational research projects:&lt;br/&gt;* Studying
software and performance issues for heterogeneous Grid systems.&lt;br/&gt;*
Caching and clustering schemes for web sites with dynamic content,&lt;br/&gt;*
Designing improved TCP/IP interfaces for cluster computing,&lt;br/&gt;*
Multiscale computational biology, biophysics, and bioengineering,&lt;br/&gt;*
Modeling of tissues, cells, and cell populations,&lt;br/&gt;* Modeling of flow
and hemolysis in implantable blood pumps,&lt;br/&gt;* Computer-aided drug
discovery,&lt;br/&gt;* Algorithms for PDE constrained optimization,&lt;br/&gt;*
Novel algorithms for large-scale numerical linear algebra,&lt;br/&gt;* Using
computational fluid dynamics to model thermal convection in the Earth's
mantle,&lt;br/&gt;* Particle dynamic simulations of earth processes,&lt;br/&gt;*
Multiscale seismological simulation,&lt;br/&gt;* Analysis of functional MRI
(fMRI) data,&lt;br/&gt;* Source modeling of EEG and ERP signals, and&lt;br/&gt;*
Modeling of visual ideal observers.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The facility,
benefiting more than 100 PhD students, 50 undergraduates, and 30 Postdoctoral
fellows, and directly impacting 32 investigators, will be used in classes at the
undergraduate and graduate levels and also as a recruiting tool through existing
alliance activity (AGEP: Alliance for the Graduate Education and the
Professoriate and a "Spend a Summer with a Scientist" outreach program).
Furthermore, the work exhibits strong emphasis on learning, communication, and
interaction across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;