* 0421483
* Acquisition of a Picosecond Streak Camera System for Time-Dependent Luminescence Measurements of Semiconductor Nanostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jelena Vuckovic, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2007
* USD 153,969.00

Project summary&lt;br/&gt;We propose the acquisition of a picosecond streak
camera system for time-resolved&lt;br/&gt;measurements of photoluminescence from
semiconductor nanostructures. The equipment will be&lt;br/&gt;located in the PIs
optics laboratory in Ginzton, where it would be completely accessible to
the&lt;br/&gt;co-PIs and their students residing in the same building, as well
as to the interested users from&lt;br/&gt;other research groups around Stanford.
Ginzton Laboratory has a strong infrastructure for&lt;br/&gt;nanophotonics
research, including state-of-the-art optics laboratories of the investigators
and a&lt;br/&gt;shared microfabrication facility. In addition, the Stanford
Nanofabrication Facility is located in&lt;br/&gt;the neighboring building and is
extensively used by the investigators. The streak camera
will&lt;br/&gt;complement the existing capabilities of the PIs and broaden their
research in the fields of&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale photonics and quantum information
processing, which are already major thrusts in the&lt;br/&gt;Ginzton Laboratory.
Moreover, the camera will enable research training of a large number
of&lt;br/&gt;graduate and undegraduate students from the research groups of the
investigators in performing&lt;br/&gt;time-resolved spectroscopy and will thus
be important in education of a new generation of&lt;br/&gt;scientists who will
exploit nanophotonics at its full potential. The PIs also place an emphasis
on&lt;br/&gt;research training of women and other underrepresented groups; for
example, there are usually&lt;br/&gt;around 10 women researchers (mainly
experimentalists) across their groups.&lt;br/&gt;The streak camera system is
capable of unprecedented sensitivity in performing time-
resolved&lt;br/&gt;photoluminescence measurements. If the NSF decides to fund
this project, the activity that would&lt;br/&gt;result would be time-resolved
study of light emitted from photonic nanostructures (e.g.,
photonic&lt;br/&gt;crystal structures) with embedded emitters, such as excitons
in quantum dots or quantum well&lt;br/&gt;impurities. This is crucial for
development of novel low-threshold and high-speed lasers and&lt;br/&gt;optical
modulators, as well as hardware for emerging technologies such as quantum
computation&lt;br/&gt;and quantum communication (e.g., single and entangled
photon sources and photon storage&lt;br/&gt;components). PIs are presently
leading research programs focused on quantum information&lt;br/&gt;processing in
the optical domain and on development of optical interconnects; these
programs&lt;br/&gt;would also greatly benefit from the acquisition of the
proposed equipment.