* 0421202
* Development of the Minnesota Terrestrial Integrated Mesocosms for Biophysical and Ecophysiological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Jennifer King, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Vicki Martin
* 09/30/2010
* USD 927,418.00

This award supports the development of a world-class research and education
mesocosm facility that will provide unique opportunities to: 1) conduct detailed
process and simulation studies to complement ongoing field experiments; 2)
improve the design of future field experiments and models; 3) examine future
management and climate change scenarios; 4) educate students by integrating this
facility into courses offered in at least three colleges at the University, and
5) provide a highly visible and easily accessible forum for public engagement in
science education. This facility will make it possible to pursue long-term
multidisciplinary studies. Two important Research and Education Themes that this
unique facility will help address include: 1) Impacts of Multiple Climate Change
Stressors (CO2, O3, temperature) on Northern Perennial Natural and Managed
Ecosystems and 2) Effects of Seasonal Saturation and Freeze-Thaw Cycles on
Natural and Managed Northern Ecosystems. The mesocosms will be developed using
12 large rhizotrons including large above ground canopies with a climate and
environmental control system to examine processes ranging from those in a model
ecosystem to those at a molecular scale, including above ground and subsurface
processes. The mesocosm facility will be used to bridge the gap between
theoretical, laboratory, field, and model-based investigations at a range of
scales. A sophisticated climate control system will allow a large,
interdisciplinary, collaborative research team to examine the effects of
temperature, water table, carbon dioxide (CO2) and ground level ozone (O3)
variations on biophysical and ecophysiological processes. In particular, the
mesocosms will be uniquely designed to study cold temperature processes, which
remain poorly understood and understudied. The simulation of mid-continent
winter will be achieved using conditioned (filtered, modified) outside air and
soil freezing. In addition, fluctuating water tables, which strongly influence
the chemistry, physics, and biology of northern ecosystems, will be studied. The
instrumentation will also facilitate process investigations including microbial
population dynamics and root demography, soil chemistry, greenhouse gas
exchange, soil water, heat, and chemical transport, physiological responses of
whole plants, symbiotic associations, ecosystem dynamics and land-atmosphere
energy and mass exchange. Continuous flux measurements of CO2, O3, N2O, NH3, and
CH4 at each mesocosm will allow for detailed environmental control studies.