* 0421141
* MRI:  X-ray Diffractometer for Material Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* David Vanko, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 267,196.00

This proposal requests funds to acquire a 4-circle x-ray diffractometer for
structural analysis of thin films, single crystals and powder samples. This
instrument will be a key component of research projects in several
multidisciplinary areas such as Materials Physics, Condensed Matter Physics,
Nanotechnology, Geosciences and Chemistry. The materials physics projects
include structural characterization of epitaxial thin films of functional metal
oxides grown by pulsed laser deposition. The thin films which will be studied
include colossal magnetoresistive manganite materials for infrared detector and
magnetic sensor applications and charge-ordered manganites for photonic device
applications. Besides using the diffractometer as a diagnostics tool for
establishing phase purity and crystalline quality of epitaxial thin films,
detailed evaluation of lattice parameters will be undertaken to study lattice-
mismatch strain effects in several material systems. Structural analysis using
the x-ray diffractometer will also form an essential component in our lattice
engineering efforts to grow functional oxide materials on technologically
important substrates such as Silicon, employing buffer and template layer
schemes. The nanotechnology projects which will use this instrument include
study of mechanical properties of thin films using atomic force microscopy and
x-ray micro beam techniques and growth of macromolecular crystals. The x-ray
diffractometer will also form a vital component in several geology research
projects. The use of this instrument will have a major impact on the
characterization of the mineralogy of fine-grained sediments in the
investigation of the evolution dynamics of geological systems. Another geology
project which requires x-ray diffraction analysis is the evaluation of organic
shales as potential sources of oil and natural gas by estimating the peak burial
temperatures of petroleum source rocks using the illite crystallinity index
method. In addition to the above mentioned projects in physics and geosciences,
the x-ray diffractometer will also contribute to several research projects in
the Chemistry department including Forensic Chemistry, nano surface processes,
self assembly of mono-layers on template surfaces, solid state phase
transformations catalytic surface chemistry and materials chemistry. The x-ray
diffractometer will also be used to enhance undergraduate education through
laboratory instruction as well as through undergraduate research projects. X-ray
diffraction experiments will be implemented in advanced physics laboratory
courses and upper level geology courses. Besides Towson University, several
other institutions in the vicinity are expected to benefit from this instrument
via collaborative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
requests funds to acquire an x-ray diffractometer for analyzing the structural
properties of materials in the form of thin films, powders and single crystals.
This instrument will be a key component of research projects in several
multidisciplinary areas such as Materials Physics, Condensed Matter Physics,
Nanotechnology, Geosciences and Chemistry at Towson University. The materials
physics projects focus on the development of novel materials for technological
applications such as electronic sensors for sensing temperature and magnetic
field and nano-structured photonic materials for optical communications and
computing. The development of these novel materials involve studies of their
crystal structure by x-ray diffraction using the proposed instrument. The x-ray
diffractometer will also form a vital component in several geology research
projects. The projects include characterization of trace elements in fine-
grained sediments to study the evolution and dynamics of geological systems and
evaluating the potential of organic-rich shales as source rocks for oil and
natural gas by estimating the peak burial temperatures of petroleum source
rocks. The x-ray diffractometer will also contribute to several research
projects in the Chemistry department including Forensic Chemistry. In addition
to its use in research projects, the x-ray diffractometer will be used to
enhance undergraduate education through laboratory instruction as well as
through undergraduate research projects. X-ray diffraction experiments will be
implemented in advanced physics laboratory courses and upper level geology
courses. Besides Towson University, several other institutions in the vicinity
are expected to benefit from this instrument via collaborative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;