* 0421955
* GE:GenEn:  Solar Saltern Extremophage: Genomics and Population Modeling
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Peter Salamon, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,652,581.00

Bacteriophage are viruses of bacteria, and recent evidence is that they are
hugely abundant and diverse in nature. This biocomplexity project is studying
the composition and diversity of bacteriophage communities in solar salterns by
high throughput DNA sequencing. The sequencing includes the complete genomes of
cultured phage and partial shotgun sequencing of entire phage communities. Since
phage genomes are ~50X smaller than those of prokaryotes, similar coverage of
the phage community genome is being obtained with much less sequencing.
Additionally, by focusing on lower diversity saltern systems, this project is
obtaining high genomic coverage of the phage community from numerous samples.
This approach will allow the research team to measure bacterial and phage
diversity on a community level and determine if diversity changes as phage and
host concentrations increase. The sequencing efforts are being combined with
microarray methods, microbial ecology measurements (e.g., production and decay
rates), and microscopy to investigate the types, concentration, distribution,
and colonization of particles that contribute to spatial and temporal
heterogeneity.

The resulting data on diversity, dynamics, and environmental parameters are
being used to model phage-host dynamics across other ecosystems. Bioinformatic
analyses of the data are also being used to address questions in phage taxonomy
and genomics. Tools for analyzing and disseminating sequence data, as well as
for mathematically modeling populations based on shotgun sequencing data are
being developed. This project is producing robust bioinformatic, genomic, and
mathematical tools that are applicable for assessing uncultured phage diversity
in any ecosystem. This work is being made accessible to the public through
several outreach programs and will also contribute to the education of K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students.