* 0421833
* Excited-State and Interfacial Properties of Electrically and Optically Active Pi-Conjugated Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 10/31/2003,07/31/2004
* Jean-Luc Bredas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn F. Schneemeyer
* 07/31/2004
* USD 87,039.00

Professor Jean-Luc Bredas of the University of Arizona is supported by the
Advanced Materials and Processing Program in the Chemistry Division to carry out
theoretical calculations and modeling studies with close collaboration with
experimentalists. These studies are to verify the theoretical (ab initio and
semiempirical techniques including quantum chemistry) approaches, and to
determine the relationship between microscopic molecular properties and the
macroscopic bulk properties of conjugated polymers. Oligothiophenes, poly
(p-phenylene vinylene), related conjugated polymers and their derivatives in
their ground-, ionized- and lowest excited states will be evaluated for
electronic structures and charge transfer processes taking place at organic-
organic interfaces, and organic-metal interfaces in devices. The knowledge
gained from these studies will be useful to enhance the performance and
efficiencies of electronic materials and devices such as light-emitting diodes.
The computational materials chemistry group, which will be started under the
award, will have a major impact on the education of students in Materials
Chemistry.

Computational and modeling studies of electronic materials will be carried out
in close collaboration with experimental research scientists. These studies will
provide theoretical information to optimize functions of electronic materials
and devices prepared from them. In addition, these studies will provide the
know-how to design and fabricate highly efficient optical devices such as light-
emitting diodes at low cost. The computational materials chemistry group will
provide training and hands-on experience to students in this emerging field.