* 0421492
* NEESR-II Large-scale testing and micromechanical simulation of ultra-low-cycle fatigue cracking in steel structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2009
* Amit Kanvinde, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 10/31/2009
* USD 449,254.00

Cyclic inelastic deformations are the primary mode of seismic energy dissipation
in steel structures. &lt;br/&gt;During earthquakes, beam-column moment
connections undergo a phenomena called Ultra-Low &lt;br/&gt;Cycle Fatigue
(ULCF), which is characterized by very few (&lt;10-20) large strain cycles. ULCF
is &lt;br/&gt;quite distinct from low cycle fatigue, which has been more widely
studied but does not address the &lt;br/&gt;conditions prevalent in seismic
design. Relatively little attention has been given to characterizing the
&lt;br/&gt;fundamental failure mechanisms associated with ULCF, due to the lack
of suitable micro-scale models &lt;br/&gt;to simulate ULCF and the computational
requirements necessary implement the models for studying &lt;br/&gt;large
structural components. Existing research on ULCF of steel structures in
earthquakes relies &lt;br/&gt;almost exclusively on semi-empirical methods,
which cannot be transferred to varied structural &lt;br/&gt;configurations.
Moreover, most of the existing empirical research is based on quasi-static
testing, &lt;br/&gt;which does not account for earthquake loading rate effects.
Such knowledge gaps represent serious &lt;br/&gt;issues for seismic hazard
mitigation. The proposed research aims to (1) identify and quantify the
&lt;br/&gt;underlying failure mechanisms of earthquake-induced ULCF, (2) develop
and implement models to &lt;br/&gt;simulate ULCF in steel structures (3) conduct
large scale subassembly tests at earthquake loading &lt;br/&gt;rates to verify
and demonstrate the models (4) apply the ULCF models to develop practical
guidelines &lt;br/&gt;and recommendations for earthquake resistant design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent study by the PI and his collaborator at Stanford
succeeded in developing some of the first &lt;br/&gt;micromechanical models for
predicting earthquake-induced ULCF crack initiation in steel structures.
&lt;br/&gt;Based on these initial advances, the proposed study will integrate
micromechanics concepts with &lt;br/&gt;advanced simulation techniques and
parallel-computing to realistically simulate fundamental
fatigue-&lt;br/&gt;fracture processes in steel structures. The first phase of
the research will include integrated testing and &lt;br/&gt;analyses of welded
components to calibrate the material properties in the micromechanical models.
&lt;br/&gt;The second phase will use the fast hybrid testing facility at NEES
Colorado to test full-scale welded &lt;br/&gt;steel connections results of which
will be used to validate micromechanical simulations for predicting
&lt;br/&gt;ULCF fractures. The third phase will use the micromechanical model-
based simulation framework to &lt;br/&gt;address unresolved practical problems
of interest to the design and construction industry, e.g. the
&lt;br/&gt;initiation and propagation of ductile fractures in welded steel
construction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Research:
This research will develop powerful tools to model &lt;br/&gt;crack initiation
and propagation at a very fundamental level in structural steel components under
&lt;br/&gt;earthquake loading effects. The research will substantially advance
the state of knowledge in &lt;br/&gt;fracture/fatigue mechanics and effectively
demonstrate the power of micro-scale modeling for &lt;br/&gt;addressing
important earthquake engineering problems. This will have both a positive effect
on &lt;br/&gt;simulation practices in general and the migration towards a more
extensive model-based simulation &lt;br/&gt;environment. Consistent design
recommendations based on the simulations will address important
&lt;br/&gt;detailing issues and mitigate earthquake hazard. The research will
utilize the fast hybrid testing facility &lt;br/&gt;at NEES-Colorado, and the
research team is committed to free sharing of data, simulation models, and
&lt;br/&gt;other information through the NEESgrid and publication in refereed
journals. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of Proposed Research: This
research will have a significant impact on the state of &lt;br/&gt;the art in
earthquake fatigue mechanics, model based simulation, and design guidelines to
protect &lt;br/&gt;against ULCF in earthquakes. Involving expertise from
structural engineering, materials and &lt;br/&gt;computational science, this
research will promote interdisciplinary technology transfer and
&lt;br/&gt;collaboration between the between the two participating schools and
the NEES site at CU-Boulder. &lt;br/&gt;An educational impact of this study will
include the education of two doctoral students, one each at &lt;br/&gt;UC Davis
and Stanford. Moreover, the PI and the co-PI are both responsible for teaching
steel design &lt;br/&gt;classes at UC Davis and Stanford, which provide a
natural educational opportunity for students to &lt;br/&gt;become engaged in the
research through the NEES teleparticipation and database facilities. The
&lt;br/&gt;project team is committed to involving under-represented groups in
research and will collaborate with &lt;br/&gt;on campus engineering diversity
programs to achieve these aims.