* 0421551
* NEESR-II: Sidesway Collapse of Deteriorating Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Helmut Krawinkler, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2008
* USD 449,320.00

Understanding, predicting, and preventing collapse have always been major
objectives of earthquake &lt;br/&gt;engineering. Collapse is the main source of
injuries and loss of lives. Thus, it constitutes an engineering &lt;br/&gt;limit
state that needs to be predicted in order to evaluate, in a probabilistic
format, the life safety &lt;br/&gt;performance level, which is of primary
societal concern. In the context of earthquake risk management, a
&lt;br/&gt;process is needed that permits a rigorous assessment of the
probability of collapse to make informed &lt;br/&gt;decisions in the best
interest of society. In the context of earthquake resistant design, this process
needs &lt;br/&gt;to be simplified so that the engineering profession can use
engineering techniques, which are based on &lt;br/&gt;parameters such as
strength, stiffness, and ductility (deformability), to derive structural
properties that &lt;br/&gt;comply with specified targets for a required level of
collapse safety, or a tolerable probability of collapse. &lt;br/&gt;This project
will address both contexts. It will provide a methodology and reliable data for
predicting a &lt;br/&gt;critical mode of collapse, namely that associated with
sidesway instability in which an individual story (or &lt;br/&gt;a series of
stories) displaces sufficiently so that the second order P-delta effects fully
offset the first order &lt;br/&gt;story shear resistance and dynamic instability
occurs, i.e., the structural system loses its gravity load
&lt;br/&gt;resistance. Prediction of this mode of collapse is a challenging
problem because structural components &lt;br/&gt;will deteriorate in strength
and stiffness before the collapse limit state is reached, and great
uncertainties &lt;br/&gt;are associated with the description of the seismic
input and of the parameters that control the response of &lt;br/&gt;structures
close to collapse. &lt;br/&gt;The methodology will be based on a combination of
analytical and experimental simulations, with the &lt;br/&gt;former being
carried out at Stanford University and the main effort of the latter, a shaking
table collapse &lt;br/&gt;test of a model of a steel structure, being carried
out at the NEES facility at the University at Buffalo. &lt;br/&gt;The outcomes
of the proposed research will be (a) a methodology for predicting sidesway
collapse of &lt;br/&gt;deteriorating structural systems, (b) an extensive
database on deterioration properties of structural steel &lt;br/&gt;and
reinforced concrete components, including uncertainty measures accounting for
modeling and &lt;br/&gt;material uncertainties, (c) incorporation of component
deterioration models in the OpenSees platform, (d) &lt;br/&gt;documentation of a
comprehensive collapse experiment with data that covers the range of response of
a 5-&lt;br/&gt;story steel frame structure from elastic behavior to incipient
collapse, (e) a methodology for computing &lt;br/&gt;the probability of sidesway
collapse that accounts for hazard, ground motion, and structural (material,
&lt;br/&gt;modeling) uncertainties, and (f) engineering recommendations for
design for collapse safety. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectural Merit. The proposed
research will lead to seminal advances in understanding and predicting
&lt;br/&gt;sidesway collapse of structures subjected to severe earthquakes. The
major challenges are to account for &lt;br/&gt;deterioration in structural
behavior in combination with P-delta effect, and for the uncertainties inherent
&lt;br/&gt;in ground motion description and in modeling the behavior of the
components that control the dynamic &lt;br/&gt;response at large inelastic
deformations (or at small deformations in the case of brittle elements). These
&lt;br/&gt;challenges imply extensive modeling efforts at the component and
structure level and the incorporation of &lt;br/&gt;reliability concepts in
assessing collapse safety of structures. Another major challenge will be the
&lt;br/&gt;planning and execution of a shaking table collapse experiment, whose
main purpose is to demonstrate that &lt;br/&gt;collapse prediction indeed is
feasible. The research involves an integrated approach of physical
&lt;br/&gt;simulations at a NEES site shaking table and computational
simulations on the OpenSees platform, while &lt;br/&gt;fully utilizing the
simulation, visualization, and collaboration tools of the NEESgrid.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts on Earthquake Engineering Research and Practice. The
research is motivated by &lt;br/&gt;professional needs to provide adequate and
consistent collapse safety in new designs and to assess the &lt;br/&gt;collapse
hazard of existing structures. These needs require the filling of knowledge gaps
that exist in &lt;br/&gt;regard to data and tools and the understanding of
collapse phenomena. The impact of the proposed work &lt;br/&gt;on research and
practice will be the development of databases, advanced deterioration models,
and &lt;br/&gt;computational tools that will make it feasible to predict the
collapse safety of complex structures and will &lt;br/&gt;permit more rational
allocation of resources in the context of performance-based seismic risk
&lt;br/&gt;management. The impact will be felt in the academic environment in
teaching and research, in &lt;br/&gt;engineering design offices, and in
organizations concerned with risk management.