* 0421412
* Acquisition of a High Resolution ICP-MS to Expand Continuous Ultra-Trace Ice Core and Other Environmental Analyses
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 07/31/2005
* USD 275,073.00

3This MRI award supports the acquisition of an Element2, double-focusing HR-
ICPMS and additional equipment to be operated in parallel with the existing ICP
instruments. Given the high cost of collecting and storing ice cores -and their
potential to provide highly detailed information on past atmospheric chemistry,
atmospheric and oceanic circulation, and anthropogenic pollution across a wide
range of temporal and spatial scale - it is clear that the best possible
analytical procedures and instrumentation for ice core analyses are warranted,
particularly for deep cores such as the upcoming Inland bedrock ice core in West
Antarctica where sample availability is very limited. The scientific merit of
this project is that two parallel HR-ICP-MS instruments operating in real time
would allow improved, targeted measurements of a more comprehensive suite of
elements on a single ice core sample than is possible with one HR-ICP-MS. It
would also allow for additional analyses (e.g., soluble iron [Fe] and Fe
speciation) since the HR-ICP-MS requires only 40% as much sample volume as the
ICP-OES. NSF support for the proposed instrument acquisition will result in
significant advances in the study of past climates, oceanic and atmospheric
circulation, atmospheric chemistry, and anthropogenic pollution using
glaciochemistry. The availability of a second HR-ICP-MS will further improve and
expand research capabilities for DRI and University and Community College System
of Nevada (UCCSN) faculty working in various fields (e.g., pollution aerosols in
precipitation, groundwater fingerprinting, determination of sources of colloidal
material in surface waters, trace element/tree ring analysis with implications
for environmental health, trace element analysis in archeology). A related
broader impact is that this will allow the institution to attract new faculty
(with a goal of increasing diversity). This will also improve and expand
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students throughout the state.

