* 0421638
* SBIR Phase II:  Non-Contact/Zero-Stress Surface Polishing Process for Copper/Low Dielectric Constant Semiconductors
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Heather McCrabb, FARADAY TECHNOLOGY, INC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 10/31/2007
* USD 595,791.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance the
development of a non-contact electro-polish process, addressing the need for a
non-contact/stress-free polishing method for planarization of Cu/low-k
interconnects required for the fabrication of nanochip integrated circuits. This
technology utilizes pulsed electrolysis and a moving electrolyte front to effect
complete electrochemical removal of copper overplate from a semiconductor wafer.
The Phase II objectives/research tasks include: 1) design and fabrication of a
module for the non-contact electro-polish process, 2) demonstration and
optimization of the process on full size wafers, 3) development of a theoretical
model defining a process library for the non-contact electro-polish process, and
4) characterization of the polishing performance and relationship to the
mechanical properties of the materials used.

Commercially, the anticipated results of the program are a marketable
manufacturing process/manufacturing tool in the form of an electrochemical
module incorporating the non-contact electro-polish process. This
product/process technology is enabling to other emerging industries such as MEMS
and/or NEMS. In general, the project addresses the needs of the semiconductor
industry, which is an important aspect of the US commercial economy and will
play an increasing role in the US as well as world society. Furthermore, the
process minimizes chemical waste and environmental impact.