* 0421855
* Calcium Signaling in the Regulation of Flagellar Beating in Sperm
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Susan Suarez, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 08/31/2009
* USD 420,024.00

Sperm are unique cells with the vital function of propagating the species.
Unlike most other cells, they must carry out their function without the ability
to activate genes or synthesize proteins. It is amazing to think that mammalian
sperm can travel deep into the body of a female and fertilize eggs with only the
shirts on their backs, so to speak. How is this accomplished? One behavior that
enables sperm to reach the egg and fertilize it is called "hyperactivation". The
tails of hyperactivated sperm increase the amplitude of bending on one side. It
has been established that this bending pattern provides sperm with additional
thrust for penetrating the vestments of the egg; however, it is also thought to
assist sperm in reaching the egg. This project has been designed to test whether
hyperactivation is required to get sperm to the egg and to determine the
mechanism that increases the tail bending. Mutant mice whose sperm lack the
ability to hyperactivate will be used to test whether hyperactivation enables
sperm to advance towards the egg in the fallopian tube. The behavior of the
mutant sperm within mated females will be compared with that of wild-type sperm.
This can be accomplished by placing the fallopian tubes on a microscope stage
and looking through their transparent walls to chart the progress of the sperm
within. Next, in order to examine the mechanism controlling hyperactivation, the
role of calcium will be investigated. It has been established that calcium is
required by sperm in order to hyperactivate. The objective will be to identify
the type of membrane channel that enables calcium to enter sperm and switch on
hyperactivation by employing pharmacological agents known to specifically block
each type of calcium channel to see which agent prevents calcium influx and
subsequent hyperactivation. The final objective of this project will be to
identify which components of the tail interact with the protein calmodulin,
which is the immediate target of calcium. The merit of this project is that the
results obtained should elucidate the function and regulation of
hyperactivation, thereby increasing understanding of how mammalian sperm reach
the egg to fertilize it. The educational impact will be on individual graduate
and undergraduate students, including minority students, who will learn to
perform and interpret experiments. In addition, laboratory exercises on the
regulation of sperm motility will be presented to high school and undergraduate
classes.