* 0421948
* SBIR Phase II:     Ge-Free Strained Silicon Via dTCE Bonding (Differential Thermal Coefficient of Expansion Bonding)
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2004,11/30/2006
* Rona Belford, BELFORD RESEARCH, INC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 11/30/2006
* USD 499,997.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project will develop a process
that integrates wafer bonding technology with a novel straining process to
create a new ultra fast silicon substrate: Strained-Silicon-On-Insulator (SSOI).
This substrate can undergo normal IC fabrication and resulting circuits will be
30% faster at half the power required for comparative non-strained- SSOI
architectures. The process is a direct approach and entirely surpasses the
nearest competition as there is no germanium in any part of the processing. As a
result the strained silicon is free from the high concentration of treading
dislocations (>105 cm-2) always present when strained-silicon is grown on
"strain-relaxed" silicon germanium virtual substrates. The silicon strained by
the proposed method is maintained within its mechanically elastic region and
thus is free from structural imperfections. The proposed method engages wafer
bonding procedures already in place within the industry and modifies those
processes to give a combined result of wafer bonding and SOI straining within a
single step. The direct approach and single process makes the technique very
inexpensive. The discipline evoked is fundamental surface science which involves
investigation of both physical properties such as surface energies along with
chemical aspects such as maintaining surface hydration and active surface
species required for wafer bonding.

Commercially, the substrates available via this effort will make possible ultra
fast silicon electronics. The proposed process also allows for non-intrusive
radiation-hardening, giving initial commercial outlet in the military sector.
Further markets include mainstream silicon-based electronics; effectively new
host materials with speeds more characteristic of materials such as gallium
arsenide and most salient, very low power electronics.