* 0421654
* Calcium Signaling in the Developing Zebrafish Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Robbert Creton, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 07/31/2007
* USD 344,239.00

Calcium signaling in the developing zebrafish brain

Robbert Creton

The long-term objective of this project is to better understand the mechanisms
regulating brain regionalization during early development, using zebrafish
embryos as a model system. Large-scale mutagenesis screens in zebrafish have
revealed a network of genes, which play a role in patterning of the brain.
However, the dynamics of this network is only partly understood. New insights
may be obtained by combining ideas and approaches from developmental genetics
and neurophysiology. The central hypothesis of this project is that calcium
signals play a key role in the signaling pathways that pattern the brain.
Calcium signals can spread rapidly over large distances within the embryo and
are capable of regulating a variety of cellular events including post-
translational modification of signaling proteins, secretion, contraction, and
gene expression. Moreover, various lines of evidence suggest a role of calcium
in the midline signaling pathway, which induces the neural tube floor plate and
ventral brain regions. To further test the role of calcium in midline signaling,
calcium patterns will be manipulated and effects on neural tube and brain
development will be characterized. In addition, the interaction between calcium
and components of the midline signaling pathway will be examined. Obtained
results will give a first view of calcium interacting with signaling pathways in
the developing forebrain. A broader impact of this project is the establishment
of full-time research within the Bioimaging Facility at Brown University. This
multi-user facility provides training in microscopy to undergraduate students,
graduate students, post-docs, staff, faculty, and visiting scientists. Local
high schools regularly tour the facility, and for many high school students this
is their first visit to a university, and their first contact with scientific
research. In addition, the facility provides free consultation on microscopy and
image analysis to the local community including other universities, small
businesses, and nearby hospitals. A full-time research program at the Bioimaging
Facility will affect the outreach potential of this facility, in part by
enhancing the infrastructure of this facility, and in part by bringing in
investigators who will teach microscopy and image analysis.

