* 0421472
* MRI:  Acquisition of Thin Film Low Pressure Chemical-Vapor Deposition (LPCVD) and Patterning Equipment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Victor Wells, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2006
* USD 430,727.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds for the
acquisition of two systems: (i) photolithographic equipment for front- and back-
side mask alignment, and (ii) Low Pressure Chemical-Vapor Deposition stack for
thin film formation. The mask alignment and exposure system is used to align
fabricated features in thin films sequentially formed either on the front side
or the back side of a substrate to realize a complete microdevice. This is the
process that allows the manufacturing of devices such as sensors and actuators,
as well as integrated circuits, about a few micrometers in lateral dimensions.
The deposition stack is used to for the deposition of thin films such as
polycrystalline silicon, low-stress silicon nitride, low-temperature silicon
dioxide and phosphosilicate glass. These are the most commonly used silicon-
based thin films in MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) technology. This
equipment will be used by both students and researchers to fabricate and
characterize complete microsystems integrating electrical (transistors),
mechanical (beams), optical (wave-guides), thermal (heaters), biological
(proteins) and chemical components on a single chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of these systems is an essential component of the long-term plan of
the University of Arizona to set-up a state-of-the-art micro/nano fabrication
facility in support of its interdisciplinary teaching and research programs. The
on-campus facility will allow researchers from various academic disciplines such
as science, engineering and medicine to develop novel microdevices requiring
selectively modified and photolithographically defined surface properties
leading, particularly, to a unique synergy in the field of nano-bio-micro
systems. The facility will support the education of under-graduate and graduate
students in the areas of semiconductor processing, device manufacturing,
micromachining, and nano science and technology. In the fast evolving
technological scene, it is imperative to train the new generation of engineers
and researchers with the most advanced equipment and techniques. Moreover, the
facility will make a significant impact on product development being conducted
by a large number of high-tech companies in the Southwest utilizing advanced
semiconductor processing.