* 0421379
* Acquisition of Protein Purification Instrumentation for Isoflavonoid Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Nancy Paiva, Southeastern Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 67,462.00

This award supports the acquisition of a protein chromatography system and
associated protein purification and analysis equipment to be used in research
activities and undergraduate education at Southeastern Oklahoma State
University. The instrumentation will be used to study isoflavonoids and
isoflavonoid conjugates which are natural products produced in many legume plant
species. Isoflavonoids have been proposed to play several roles in plant
survival, including defense against fungal pathogens and recruitment of
beneficial nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Specific enzymatic hydrolysis of
isoflavonoid conjugates may be essential during these processes. Isoflavonoids
are also potentially important constituents of human foods, in that diets rich
in isoflavonoids are thought to decrease rates of certain cancers, osteoporosis,
and other diseases. Hydrolysis of isoflavonoid conjugates before or during
digestion may greatly affect the uptake, bioavailability and stability of
isoflavonoids. Despite their potential importance, little has been published on
beta-glucosidases which cleave isoflavonoid beta-glucosides. The instrumentation
will facilitate the biochemical analysis of plant beta-glucosidases with high
specificity towards isoflavonoid conjugates, for which clones were recently
isolated from Medicago truncatula. Conditions will be investigated for
expression and purification of large amounts of recombinant enzymes for use in
animal diet studies designed to determine the relative importance of
isoflavonoid conjugate hydrolysis in nutrition and disease prevention. The
instrumentation will also allow the purification and eventual cloning of the
enzyme 7,2'-dihydroxy-4'-methoxy-isoflavanol dehydratase (DMID). This enzyme
catalyzes the final step in the biosynthesis of the antifungal isoflavonoid
medicarpin, and may be involved in the biosynthesis of other important
isoflavonoid derivatives such as coumestans. Acquisition of this instrumentation
will also facilitate the training of students in current biochemical and
molecular biology techniques, and will directly involve undergraduates in
functional genomics research. The instrumentation will be extremely beneficial
to revisions of the existing Biochemistry laboratory courses and the initiation
of a new Advanced Protein Techniques half-course, for biology, chemistry and
biotechnology majors. Southeastern Oklahoma State University serves a diverse
student body, including Native American students, students from rural areas, and
first generation college students. The instrumentation will aid in preparing
these students for biochemistry, biotechnology and interdisciplinary research
careers.