* 0421052
* MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Undergraduate Research and Education in Nanoscale Surface Science
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Tina Huang, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2008
* USD 210,549.00

Proposal No. CTS-0421052&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: T. Huang, Lafayette
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will facilitate the purchase of
instruments to enhance undergraduate research projects and expand the
pedagogical capabilities in the area of nano-scale surface science at Lafayette
College. A multi-mode scanning probe microscope (SPM) and a profile analysis
tensiometer will be acquired. The combination of these two instruments will
allow investigation of a variety of interfacial phenomena at the air-liquid,
liquid-liquid, liquid-solid and air-solid interfaces. The tensiometer will be
used to examine the micro-rheology and dynamics of ultrathin films (both
modified and unmodified) at the air-liquid and liquid-liquid interfaces. The SPM
has atomic force, scanning tunneling, and electrochemical capabilities and will
be used to study biologically- and chemically-modified surfaces at the liquid-
solid and air-solid interfaces. As research tools, the new instruments will
foster interdisciplinary collaborations between the engineering disciplines and
chemical sciences, and enable faculty members in the Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering departments to further their research and to provide additional
research opportunities for undergraduate students. As pedagogical tools, the
instruments will be used in classroom laboratory settings as a platform to
discuss current trends and topics in interface science and nanotechnology and to
offer students hands-on experience and training with state-of-the-art
instrumentation. In an effort to better educate and train students and prepare
them for future careers in the scientific and technology sector, Lafayette is
exploring the possibility of offering a Nanotechnology Minor within the
engineering and physical science departments. Because nanotechnology is a broad
area of research that encompasses almost all the scientific fields, Lafayette
College will utilize current faculty expertise in surface science and
biologically- modified surfaces and concentrate on becoming a leader in
undergraduate research in nanoscale surface science. &lt;br/&gt;