* 0421580
* Acquisition of high speed camera and instrumentation suite for visualization and three dimensional field reconstruction
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* S. Scott Goldsborough, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 137,786.00

ABSTRACT

This proposal is seeking funding for the purchase of an instrumentation suite
composed of two high-speed digital cameras capable resolving three dimensional
position, velocity and acceleration. The camera is specially outfitted to make
it of particular use over a wide range of needs. Applications for this system
vary from resolving phenomena which move anywhere from 0.1 m/s to 800 m/s and
resolving images to a resolution ranging from meters to sub-millimeters. The
cameras, two Phantom v7s, are capable of capturing 800x600 pixel images at 4,800
frames per second (FPS), up to 150,000 FPS. This proposal includes the cost of 3
lenses: a 50 mm and a 70-200mm zoom lens for larger scale objects and a model KC
long distance microscope for resolving small scale objects. The microscope lens
coupled with the camera is capable of producing a resolution of 0.0075 mm at
4,800 FPS; more than adequate for the studies in this size range, projects 1, 3,
4 and 8 listed above. The captured images will be the input to a software
package, Tema3D, capable of resolving three dimensional position, velocity and
acceleration of selected fiducial points as they move through the cameras field
of view. This feature is especially useful for resolving motion required by
projects 2, 5, 6, 7 and 9 listed above. The three dimensional capability
requires two cameras. The proposed equipment is portable and will receive near
continuous use through the academic year both for research, research training
and educational purposes. The equipment will be used by 9 senior faculty
members, several graduate students and approximately 70 undergraduate students
per year in two lab sections: Measurement and Mechatronics Laboratory and
Thermodynamic/Fluid/Heat Transfer Laboratory. The research projects benefiting
form this investment are funded through a variety of sources from industry
sponsors such as Greenheck Fan, Ford Motor Company, Rotor Finish, Rockwell
Automation and Kimberly-Clark to governmental agencies such as NSF and the Naval
Surface Warfare Center. Two of these projects represent undergraduate research
training sponsored by the Marquette College of Engineering and the Mechanical
Engineering Department.

The broader impact of this capability is to enhance our ability to provide new
educational and research training opportunities to our students, attract outside
industry participation, move forward in several research programs.