* 0421554
* MRI:  HIPerWall:  Development of a High-Performance Visualization System for Collaborative Earth System Sciences
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Jean-Luc Gaudiot, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 393,533.00

This project, developing a Highly Interactive Parallelized Display Wall
(HIPerWall) new visualization facility, aims at advancing the state of Earth
Science modeling and visualization. HIPerWall is a high performance
visualization system with a wall-sized ultra high-density tiled display that
operates at the perception threshold of the human eye, allowing researchers to
view and manipulate their data sets at resolutions commensurate with large-scale
grids or dense sensor network data. The facility will be able to display
extremely high-resolution datasets that will drive and provide focus for on-
going research into management, transfer, and visualization of terabyte-scale
data. By rapid, visual comparison of theory with experimental data, scientists
should be able to swiftly validate and comprehend theory and practice. Although
the proposed research is focused on Earth System Sciences, other research areas
will benefit, including,&lt;br/&gt;Computational Fluid Dynamics &lt;br/&gt;
Direct numerical simulation of turbulent chemically reacting and dispersed
2-phase flows,&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Mechanics &lt;br/&gt; System identification
using 3D video tracking; &lt;br/&gt;o Microwave imaging for damage
visualization; &lt;br/&gt;o Remote system monitoring,&lt;br/&gt;Structural and
Earthquake Engineering &lt;br/&gt;o Advanced scientific visualization of
dynamics of systems; &lt;br/&gt;o Model-based simulation of experimental data
from large and medium scale earthquake testing;&lt;br/&gt;o Analysis of large-
scale earthquake field data,&lt;br/&gt;Materials and Devices &lt;br/&gt;o
Molecular modeling and visualization; &lt;br/&gt;o Synthesis of structural
materials and composites; &lt;br/&gt;o Mathematical modeling of advanced
materials and processes; &lt;br/&gt;o Material
characterization,&lt;br/&gt;Embodied Interaction in Immersive Systems
&lt;br/&gt;o Novel sensor technologies and modes of interaction for cultural and
technical applications,&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Computing, &lt;br/&gt;o Large scale
data visualization;&lt;br/&gt;o Storage, compression and access of stored real
time simulation data; &lt;br/&gt;o Image based rendering; &lt;br/&gt;o 3D data
reconstruction, and &lt;br/&gt;Biomedical Engineering &lt;br/&gt;o Computer
simulation and tissue engineering; &lt;br/&gt;o Imaging and image
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The facility, to be set in a
large classroom, directly contributes to education through courses and
recruiting efforts. The display wall benefits collaborations that have impact on
areas such as homeland security and emergency response.&lt;br/&gt;