* 0421016
* Development of a Multi-Axis Differential Optical Absorption Spectrometer for Measurements of Trace Gases in the Polar Troposphere
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Roger Bales, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Martin Jeffries
* 07/31/2009
* USD 477,039.00

The Arctic environment is undergoing rapid changes, possibly due in part to
anthropogenic causes. A number of these changes involve interaction with, and
possibly feedback from, the atmosphere, so it is particularly important to
investigate and monitor processes that could amplify atmospheric
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex exchange processes in the ocean-ice-
atmosphere system often influence the levels of important atmospheric trace
gases, such as the hydroxyl radical and ozone, and trace species are also
photochemically transformed or produced within the sunlit snowpack. Because
changes in Arctic atmospheric circulation are cyclic over 4-5 year or longer
times, long-duration measurements are needed to understand circulation and to
place observed changes in a long-term perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will include the development of a new generation of multi-axis
differential optical absorption spectroscopy (MAX-DOAS) instruments to
continually measure concentrations of the important trace species formaldehyde
(HCHO), nitrous acid (HONO), nitric oxide (NO2), and halogen oxides in the
Arctic. The instrument will augment ongoing observations at the Summit Greenland
Environmental Observatory (GEOSummit), located at an elevation of 3100 m on the
Greenland ice sheet. GEOSummit is currently the only high-altitude site for
atmospheric and related measurements in the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal has a strong broader impacts, especially in the area of
education&lt;br/&gt;