* 0421159
* MRI:  MRI Instrumentation Development: Smart Reconfifurable Minature Robot System Based on System-On-Programmable-Chip Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* M. Umit Uyar, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2007
* USD 202,844.00

0421159&lt;br/&gt;Uyar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
develop a proof-of-concept, highly-adaptive computation module suitable for
ultra-small robotics systems for research in heterogeneous, reconfigurable teams
of robotic agents. The embedded high-performance computation module based on
System on Programmable Chip (SoPC) technology will allow onboard sensor
processing, advanced kinematic control, reliable communication, and real-time
adaptation of the system to its environment enabling research in a wide variety
of tasks in urban search and rescue, civilian and military surveillance, and
planetary exploration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches to miniature
robotics using proxy-processing schemes over unreliable communication channels
have demonstrated the significance and importance of the research challenges,
but lead to inefficient research production. This proposal focuses on a
computational node for robotic instruments at the centimeter scale to fill a
technically significant gap in available instrumentation. The resulting
computation module will have broad applicability to distributed robotic systems
for other researchers and educators. In addition, the research will directly
result in robotics tools for use in urban search and rescue, and surveillance.
The instrument will also enable pure research in ad hoc wireless networking and
distributed sensor networks, as well as robotics, which are areas of great
commercial importance. From the standpoints of education and diversity, this
system will act as an attractor, bringing the under-represented students at CCNY
(which ranks as one of the most diversified campuses in the U.S., with about 1/3
Hispanic and 1/3 Black) both to the instrument development activities and to the
engineering classes this instrumentation will enhance. &lt;br/&gt;