* 0421063
* MRI:  Acquisition of High Performance Computing Resources In Support of the Consortium for Computational Chemistry and Materials Sciences
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ram Mohan, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This project involving East Carolina and NCA&T universities, acquiring SGI
Origin 3900 systems, supports research of a newly developed Consortium for
Computational Chemistry and Materials Science. Combined with training in
computational science and engineering, the infrastructure supports 3 core and
various ancillary research projects.

Core Projects include: Studies on Wurster's Crown-based Devices, Studies of the
Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Materials and Biological Systems, and Advances
Polymer Composite Fabrication Process Modeling and Simulations. The ancillary
projects include: Modeling C60 Reorientation in Various Solvents, Modeling
Material Deformation at Nano Length Scales, Computational Modeling and
Simulation of Bio-Inspired Adaptive and Reconfigurable Systems, and New Research
tools for Collaborative Grid Computing and Visualization. The first core project
studies a new, versatile electrochemically-active class of macrocyclic receptors
with broad applications (e.g., from sensing to catalysis to molecular
magnetism). This research uses ab initio calculations of structures to guide
chemical synthesis whose results are then used to refine future calculations.
The second interprets chemical effects of exposure to different types of
ionizing radiation, concentrating on understanding the changes in the spectral
structure observed in bi-layers of frozen glass, biomolecules, and tissue. The
third studies chemical and transport phenomena during the fabrication of
advanced polymer-based composite materials. New physical models including multi-
scale effects in the transport phenomena, coupled with macro-micro flow
behavior, rheological transport and dispersion system with embedded nano-
particles, and their multi-length scale interactions are of particular interest.

Broader Impact: The activity focuses on training and support for faculty,
students, and postdocs to apply and develop computational techniques. The
training includes advanced course work and participation in research projects.
The work fosters research training for underrepresented groups at NCA&T (an
HBCU) and ECU (a predominantly women's institution).