* 0421561
* Acquisition of Laser Doppler Velocimetry System for Turbulence Research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Paul Fontana, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 07/31/2005
* USD 229,808.00

ABSTRACT

Proposal No. CTS-0421561 Principal Investigator: P. W. Fontana, Seattle
University

This grant is for acquisition of a laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) system for
use in turbulence research in the Fluid Turbulence Laboratory at Seattle
University. The initial investigations in which this instrument will be used
involve the phenomenon of sheared flow suppression of turbulence. This
phenomenon is not yet fully understood, but is believed to be responsible for
the restriction of airborne particulates from volcano eruptions from entering or
leaving the equatorial jet, the persistence of the ozone hole in the South Polar
vortex, and the good confinement seen in the best fusion reactor discharges.
This experiment will be a study of sheared flow suppression of turbulence in a
controlled and comprehensive way by inducing turbulent sheared flows in
suspended surfactant layers and directly measuring the effects of the shear on
transport. Analysis of the results will enable the first systematic quantitative
comparison of experimental data with the emerging theory. The LDV is an
essential diagnostic for this research because it will provide the time-resolved
data needed to analyze the dynamics of the flow. The instrument will
significantly broaden the scope and impact of the results to be achieved in
these experiments. The LDV is also versatile, and will continue to be a central
element of the laboratory as the research expands beyond these initial
experiments. This research is motivated by and has direct bearing on current
issues in fusion energy research. The pursuit of this limitless source of clean
energy has become a renewed national and international priority. Seattle
University is a primarily undergraduate institution, so this project will afford
undergraduates an opportunity to participate at the frontiers of science. The
teaching curriculum will also benefit from the presence of this state-of-the-art
LDV system, and the laboratory will promote recruitment of highly-qualified
students in the sciences and engineering. The university and its College of
Science and Engineering have large enrollments of underrepresented groups and
women, so these groups particularly will gain from the research opportunities
and teaching enhancements promised by this project.