* 0421916
* Computing Equipment to Support Research in Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Jean Opsomer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2006
* USD 72,565.00

This grant will support the purchase of high-performance computing equipment for
four research projects that require large amounts of intensive computing. In
"Numerics for Dynamical Reliability and Almost Invariance," the investigators
will develop methods for evaluating exit distributions from "good" regions of
the state space to failure regions, for random dynamical systems.
Computationally, this problem involves statistical simulation, multi-parameter
optimization, computational control, and computational geometry. In "Exploration
of Massive Data Sets with Emphasis on Visualization," the investigators will
develop pre-processing methods to obtain multi-resolution, indexed reduced data,
that can be explored in a real-time, interactive visual data mining tool. In
"Multiple-Treatment Time-Course Microarray Experiments," the investigator will
use computationally intensive resampling techniques to obtain a robust and
powerful method for identifying genes of biological interest. In "Variance
Estimation and Related Problems in Complex Sample Surveys," the investigators
will investigate the use of resampling methods and Bayesian methods of variance
estimation, applied to regression estimators under complex
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Numerics for Dynamical
Reliability and Almost Invariance" will provide methods for computing failure
probabilities of complicated systems like power transmission and communications
networks, as well as biological systems. "Exploration of Massive Data Sets with
Emphasis on Visualization," will develop dynamic graphics tools for large
datasets that will be capable of detecting anomalies, rare features, and usual
deviations from trends that are difficult to detect using numerical procedures.
The methods will be applied to data collected from climate monitoring, global
land use studies, mapping the sky, and fraudulent network activity. "Multiple-
Treatment Time-Course Microarray Experiments" will develop statistical methods
to enhance the ability of biological researchers to discover the functions of
genes and to understand how genes act together to carry out essential biological
processes. In "Variance Estimation and Related Problems in Complex Sample
Surveys," the investigators will develop methods for quantifying uncertainty in
surveys in which traditional variance estimation approaches are not practical.
Applications include the National Resources Inventory of the US Natural
Resources Conservation Service and the Current Population Survey, conducted by
US Census Bureau.&lt;br/&gt;