* 0421410
* Acquisition of a Powder X-ray Diffraction System for Earth Science Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Ian MacDonald, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2005
* USD 120,000.00

0421410&lt;br/&gt;Naehr&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) grant supports acquisition of a basic powder X-ray diffractometer system
for qualitative and quantitative phase analysis of geologic materials to enhance
research and teaching at Texas A&amp;M University - Corpus Christi (TAMU - CC).
The XRD will greatly enhance the research capabilities of the PI and co-PIs in
the Department of Physical and Life Sciences in the College of Science and
Technology. Examples of research projects that will benefit significantly from
the requested X-ray diffractometer system include: (1) Investigations of (a)
diagenetic processes caused by the occurrence of methane and gas hydrate and (b)
the formation of diagenetic barite and silicate minerals in sediments from the
Peruvian Continental Margin. (2) Mineralogical studies of authigenic seafloor
deposits at sites of active submarine fluid expulsion in the Gulf of Mexico
region to elucidate the geochemical environment at these sites. (3)
Mineralogical analyses of cold seep carbonates to complement studies on the U/Th
systematics of authigenic seafloor deposits from newly discovered seep sites in
the southern Gulf of Mexico. (4) Quantitative and qualitative phase analysis of
soil and sediment samples as part of the ongoing effort to study radon gas
exhalation in the context of the reverse stratigraphy of the South Texas uranium
mines. The XRD will be available on a hands-on basis to students in upper-level
laboratory courses, and thus will also positively impact educational efforts at
TAMU-CC. TAMU-CC is a minority serving and non-PhD granting institution and
several cross-disciplinary research projects have recently been undertaken, with
the goal to increase the number of undergraduate students, especially women and
students from minority groups, involved in scientific research. These
undergraduates participate in the research activities of the PI and co-PIs and
are integral to our research program. Many of these students were funded through
an NSF Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (AMP) grant. In addition
to student research activities, X-ray diffraction analyses will be integrated in
several undergraduate geology and chemistry courses (Mineralogy, Marine
Geoscience, Advanced Organic Chemistry) as well as select graduate courses
affecting up to 100 students per year. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;