* 0421537
* MRI: Acquisition of a Proteome Analyzer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Alison McCurdy, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 347,328.00

A grant has been awarded to California State University-Los Angeles (Cal State
L.A.) under the direction of Dr. Jamil Momand for partial support of a Proteome
Analyzer. In recent years it has been established that each human can express
25,000 different proteins from the genome. Using this knowledge, the scientific
community has been able to increase its understanding of how the timing and
expression levels of these genes affect the behavior of cells yet the exact
timing of the expression of genes during development and the response of the
genes to environmental toxins is not completely known. To understand these
secrets one needs to analyze the proteome-the complete set of proteins expressed
in an organism. Isolated proteins will be fragmented and the masses of the
fragments will be measured. The precise measurement of the fragment masses is,
in fact, a fingerprint of the protein. Public databases accessible through the
internet will be used identify the protein based on the fingerprint. The goal of
the project is to increase the understanding of how protein expression and
modification is altered by environmental pollutants, drugs, natural development,
diseases and genetic mutations. The Proteome Analyzer is a powerful tool that
can identify each protein and measure subtle changes in each protein's behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Proteome Analyzer will be used by seven investigators
performing research with undergraduates and Masters Degree students at Cal State
LA. For example, Dr. Momand's laboratory will identify proteins that increase
expression in response to high levels of hydrogen peroxide. Dr. Vellanoweth will
identify plant transcription factors that bind to DNA elements and identify
proteins associated with the bolting process in flower development. Dr. LaPolt's
laboratory will examine differences in patterns of protein expression in the
pituitary glands of young cyclic versus middle-aged acyclic persistent-estrous
female rats. Dr. Krug's laboratory will compare the proteins expressed during
development in the marine mollusc Alderia modesta. The Proteome Analyzer will
constitute part of a new laboratory course that will train undergraduates in the
use of three pieces of equipment. In this course students will learn how to use
the Proteome Analyzer, a new 600 MHz NMR, and a new Electron Spin Resonance
machine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cal State LA is a Minority-Serving Institution
that has made a major impact on the educational and research experiences of
minorities. Cal State LA graduates a very large number of students with Hispanic
ancestry in the US. It has an excellent reputation in providing bridges to top-
rated Ph.D. programs for its undergrad and graduate students. The acquisition of
the Proteome Analyzer will give its motivated faculty a research tool to enable
them to perform cutting-edge research. Because the Proteome Analyzer will be
incorporated into the curriculum of a new laboratory course, it will provide
valuable training to all Cal State LA students pursuing molecular life science
degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;