* 0421496
* MRI: Development of Resonant Cavity-Based UV and Mid-IR Remtosecond Laser Light for Direct and Pump-Probe Photoemission Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* R. Jason Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 541,126.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports instrument
development at the University of Colorado. Resonant-cavity-based sum and
difference frequency generation will be used to produce the highest intensity to
date of high repetition-rate femtosecond laser light in the difficult-to-obtain
UV and mid-IR spectral regimes. The laser developments will be useful for a
diverse set of studies in physics, chemistry, and biology. The principal
scientific motivation is to utilize the light for the brand new techniques of
laser-based angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and pump-probe
laser based ARPES for the study of electron dynamics. Among the problems to be
addressed are the physics of high temperature superconductors (HTSC) and
colossal magnetoresistive (CMR) oxides, as well as the chemistry of excited
state dynamics in surface reactions and
desorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program supports instrument development at the University of
Colorado. Researchers at the University of will develop new capability to
generate the highest intensity to date of very short laser pulses (femtosecond
time scale) at a high repetition-rate (~100 million pulses per second) in the
difficult-to-obtain ultravioler and mid-infrared spectral regimes. The laser
developments should be useful for a diverse set of studies in physics,
chemistry, and biology. The high power laser lights willbe used to perform
photoelectron spectroscopy, which is a technique to study the quantum mechanical
energies and motions of electrons in various materials. Among the problems to be
addressed are the physics of high transition temperature superconductors (HTSC)
and colossal magnetoresistive (CMR) oxides, as well as the nature of chemical
reactions which occur at surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;