* 0421521
* MRI:  Phase I of an Advanced Spectromicroscopy Facility: Acquisition of a Combined Confocal Optical and Atomic Force Microscope, and an Enhanced FTIR Imaging Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Gang-Yu Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 354,000.00

This proposal represents phase I of our long-term plan for the development of a
state-of-the-art spectromicroscopy facility specializing in investigating the
interactions of nano- and micro-structures with soft materials, including
polymers, inorganic-organic composites, and biosystems such as proteins, cells,
viruses and bacteria. In addition to high-resolution structural
characterization, the instruments in the facility allow the studies of the
kinetics, mechanism and dynamics of these interactions. These investigations are
critical for realizing the potential applications of nanoscience in modern
materials science and biotechnology. In phase I, we propose the acquisition of a
combined confocal optical and atomic force microscope (CCOAFM). The CCOAFM is
the first of its kind from Asylum Research, which allows simultaneous
acquisition of high-resolution AFM images and multichannel confocal microscopy
images. A key feature is the closed-loop and non-tube based AFM scanner, which
effectively reduces drift, increases scanning speed, and allows integrated and
concurrent confocal imaging. Moreover, the setup is modular allowing subsequent
additions of advanced spectroscopy features in phase II. The scientific projects
address manipulation of thin films and nanostructures, crystal growth
mechanisms, production and properties of inorganic-organic composite materials,
immunoprocesses such as allergy and initial viral infection, and the feasibility
of using artificially engineered 2D nanostructure arrays or nano and
microfunctional lipid bilayers as near-native hosts to probe the dynamics of
protein-lipid and protein-protein interactions related to cell surface dynamics
and signaling. These projects represent the thrust areas of an organized
research unit (ORU) at UC Davis: Nanomaterials in the Environment Agriculture
and Technology (NEAT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NEAT ORU aims to bring students
to the forefront of nanoscience and nanotechnology by providing
interdisciplinary research projects, state-of-the-art facilities, and advanced
educational programs. Complementary to the existing programs studying hard
materials, such as catalysts, magnetic and optical materials, this proposal
intends to equip the NEAT students with solid fundamental knowledge and skills
to identify, approach, and understand the advantages and limitations of
nanomaterials in the context of advanced soft materials, and biotechnology. With
the support of NSF-IGERT, NEAT has offered 46 graduate fellowships, graduated 6
Ph.D. degrees. The new facility, together with existing ones, will provide
advanced training and technical expertise for NEAT students to face modern
challenges in material characterization, nanotechnology, and nanobiotechnology,
which are critical for maintaining our nation's leadership in science, industry
R&amp;D, and homeland security. This proposed facility has also generated great
enthusiasm from local interdisciplinary programs, industry, community colleges,
and high schools. Several outreach programs will be expanded, as our existing
ties are strengthened by the impact and allure of imaging. The facility enhances
our existing interactions and communication with the NSF-supported CPIMA
program, the NSF Science and Technology Center for Biophotonics (CBST) program
led by UC Davis and LLNL, as well as the Molecular Foundry at LBNL. In addition,
many local corporations (Agilent, Alza, Kovio, Metrolaser, IBM, Integrated
Nanosystems, and Intermatix) have expressed their strong interests in beginning
or continuing collaborations with NEAT teams through the utilization of the
CCOAFM. We anticipate a new phase of NEAT-Industry partnership with the
establishment of the advanced spectromicroscopy facility.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal represents phase I of our long-
term plan for the development of a state-of-the-art instrument facility
specializing in high-resolution imaging and spectroscopy. In phase I, we propose
the acquisition of a combined confocal optical and atomic force microscope. The
instrument is the first of its kind from Asylum Research. This new combination
provides, by using confocal mode, three-dimensional visualization of materials
down to subcellular level resolution, and simultaneously, is able to zoom into
points of interests and to further image local structures with nanometer to
molecular resolution by atomic force microscopy. The proposed combination has
superior performance among the few competitors in stability, speed, resolution
and ability to do dynamic studies, mainly due to the revolutionary design of the
imaging scanner by Asylum Research. Research teams at UC Davis plan to use this
new instrument for production and visualization of nanostructures, for the study
of crystal growth mechanisms, for the production and properties of novel
inorganic-organic composite materials, for monitoring of the immunoprocesses
such as allergy and initial viral infection, and for testing the feasibility of
using artificially engineered nanostructures to mimic cell signaling. We
anticipate that results from these investigations would provide critical
information in realizing potential applications of nanoscience in modern
materials science and biotechnology. The proposed equipment and projects
represent the thrust areas of an organized research unit (ORU) at UC Davis:
Nanomaterials in the Environment Agriculture and Technology (NEAT). The new
facility, together with existing ones, will provide advanced training and
technical expertise for NEAT students to face modern challenges in material
characterization, nanotechnology, and nanobiotechnology, which are critical for
maintaining our nation's leadership in science, industry R&amp;D, and homeland
security.&lt;br/&gt;