* 0421900
* Testing Fundamental Tradeoffs between Power and Efficiency in the Translational Machinery of Bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Thomas Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 599,501.00

The machinery of protein synthesis is similar in all forms of life, and yet
despite recent progress in understanding the structure of ribosomes and the
sequence of events involved in translation, little is known about differences in
the production or performance of the translational machinery between organisms.
With support from the NSF, a research project was initiated to document and
explain the puzzling occurrence of different numbers of ribosomal RNA-encoding
genes in evolutionarily diverse bacteria. Results from this research suggest
that bacteria possessing multiple copies of the rRNA genes are more competitive
when resource availability fluctuates, due to their ability to synthesize
ribosomes rapidly, while those possessing few rRNA genes may be more efficient
at growth under constant, low-nutrient conditions. It was also revealed that the
average rate of protein synthesis per ribosome correlated with the position of a
strain along a spectrum between adaptation for episodic, fast growth and
adaptation for slow, resource-limited growth. These results form the basis for a
conceptual model that links bacterial physiology with organismal ecology and
evolution. The model focuses on protein synthesis, the single largest metabolic
expense in bacteria, and includes a proposed tradeoff between translational
speed and resource utilization efficiency. The model challenges the widely held
notion that the protein synthesis machinery in bacteria operates with little
variation in performance, and brings an ecological perspective to the recent and
spectacular advances in our understanding of the structure and function of
ribosomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of the proposed research are
to test aspects of this conceptual model and thereby advance our understanding
of the interplay between fundamental properties of bacterial physiology, ecology
and evolution, and to help graduate students develop the practical and
conceptual skills necessary to make discoveries in microbial physiology and
ecology. These goals will be met by addressing the following specific
aims:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Determine if there is a tradeoff between power and
efficiency in the translational machinery of bacteria, and the potential impact
of such a tradeoff on population growth rate and yield;&lt;br/&gt;2) Increase
our understanding of the physiological and ecological consequences to bacteria
maintaining different numbers of rRNA operons;&lt;br/&gt;3) Increase our
understanding of the interplay between the translation machinery and codon bias,
and explore the possibility of using this information to advance the analysis of
genomes from uncultivated bacteria; and&lt;br/&gt;4) Develop the capacity for
graduate and undergraduate students to think creatively and critically in the
design of experiments and interpretation of results, especially as they apply to
developing field tests of ideas resulting from research on pure cultures of
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will address the first three specific aims
by a combination of approaches, including: growth studies of bacteria that have
been selected to represent microbes positioned for rapid or efficient growth;
direct measurements of the rate and processivity of the translational machinery;
and examination of the structure of microbial communities in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying a genomic marker (rRNA operon copy
number) and the physiological mechanisms that underlie different bacterial life
histories would link bacterial energetics and ecology, and provide the basis for
predictive and testable models of how bacteria respond in specific environments.
This information would provide insight into the competitive success of microbes
present in natural and managed microbial systems, including bioreactors, waste
water treatment plants, and agricultural soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;