* 0421827
* Coalitions, Dominance and Egalitarianism
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mike Mesterton-Gibbons, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 88,294.00

Cooperation and dominance are central to the study of animal&lt;br/&gt;social
relations, a remarkable feature of which is the emergence&lt;br/&gt;and
persistence of linear dominance hierarchies or "pecking&lt;br/&gt;orders." For
well over half a century, the conventional&lt;br/&gt;theoretical approach to
cooperation and dominance has been to&lt;br/&gt;study them separately. But this
approach ultimately yields&lt;br/&gt;diminishing returns, because each
phenomenon incorporates crucial&lt;br/&gt;aspects of the other. On the one hand,
a dominance hierarchy is a&lt;br/&gt;cooperative structure: well organized
groups, in which each&lt;br/&gt;individual knows and is fairly resigned to its
particular social&lt;br/&gt;status, are more productive than similar groups in a
constant&lt;br/&gt;state of organizational turmoil. On the other hand, there
are&lt;br/&gt;individual benefits to holding high rank within a
dominance&lt;br/&gt;hierarchy, and animals can help themselves obtain those
benefits&lt;br/&gt;by forming coalitions with others. The investigator studies
these&lt;br/&gt;connections between cooperation and dominance by developing
a&lt;br/&gt;suite of analytical and computational models to predict
the&lt;br/&gt;effects of coalition formation on the emergence and stability
of&lt;br/&gt;dominance hierarchies versus more egalitarian social
structures,&lt;br/&gt;and to identify conditions that favor each possible
outcome. The&lt;br/&gt;models are "games," i.e., mathematical models of
strategic&lt;br/&gt;interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There is no formal theory
to predict the effects of&lt;br/&gt;coalitions and domoinance hierarchies on
each other, yet such&lt;br/&gt;theory is urgently needed to guide and interpret
field studies in&lt;br/&gt;the biological and social sciences. The development
of such a&lt;br/&gt;formal theory also leads to advances in game-theoretic
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;Moreover, because there are good reasons to suppose
that&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms for social stability are broadly similar
across&lt;br/&gt;different kinds of groups, the project has likely implications
for&lt;br/&gt;conflict resolution among humans. In particular, the results
of&lt;br/&gt;the project should help to resolve an ongoing controversy
in&lt;br/&gt;anthropology between those who argue that egalitarian
societies&lt;br/&gt;are deliberately shaped by their members, with the political
rank&lt;br/&gt;and file creating a "reverse dominance hierarchy," and those
who&lt;br/&gt;stress that levelling mechanisms operate independently of
people's&lt;br/&gt;intentions. Finally, a central goal is to develop an online
game&lt;br/&gt;theory workshop for students in the life and social sciences.
All&lt;br/&gt;materials developed during the project -- in particular,
numerous&lt;br/&gt;game-theoretic computer programs -- are made freely
available&lt;br/&gt;through this web site. It therefore serves as a permanent
legacy,&lt;br/&gt;with the potential to strengthen the modelling skills of
every&lt;br/&gt;student of game theory.&lt;br/&gt;