* 0421178
* BE/CBC: Complex Interactions Among Water, Nutrients and Carbon Stocks and Fluxes Across a Natural Fertility Gradient in Tropical Rain Forest
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Richard Hall, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,638,730.00

0421178&lt;br/&gt;Oberbauer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world's tropical rain
forests play a disproportionately large role in the global carbon budget. Their
current and future carbon balance is poorly understood and remains controversial
because of large gaps in our understanding of carbon cycling in this biome. To
date relevant studies in these forests have largely been limited to few carbon
fluxes that were followed for short periods. For no topical rain forest has
there been a multi-year integrated study of multiple components of both
aboveground and belowground carbon cycling and how they interact with and are
controlled by water, nutrients, and climatic factors. This Biocomplexity project
will address these knowledge gaps to bring understand of tropical forest carbon
cycling to a new level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will build on complementary on-
going research in an exceptionally well-studied tropical rain forest (La Selva,
Costa Rica) for a first-time integrated study of forest carbon, nutrient, and
hydrological cycles. Our study will contrast the effects of different phases of
the ENSO cycle and will compare stands across a broad range of soil fertility
levels, thus representative of the fertility levels of many of the world's
tropical forests. The broad range of expertise represented in our team -
tropical forest ecology, plant ecophysiology, micrometeorology, forest
biogeochemistry, forest hydrology, ecosystem modeling, remote sensing,
invertebrate biology - will allow us to together address many interacting
aspects of the carbon, nutrient, and water cycles in this forest. With
complementary data from on-going studies at La Selva, this project will provide
a more comprehensive analysis of the forest carbon budget than has been attained
for any TRF. Because our studies will be continuous through almost three years
and for some data sets build on long-term measurements, we will be able to study
how inter-year variation in climatic factors such as temperature and rainfall
affect the complex interactions and feedbacks among carbon, nutrients, and water
in this ecosystem type. By studying all of these cycles in concert, through
time, and across a strong gradient of soil fertility levels, we will be able to
identify and quantify the complex constraints and feedbacks among all these co-
varying processes. We will integrate our findings by developing from our data an
empirically-based tropical rain forest version of the ecosystem process model
CENTURY. We will use this model to develop a generalizable, predictive
understanding of how TRF currently processes carbon, and TRF carbon balance is
likely to respond to the on-going changes in
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts - Through a many-faceted education
program, this project will convey both our research findings and the concepts of
Biocomplexity, global change, and ecosystem science, to diverse levels of
students decision-makers, and the general public. The research component of this
project will provide outstanding opportunities for intensive research training
by hands-on participation in interdisciplinary science in the tropics for a
postdoctoral fellow, graduate students, numerous undergraduate assistants, and
Costa Rican postgraduates and assistants. The project will be presented in the
form of lectures, field problems/walks, and informal interactions to the
thousands of undergraduate and graduate students in university-level field
biology courses that visit the field site annually. We have partnered with
Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden and the Organization for Tropical Studies with
outreach programs that will annually reach thousands of children, students and
the general public, both in the U.S. and in Costa Rica. Public education
components of the project target will raise awareness of the school children,
their teachers, and the general public to the connectivity of water, carbon and
nutrient processes in the tropics and how their effects can extend to the global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;