* 0421683
* A Monoclonal Antibody Toolkit for Functional Genomics of Plant Cell Walls
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Christopher King, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2009
* USD 3,876,000.00

A Monoclonal Antibody Toolkit for Functional Genomics of Plant Cell
Walls&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary &lt;br/&gt;List of Senior
Personnel&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael G. Hahn, CCRC and Department of Plant Biology,
University of Georgia (UGA)&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Geert-Jan Boons, CCRC and
Department of Chemistry, UGA&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Christopher S. King, College of
Veterinary Medicine, UGA&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Malcolm A. O'Neill, CCRC,
UGA&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: William S. York, CCRC and Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, UGA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Introduction&lt;br/&gt;Plant cell
walls are composed primarily of polysaccharides, many of whose structures are
complex due to multiple sugar components and branching between the sugars.
Available evidence suggests that over 2000 genes in a given plant may encode
enzymes involved in cell wall synthesis and modification. To date, only a
handful of these genes have been functionally identified and characterized. This
project will provide a large, diverse, well-characterized library of monoclonal
antibodies against plant cell wall polysaccharide structures as tools for the
functional identification of genes that encode cell wall biosynthetic and
modifying enzymes; genes for which there are limited alternative assays. The
availability of diverse antibodies against plant cell wall polysaccharide
structures will provide additional tools that are complementary to existing
genetic and biochemical experimental approaches for studies of plant cell walls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Description and Expected Outcomes&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals are: 1) To isolate monoclonal antibodies that recognize plant
cell wall carbohydrate structures either from hybridoma cell lines or from phage
display libraries. Mice will be immunized with diverse neoglycoproteins prepared
using cell wall extracts or purified poly/oligosaccharides isolated from diverse
plants, and hybridoma cell lines will be generated from splenic lymphocytes of
the immunized animals. Resulting hybridoma cell lines, or alternatively,
antibody phage display libraries, will be screened for production of antibodies
reactive with plant carbohydrate structures. 2) To characterize in detail the
carbohydrate structure (epitope) recognized by the cell wall-reactive
antibodies. The antibodies obtained will be grouped by their abilities to bind
to a set of purified wall polysaccharides from diverse plants. The epitope
structure(s) recognized by selected antibodies in each reactivity group will be
characterized in detail. The ~100 unique antibodies generated during the course
of this project will be instrumental to those interested in the functional
characterization of genes involved in the biosynthesis and modification of plant
cell walls, and will also serve as valuable tools for chemical and biological
investigations of plant cell wall structure and function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outreach and Training&lt;br/&gt;An explicit effort will be
made to involve undergraduate students in the research carried out under this
grant. The participation of historically underrepresented groups in the research
will be fostered by recruiting undergraduate students through the UGA Summer
Undergraduate Research Program (SURP) (www.gradsch.uga.edu/rr/) and through a
newly established interaction between the Department of Plant Biology, the CCRC
and Morehouse College in Atlanta that brings Morehouse undergraduates to the
Department/Center for summer research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to
Expected Outcomes &lt;br/&gt;Information about all antibodies generated through
this project, including details about the polysaccharide structures recognized
by each antibody, will be made available immediately to the scientific community
via posting to an antibody database on the NSF-funded Plant Cell Wall
Biosynthesis Research Network web site (http://xyloglucan.prl.msu.edu/). A link
to this database will also be posted on the website of the Complex Carbohydrate
Research Center (CCRC) (http://www.ccrc.uga.edu/). The antibodies will be made
available to the research community without restriction through antibody stock
centers established at the CCRC at UGA (Athens, GA) and the Centre for Plant
Sciences at the University of Leeds (UK). Antibodies may be ordered from and
will be distributed by CarboSource
(http://www.ccrc.uga.edu/web/services/carbosource/CSS_home.html) and Plant
Probes (http://www.plantprobes.co.uk/). The distribution of the antibodies will
be self-supported by modest fees charged to those ordering the antibodies. The
fee structure will be posted to the CarboSource and Plant Probes web sites. The
hybridoma cell lines themselves will be replicated and stored in three
physically separated facilities: 1) the CCRC and 2) the Monoclonal Antibody
Facility of the College of Veterinary Medicine, both at UGA; and 3) with Dr.
Paul Knox at the University of Leeds.. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;