* 0421253
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Novel Raman and Fourier-Transform Infared Microscope for Research and Education in Bio-Materials, Nanoscience, and Forensics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Alfons Schulte, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 177,685.00

&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides support to establish a state-of-the-art combined
micro-Raman and Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) facility at the University of
Central Florida. While traditionally only a single spectroscopic technique -
either Raman or Infrared - has been coupled with microscopy, the novel Jobin
Yvon LabRam-IR instrument provides complete and highly specific vibrational
spectral fingerprinting and adds superior spatial resolution due to its confocal
optics. It also includes a near-infrared laser, which is essential for Raman
studies of cells and materials, which are fluorescent or strongly absorbing in
the visible region. The intellectual merit is derived from the ability to
spectrally and spatially probe materials with sub-micron precision. The detailed
knowledge of how molecules interact with their chemical environment will advance
our understanding of membrane proteins and drug-cell interactions. It will allow
us to determine how molecular structure determines self-assembly, supramolecular
size, chemical behavior of nanoparticles, and properties of optoelectronic
devices. In forensics it will accelerate the detection of crime scene evidence
and identification of hazardous materials. In planetary science it will advance
new methodologies for analysis of mineral assemblages relevant to the
geochemical evolution of asteroids and planets. The broader impact of the next
generation instrumentation will be new cross-disciplinary collaborations and the
integration of research and education, both at the undergraduate and graduate
levels. The Raman / FTIR microscope will greatly strengthen funded and planned
research efforts as well as partnerships with industry and minority
institutions. It will enable research in forensics which may lead to more
efficient methods to detect concealed explosives. The interdisciplinary facility
will provide an integrated spectroscopy resource for advanced student learning
and transfer of research findings into the industrial sphere.&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports the acquisition of a combined Raman and Fourier-Transform
Infrared microscope at the University of Central Florida, under the direction of
Dr. Alfons Schulte, to create an interdepartmental focus for in-situ molecular
characterization and imaging of materials on the micro- and nano-scale. The
instrumentation will be a unique tool for the analysis of biological and man-
made nanostructures, optical materials, and semiconductor devices. It will
enable non-destructive trace detection in forensics application, particularly
with minuscule amounts of explosives and hazardous biological materials. In
planetary science it will establish new methodologies for analysis of mineral
assemblages and help to shed light on the geochemical evolution of asteroids and
planets. The broader impact of the novel instrumentation will be new cross-
disciplinary collaborations and the integration of research and education, both
at the undergraduate and graduate levels. It will bring together a diverse group
of faculty across disciplines and encourage collaborations between university
researchers, government organizations, and industry. Students from UCF and
minority institutions will benefit through involvement in cutting edge research
and bring their expertise to high-tech companies in the Florida I4-corridor.
&lt;br/&gt;