* 0421961
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Robert Olsen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 439,999.00

This project is establishes a partnership between Washington State University
(WSU) and Columbia Basin College (CBC) offering scholarships to academically
talented but financially needy students pursuing BS degrees in engineering,
computer science and mathematics.

Well prepared students are identified through an existing Math Engineering
Science Achievement (MESA) program that is designed to encourage
underrepresented middle and high school students to complete the academic
prerequisites necessary to enroll in programs leading to BS degrees in
mathematics, engineering and science. This program is well established in
several middle and high schools in the area, and had significant success in
producing students who earn BS degrees in science and engineering.

Student services are in place both at WSU and CBC that have been shown to be
successful at assisting students similar to those targeted here during both the
transition from high school to college life and the remainder of their academic
career. These services include "bridge" programs during transitions between
different institutions, free tutoring for core courses and affinity groups that
provide encouragement for students during their studies. Where appropriate, the
programs involve the entire family unit since they are a very important
influence on decisions made by students in the targeted area.

A significant result of this project is the enhanced educational achievements by
students from Hispanic backgrounds. Many of these students enter the local
workforce at one of the numerous corporations in the targeted areas of the state
of Washington. These corporations have indicated that they are 1) interested in
providing mentors, shadowing opportunities and internships for students in this
program, 2) very interested in hiring the students upon graduation with a
baccalaureate degree and 3) interested in continuing the funding for the program
after the NSF funding in no longer available. Thus, another positive result is
increased cooperation between industry and educational institutions.