* 0421423
* MRI:  Development of a System for Interactive Analysis and Visualization of Multi-Terabyte Datasets
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Paul Woodward, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This project, creating a new cluster computer design targeted at interactive
exploration of datasets tens of terabytes in scale, supports analysis and
visualization of massive datasets. Research efforts concentrate mainly on
genomics and bioinformatics, cosmology and geophysics, and computational fluid
dynamic (turbulence and stellar convections). For the purpose of rendering, in
near real-time, datasets whose render information requires up to 2TB of
simultaneously active storage, a large system consisting of 80 dual processor
nodes with a massive amount of disk space will be used for the visualization
task. The visualization system will allow slightly more leeway for exploratory
viewing of interactions among multiple variables at multiple time slices.
Motivated by the need to interactively explore voluminous datasets, the system
supports interactive analysis and visualization that follows any interactively
specified and/or modified path through the 4 dimensions examining all the data
along that path by streaming this data, potentially replicated at each of 80
network nodes, into the memories at a rate that matches the node's ability to
perform significant analysis and/or visualization operations on the data and to
display the results for the user at high resolution on viewing screens as large
as the LCSE's 13 Mpixels Power Wall. Volume visualization and various kinds of
pattern matching and cross correlation target this data. The design goals
require significant research in scientific visualization, data management, data
storage and cluster data sharing, as well as prority-based job
scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The development of this system
involves many students and postdocs in the collaborating disciplines. The system
will be used in instruction as well as in research leading to advance degrees.
The computer science department at Fond du Lac Tribal and community College in
Cloquet Minnesota will also benefit from this project due to the existing
collaboration of the Laboratory for Computational Science and Engineering (LCSE)
with this Native American serving college. LCSE has also shared its technology
developments and software. Once again, the developed software will be made
available over the Web in Open source format.&lt;br/&gt;