* 0421986
* RUI: Heavy Metal Detoxification in Crustaceans
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Gregory Ahearn, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2008
* USD 606,121.00

This study will investigate the membranes, cells, tissues, and organs of
crustaceans involved in heavy metal detoxification. The overall objectives of
this research will be to disclose how the gastrointestinal tract, blood, and
excretory system of the American lobster, Homarus americanus, isolates and
eventually eliminates potentially toxic environmental heavy metals obtained in
the diet. In this project, physiological and molecular biological techniques
will be used to characterize the mechanisms by which heavy metals such as
copper, zinc, and cadmium enter and exit gastrointestinal epithelial cells and
their organelles. In addition, these studies will extend to uptake and efflux
processes for metals that occur in lobster hemocytes and antennal glands
(kidneys) since these other two sites are involved in the transport of metals
throughout the animal and their eventual excretion to the environment and are
therefore integral in the homeostatic regulation of these potentially toxic
substances. Proposed molecular studies will involve the use of cloning of
lobster-specific cDNAs to obtain full-length nucleotide sequences of heavy metal
membrane transporter proteins. These nucleotide sequences will be compared to
published analogous sequences from other organisms to determine the extent of
similarity between species. Antibodies to deduced amino acid sequences will be
synthesized and used in localization studies to determine the tissue and
cellular distribution of detoxification mechanisms in crustacean organ systems
and their potential roles in organismic metal homeostasis. These studies could
have broad implications for heavy metal homeostasis in cells of all organisms
since toxic properties of metals are ubiquitous phenomena. The research that
will be conducted at an undergraduate research institution that has just
initiated its first graduate program in Biology and will be partially used to
support research activities of both undergraduate students and Master of Science
graduate students. Research results from student activities will be presented at
scientific conferences and published in appropriate
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;