* 0421876
* 8th Annual Green Chemistry and Engineering Conference:  Student Scholarships
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2004
* Mary Kirchhoff, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 10/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

The American Chemical Society has partnered over the past several years with
NSF, EPA, and other federal funding agencies to support an annual Green
Chemistry and Engineering Conference. The topic of this meeting focuses on the
design, development, and implementation of chemical processes and products that
reduce or eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances in a way that
is both feasible and economically viable. Green chemistry and engineering are
important tools in preventing pollution at the source and in providing solutions
to long-term global challenges.&lt;br/&gt;Student scholarships will be provided
by this NSF funding for participation in the 8th Annual Green Chemistry and
Engineering conference on June 28-30, 2004 at the National Academies in
Washington, DC. The theme of the meeting is "Green Chemistry and Engineering:
The Business Imperative for Sustainability." The program will emphasize the
business case for green chemistry and engineering. Case studies will highlight
innovations in green chemistry and engineering that have been successfully
implemented and will explore what needs to be done to further the adoption of
these technologies in business. Topics involving fundamental scientific and
engineering advances related to green chemistry will be presented by faculty and
student participants. Technical talks will be given in such areas as alternative
solvents, catalysis, and benign synthesis and processing. &lt;br/&gt;A diverse
group of students from geographical locations across the United States has
received scholarships through NSF funding to attend these meetings. Over 90% of
the students have been involved in oral or poster presentations. Students have
an excellent opportunity to learn about the newest research developments in
their areas, dialog with other academic, industrial, and governmental
researchers, and advance their participation in professional
societies.&lt;br/&gt;