* 0421738
* Using Stable Isotopes to Understand Trophic Relationships: Experimental Tests of Mass Balance Models
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Carlos Martinez del Rio, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 446,089.00

Elements with the same number of protons but with a different number of neutrons
are called isotopes. Most of these isotopes are stable, they do not undergo
radioactive decay, and can be distinguished by their mass. The pathways that
organisms use to manufacture and transform organic molecules can be isotopically
discriminating. As a consequence, the isotopic composition of many materials,
including the tissues of organisms, often contains a label of the process that
created it. Ecologists and physiologists use these isotopic labels to detect the
imprint of processes at a variety of temporal and spatial scales. Plant
physiologists, atmospheric scientists, and geochemists have relied on the
measurement of natural stable isotope signatures for decades, and have drawn
inferences about processes from the signatures. Animal ecologists have been
latecomers to the field, but recently they have been active. A large variety of
questions in animal ecology have been solved with the aid of stable isotopic
approaches. Stable isotopes have been used to reconstruct animal diets, to
determine how resources are allocated to reproduction, to track animal
movements, to assess the flow of materials between ecosystems, to assign trophic
levels, and to determine the structure of food webs. Stable isotope methods have
been adopted by scientists at one of the fastest rates of almost any scientific
methodology. Stable isotope analyses play a role in integrative ecology
analogous to the role that PCR (polymerase chain reaction) plays in molecular
biology. In geochemistry, plant physiology, and plant physiological ecology,
progress in the use of stable isotopes has been stimulated by the vigorous
interaction of theory, laboratory research, and field study. Because animal
ecologists have adopted a descriptive approach to the use of stable isotopes,
the mechanisms that create isotope variation patterns remain unexplored. The
overarching objective of this project is to describe and test a theoretical
framework for the isotopic ecology of animals that is based on physiological
principles. The models that will be tested aim to explain 1) the factors that
govern the time course of isotopic incorporation and 2) one of the most widely
observed patterns in animal isotopic ecology: the enrichment in the heavy
nitrogen isotope (15N) observed across trophic levels. Briefly, many animals are
enriched in 15N relative to their diet. This enrichment in 15N is very useful
because it provides ecologists with a tool to estimate the trophic position of
an animal. For example, by measuring the nitrogen isotope composition of an
animal's tissues it can be determined whether the animal is a herbivore or a
carnivore. The models establish connections between well-studied physiological
observations and the patterns observed by ecologists that use stable isotopes.
The predictions of these models will be examined with experiments on three
species: a fish (Nile tilapia, Orechromis niloticus), a mammal (laboratory
mouse, Mus musculus), and a bird (house sparrow, Passer domesticus). Perhaps the
main distinguishing characteristic of this project is that experiments are
designed to both test qualitative hypotheses and to determine the adequacy of a
model. The models that structure this project make quantitative predictions
about the relationship between variables of ecological relevance (such as growth
rate, the efficiency with which animals use protein, an animal's nutritional
state, and the chemical composition of food) and the rate of an animal's
incorporation of 13C and 15N into its tissues. They also provide mechanistic
hypotheses to explain variation in the magnitude of the trophic level effect,
defined as the difference in nitrogen isotope composition of an animal's tissues
and that of its diet. The models predict that the trophic effect will decrease
with the rate and efficiency of nitrogen incorporation, but will increase in
animals in negative nitrogen balance. The research described in this proposal is
both relevant and timely because it will provide mechanistic grounding to a very
rapidly growing body of data. It will also permit establishing limits to the
inferences that ecologists can make from field and laboratory data, and perhaps
more importantly, it will bring about novel inferences from stable isotope
patterns. Ultimately, this project aims to create a predictive framework for
animal isotopic ecology that is firmly grounded in physiological mechanisms.