* 0421502
* MRI:      Acquisition of Equipment for a Face-to-Face Interaction Laboratory for Studying Cognitive, Neurocognitive, Social Cognitive, and Emotional Aspects of Human Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Coombs, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 06/30/2008
* USD 253,491.00

This proposal, from a MSI institution in an EPCoR state, develops a face-to-face
interaction room to enable improving the degree of analytical precision
available in studies of naturalistic sociolinguistic interaction. The research
aims at better quantifying the cognitive, physiological, and behavioral
correlates of both deception, and the ability to detect deception. Addressing an
understudied Homeland Security need (the ability of interviews to detect
deception in one-on-one and group interviews), the work specifically seeks to
design&lt;br/&gt; Training methods, to train humans to better detect deception
in interviews, and&lt;br/&gt; Automatic quantitative measures that may aid an
interviewer in detecting deception.&lt;br/&gt;Studying visual attention, PIs
will conduct experimental studies of cognitive and neural correlates of
deception, and of deception detection, in the context of interviews and
conversations. They will study EEG correlates of executive function and rapport
development, coded video to detect nonverbal language associated with deception,
and language-use correlates of deception using latent semantic analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Consistent with current national priorities in
today's climate of social uncertainty, this minority serving institution
addresses issues in homeland security. The lab will also be used to train
students to conduct research into multi-modal language understanding.&lt;br/&gt;