* 0421456
* MRI:Acquisition of a Large Beowulf Cluster for Research and Education in Science and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2009
* Ian Leslie, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2009
* USD 240,000.00

This project, (from a minority-serving institution in an EPCoR state) acquiring
a 128 processor Beowulf cluster interconnected by Myrinet running the Linux
Operating System, enables research in multiprocessor design, natural hazard
assessment, medical cardiology, and nanobiotechnology. Specifically, the cluster
will service the following research projects:&lt;br/&gt;Development of Accurate
Analytical Cache Models Using Intrinsic Locality&lt;br/&gt;Bioelectromagnetic
Analysis and Optimization&lt;br/&gt;Validation of a Physics-based Wildfire
Model&lt;br/&gt;Nanobiotechnology&lt;br/&gt;Contributing to the body of
knowledge and understanding in computer architectures, nanobiotechnology,
bioelectromagnetics, and the environmental sciences, the equipment fulfills the
need of a high-performance computational platform to enable the research of the
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Some significant research
activities, such as wildfire modeling, modeling of cardiac electromagnetic field
and currents, and phytoremediation, can reasonably be expected to save lives and
property. Thus the research is bound to have a high impact on society as well as
education in this minority serving institution. Furthermore, the work exhibits
strong emphasis on learning, communication, and interaction across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;