* 0421142
* NEESR-SG:     Evaluation of Ground Rupture Effects on Critical Lifelines
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Michael O'Rourke, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 03/31/2009
* USD 2,000,000.00

The research addresses a fundamental problem affecting all underground
lifelines, namely the effects of large differential ground deformation on buried
pipeline and conduit performance. The research will produce a seminal outcome
through state-of-the-art modeling and quantification of earthquake-induced
ground movement effects on lifelines. It also will improve the design and
construction of lifelines affected by landslides, mining, extraction of
subsurface fluids, and underground construction. The research deliverables
include, as a minimum: 1) systematic assessment of lifeline performance under
permanent ground deformation, 2) quantification of serviceability and ultimate
limit states for critical lifelines, 3) design guidelines, 4) experimental
databases for benchmarking future numerical models and guiding the evolution of
numerical simulations for soil-structure interaction, and 5) validation and
guidance for advanced materials as well as sensor and robotics deployment in
underground conduits. The research will be performed through physical modeling
using the Cornell Large Displacement Soil- Structure Interaction Facility for
Lifeline Systems and the Rensselaer 150 g-ton Geotechnical Centrifuge in
combination with advanced computational simulation. The 4-year program is
organized according to a matrix management approach in which lifeline response
to a comprehensive suite of ground rupture patterns is systematically
investigated and checked through large-scale experiments, centrifuge tests, and
numerical simulation. Technical Merits: The research team at Cornell and
Rensselaer has extensive experience in the design, siting, and construction of
underground lifelines, as well as laboratory and field testing of
pipelines/conduits. They have worked extensively together and have earned a
strong national and international reputation for their contributions to
lifeline, geotechnical, and structural engineering. Moreover, they will follow a
meticulous and systematic plan for the research that is thoroughly integrated
and managed. They will use world-class NEES facilities that were constructed
specifically for this type of investigation. Research investments through the
proposed project will be leveraged into improved practices for water, electric
power, gas and liquid fuel, telecommunication, transportation, and wastewater
conveyance lifelines representing hundreds of thousands of km of US facilities
critical for the delivery of community resources and services. Broader Impacts:
The proposed project addresses safety and reliability of critical infrastructure
while also creating an innovative outreach program with the Sciencenter of
Ithaca, NY. The project team will develop a 300-SF museum exhibition on
earthquake engineering and will explain how engineers at NEES sites study
earthquake effects using networked experimental facilities. An interactive shake
table that can be controlled by anyone on the Internet will allow museum
visitors, school classes, and home users to participate in earthquake
engineering experiments, reaching an estimated 600,000 individuals over four
years. The project will model a process for how other NEES sites can link with
400 science centers throughout the U.S. The project involves substantial
collaboration with industry, including ADS, Inc., Corning, Inc., Exxon Mobil,
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, Phillips Driscopipe, Inc., Tokyo Gas
Co., Ltd., and ULC Robotics, Inc. Hence, the research results will be guided by
industry for maximum impact in practice, continuing education of the U.S. work
force, and nationwide dissemination in infrastructure projects. The project will
receive assistance from Cornell in supporting women and minority summer research
experiences for undergraduates, and will benefit from a Sciencenter program that
will support teenage museum guides from underserved communities. Additional
undergraduate support will be sought through the NSF REU program, graduate
students will be supported, and research results will be integrated into courses
taught by the PIs and their colleagues at Cornell, Rensselaer, and other
institutions.