* 0421047
* Development of phase-modulated ultrashort laser pulse technology for probing molecular dynamics, optical switches and materials, and coherent control of multiphoton microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* James Dye, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 816,035.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Marcos
Dantus and colleagues in the Department of Chemistry at Michigan State
University will develop phase-modulated ultrashort laser pulse technology for
probing molecular dynamics, optical switches and materials, and coherent control
of multiphoton microscopy. The investigators will develop the necessary
technology for two unique systems based on ultrashort femtosecond (fs) pulses
with pulse characterization methods with unparalleled sensitivity that is
directly linked to active phase and amplitude compensation. System A will be an
ultrabroad-bandwidth sub-9 fs laser that will require a specially modified
amplitude and phase modulator setup that minimizes dispersion and compensates
third and fourth order phase distortions. This source will be used to achieve
unprecedented selective excitation of molecular probes, as required for
functional imaging, for example, using coherent laser control methods developed
at Michigan State University and elsewhere. System B will be an amplified sub-20
fs laser source using a two-dimensional pulse shaper to achieve single-shot
nonlinear optical excitation spectra of novel materials and nonlinear
chromophores over a broad bandwidth. This will use binary pulse shaping
technology combined with a novel two-dimensional optical phase modulator. This
development will enhance the speed and accuracy of nonlinear optical
spectroscopy by orders of magnitude. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of
interdisciplinary scientific projects linked to biophysics, telecommunications,
and advanced materials, will benefit from the development of these systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;