* 0421530
* Thresholds of Vegetation Change Following N Deposition in Southern California Ecosystems
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2011
* Edith Allen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/28/2011
* USD 1,926,594.00

This project will examine the influence of anthropogenic nitrogen (N) deposition
on thresholds of vegetation-type conversion caused by invasive annual grasses.
Invasive plants have dramatically altered many semiarid ecosystems of the
western United States, but N deposition may exacerbate the problem. The
conceptual framework for this effort is based on complex systems theory,
including modeling non-linear, non-equilibrium dynamics to determine thresholds
at which N deposition and fire irreversibly change ecosystems ranging from
desert to forest. The impacts of N deposition varies as a function of ecosystem
proximity to major N emission sources, meteorology, and soil physical and
chemical conditions. N emissions in this region originate primarily from
internal combustion engines as nitrate, and secondarily from agriculture as
ammonium. This project proposes to identify sources of N deposition, describe
atmospheric transport of N, quantify rates of deposition across landscapes, and
subsequently determine the N supply rate to vegetation. Biogeochemical,
hydrological, fire, and landscape transition models will then be used to show
how elevated N and fluctuating precipitation affect grass biomass, the fire
cycle, and vegetation change in the different ecosystem
types.&lt;br/&gt;Methods: The research will have two major components. First, it
will describe N deposition to different ecosystems in the southern California
air basin. The hydrological, carbon, and nitrogen cycles will be coupled since
together they control the movement of N, and interannual variability in
vegetation growth. Researchers will examine the relationships between modeled N
deposition and vegetation response from 1982 to the present. They will also
model N deposition expected in the future as a result of projected urban and
agricultural land use changes, comparing possible impacts associated with three
urban development scenarios. Second, they will examine vegetation composition
along N deposition gradients and resample historic vegetation plots to determine
changes in plant diversity, and use remote sensing to detect large-scale
vegetation changes. Researchers will measure N inputs, turnover, and losses in
soils, and conduct fertilization experiments in desert, forest, and shrubland
ecosystems to determine thresholds of change under increased N loading.
Vegetation change will be modeled using fire and landscape transition models.
These results will be coupled with the atmospheric model to show the effect on
vegetation for several N deposition scenarios in 2018.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This research will have relevance far beyond southern California since
the processes of urbanization and N deposition are occurring around the world,
and to a range of ecosystems from arid to mesic. This effort will be one of the
few to couple biogeochemical and landscape transition models to show how N
deposition, variation in precipitation, and exotic invasions promote non-linear
changes in different ecosystem types. The research will promote our
understanding of complexity theory by comparing four ecosystem types, each
responding with its own threshold and emergent properties to N deposition.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will examine complex dynamics of
landscapes impacted by emissions caused by changing human demographics and
population growth. The controls on plant invasions and their further impacts are
not well known, so the results of this research will have implications for
regional planning efforts and for emissions regulations. The educational and
outreach components of the project include working with local programs to
educate the public and school children about N deposition, organizing a regional
conference on N deposition for land managers, legislators, and scientists, and
working with federal, state, and local agencies on Habitat Conservation Planning
efforts for sensitive species subject to air pollution and invasive species. The
project will provide research opportunities for a diverse student population,
which will be augmented by advanced seminar courses led by an interdisciplinary
research team. &lt;br/&gt;