* 0421803
* Comparative Genomics of Papaya Chromosomes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Andrew Paterson, Hawaii Agriculture Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* TEST user
* 01/31/2006
* USD 1,534,515.00

Papaya (Carica papaya L.) is a principal fruit crop of tropical and subtropical
regions worldwide. Papaya fruit is a major export commodity in Hawaii, and is
also in production in Florida, the Rio Grande Valley of Texas, and southern
California. Papaya trees are grown for both fruit and papain, a commercially
valuable proteolytic enzyme. Papaya is one of the few plant species which fruit
throughout the year and can produce ripe fruit in as little as nine months from
planting. A papaya tree may live for 25 years or longer, bearing continuously
with one or more fruit in each leaf axil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Papaya has male,
female, and hermaphrodite sexes, with a primitive Y chromosome that provides a
unique opportunity to study sex chromosome evolution and sex determination. Sex
chromosomes in animals are ancient - about 300 million years old, and
Y-chromosomes are genetically eroded. Flowering plants appeared about 130-200
million years ago and plant sex chromosomes evolved more recently. The Silene
genus with its estimated 20 - 25 million-year ancestry has generally been
thought to contain the most recently evolved XY system known in eukaryotes. Yet
90% of the Y chromosome in Silene is degenerated and suppressed for
recombination. The recently discovered primitive Y chromosome in papaya has a
small male specific region that comprises only about 10% of the Y chromosome.
This male specific region (MSY) shows much more moderate degeneration and
suppression of recombination. Thus the papaya system appears to be the most
recently evolved XY system known to date, offering potential insights into the
question of how evolution of the sex chromosome began. Unraveling plant sex
determination processes will have direct applications in production of crop
plants such as papaya, asparagus, spinach, black pepper, yam, and pistachio.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to explore the nature of incipient sex
chromosomes. The papaya MSY and the corresponding X-specific region will be
sequenced and characterized. To estimate the antiquity of the non-recombining
region, the extent of divergence of X and Y gene pairs along the region will be
calculated, giving special attention to candidate gene(s) for sex determination.
Comparing the X and Y DNA sequences and their surroundings will reveal types and
extent of chromosomal rearrangements and the role of transposable elements in
the degeneration of MSY. The relative position of MSY to the centromere of the
primitive Y chromosome will be clarified by pachytene and fiber Fluorescent In
Situ Hybridization (FISH) analyses. It is expected that this project will
generate candidate genes for sex determination and embryo lethality for the
papaya research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to project
outcomes&lt;br/&gt;DNA sequence data and trace files will be deposited in
GenBank, and project data made available at the websites of Hawaii Agriculture
Research Center (http://www.hawaiiag.org/harc) and University of Georgia
(http://www.plantgenome.uga.edu/). Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) clones
will be distributed by the Plant Genome Mapping Laboratory at the University of
Georgia and also deposited in a public BAC distribution center.&lt;br/&gt;