* 0421235
* Acquisition of a Multi-Collector Thermal Ionization Mass Spectrometer for the AIRIE Program
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Judith Hannah, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2006
* USD 499,822.00

0421235&lt;br/&gt;Stein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a new multi-
collector thermal ionization mass spectrometer (MC-TIMS) with multiple ion
counters marks a major leap forward in analytical capabilities for the AIRIE
Program at Colorado State University. We currently use two 35-year-old, single-
collector instruments that greatly limit both the kind of analyses we can do and
the efficiency of data acquisition. Frequent breakdowns and lack of spare parts
for our aging instruments have demanded huge expenditures of time and funds on
maintenance. The AIRIE Program has focused strongly on geochronology, developing
and proving methods based on the decay of rhenium (Re) to osmium (Os) in the
mineral molybdenite. This has been possible because of the relatively high
concentration of these elements in molybdenite. But the Re-Os system offers an
enormous range of other potential applications that are impossible to pursue
with single-collector instruments. Multiple collectors allow us to measure all
of the critical isotopic ratios simultaneously, greatly increasing both speed of
data acquisition and precision of the analyses. With multiple ion counters, we
will be able to make simultaneous measurements even for very low concentrations.
With these new capabilities, we will expand research to track the behavior of Re
and Os in the earth's crust and oceans, explore changes in the earth's oxygen
budget, develop new geochronometers (e.g., date the formation of gold), and
investigate new isotopic systems to address fundamental questions in particle
physics. Modern lab facilities will help us better attract top-quality students
and guest researchers. The AIRIE Program has a record of collaboration with
hundreds of scientists from the mineral industry, government agencies, and
academia. Our expanded capabilities will benefit all of these
constituencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;