* 0421457
* Acquisition of a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer for the Paleomagnetism Laboratory, Western Washington University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Bernard Housen, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2007
* USD 196,019.00

0421457 Housen

This Major Research Instrumentation Grant provides funds for acquisition of a
Princeton Measurements 3900-04 Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM), with high
temperature furnace, for the Western Washington University Paleomagnetism Lab.
The new VSM will provide opportunities to collect important new data that will
greatly augment the existing paleomagnetic and rock magnetic research programs
at WWU and will also enable new research lines and collaborative work to be
made. Existing research efforts focused on plate and terrane (micro-plate, or
deformed plate margin regions) kinematics and paleogeographic reconstructions,
use of magnetic fabrics as a structural tool in deformed rocks, and
magnetostratigraphic studies will all be greatly enhanced by the ability to more
completely characterize the magnetic mineralogy of rocks and sediments.
Additional new lines of research will involve expanded use of anisotropy of
high-field susceptibility as a petrofabric tool in deformed plutonic rocks,
fault zones and accretionary prisms, and as a measure of compaction-shallowing
of remanence in sedimentary rocks. Other new research efforts will also include
use of rock-magnetic properties to explore climatic changes recorded in Holocene
sediments cored from alpine lakes in the Cascade Range, and environmental
magnetism aimed at rapid and inexpensive detection of urban pollution in
regional lakes. The WWU Physics Department will also utilize the VSM for a
significant part of their research on the magnetic properties of advanced
semiconductors. A significant number of undergraduate and MS students in the WWU
Geology and Physics Departments, as well as visitors from within the region,
will benefit from this new device. ***