* 0421771
* US-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:  Symbolic and Numerical Methods for Geometric Modeling
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Ronald Goldman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 07/31/2010
* USD 30,000.00

0421771&lt;br/&gt;Goldman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research project addresses solutions for polynomial equations
systems and applications to problems in geometric modeling and molecular
biology. Ronald Goldman of Rice University and the GALAAD group at the French
National Institute for Research in Informatics and Applied Mathematics (INRIA),
led by Bernard Mourrain, will develop techniques in algebraic computation. The
GALAAD team will concentrate on polynomial equations and applications to
computational biology. This is complemented by Rice University's focus on
polynomial equations and their applications to computational geometric
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Many applications in
geometric modeling and computational biology require fast robust methods for
solving systems of polynomial equations. The investigators propose two
approaches to solving systems of polynomial equations: innovative resultant
techniques and numerical methods based on Bezier subdivision. They will also
implement their algorithms in the C++ library
SYNAPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed methods will be
applied to problems in geometric modeling and computational biology. To aid in
geometric modeling, they will investigate some approaches to computer
representations of shape and apply their techniques to more efficient solutions
to standard problems representing rational curves and surfaces. In computational
biology they will try to recover the three-dimensional structure of a molecule
from partial information generated by NMR experiments. The results may be useful
for automated drug design, protein folding and studies of cell properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also gives a U.S. graduate student training in
an international environment via research immersion with the INRIA group and
provides an opportunity to develop connections for future international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;