* 0421028
* MRI: Development of an Integrated Thin Film Growth System with Comprehensive  In-situ Characterization for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Yves Chabal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 380,000.00

This is an instrument development award from the Major Research Instrumentation
program to Rutgers University New Brunswick. A large-scale, integrated
instrument will be developed, which combines atomic layer deposition (ALD)
growth and UHV preparation chambers with a unique array of characterization
techniques, including medium energy ion scattering (MEIS), infrared absorption
spectroscopy (IRAS), scanning probe microscopy, as well as more conventional
surface probes. This instrument will significantly advance the forefront of
materials synthesis by coupling a promising and novel growth technique for a
wide range of materials with the in-situ characterization needed to identify,
understand, and ultimately tailor the key aspects of the growth process. It will
directly benefit research spanning the range from microelectronics to quantum
confinement. It will also play a key role in initiating collaborative work and
exposing students to a wide variety of techniques and industrial applications.
In particular, it will be the centerpiece of a recently NSF-funded IGERT program
on engineering bio-interfaces and various other interdisciplinary programs at
Rutgers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As devices become smaller, there is a need to
develop growth techniques to deposit one atomic layer at a time, to check that
this is done in a very uniform manner, and to do so over large, patterned areas.
A unique instrument will be developed that incorporates a process where atoms
can be deposited onto semiconductor surfaces very uniformly, one layer at a
time, and sophisticated techniques that make it possible to "see" each layer of
atoms individually. The growth technique is based on vapors reaction with
surfaces, but tailored to limit the deposition to only one atomic layer per
pass. The instrument will make it possible to make transistors and other devices
with a precision that was not possible before and to understand how each layer
is formed. Students will be trained on this state-of-the-art instrument and
interact with and interdisciplinary team of scientists from the fields of
physics, chemistry, material science, electrical and biomedical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;