* 0421033
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Nanomanipulation Device for Biological Electronic and Optoelectronic Samples and Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Bradley Layton, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,100.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds for the
acquisition of a Zyvex S100 nanomanipulator, a palm-sized device designed to be
used inside a scanning electron microscope. This equipment will be used to
support research on the following technologies: 1) manipulation of individual
protein structures such as those consisting of collagen with dimensions on the
order of 50 nanometers in diameter and 0.1 to 100 millimeters in length, 2)
positioning small-scale instruments to investigate how size affects mechanical
and electrical properties in structures such as nanowires, 3) manipulation of
nanotube-enhanced biological tissues, 4) microfabrication of optoelectronic
devices, 5) local gating of nanowire devices, and 6) general nanofiber
synthesis. The device is ideally suited for an academic environment due to its
user-friendly joystick interface which will allow students to quickly appreciate
and master techniques for manipulating matter at a scale smaller than is visibly
resolvable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Zyvex S100 will enable research in the
fields of nanoscale tissue engineering, computer engineering, and aerospace
engineering. It will enable researchers to test hypotheses regarding the
behavior of healthy, diseased, and engineered biological tissue. Specifically it
will enable current and future researchers to look at how nature arrived at the
current configuration of matter in living systems, guide pathologists toward
solutions for correcting disease at the molecular level, and aid tissue
engineers working at the scale at which living systems first evolved and self-
assembled. The Zyvex S100 will facilitate the building of smaller, faster,
cheaper devices, such as those constructed from metallic or polymer nanowires,
which will impact fields as diverse as computing, biochemical mass sensing, and
aerospace engineering where speed and precision are critical. The device will
help to enable the creation of large-scale biological tissues with tailored
material properties. The device will also be essential to the fabrication of
devices to record disease-related elevated pressures within living systems.