* 0421936
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Time Asymmetry and Relativistic Resonances
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Arno R Bohm, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 24,500.00

0421936&lt;br/&gt;Bohm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research between Dr. Arno Bohm, Physics Department,
University of Texas, Austin, Texas and an Egyptian team including Drs. Soliman
Komy and Hani Kaldass, Department of Mathematics, Helwan University, Helwan,
Egypt. The PIs will study a unified description of resonance and decay phenomena
in atomic, nuclear and relativistic particle physics. The subject has developed
from a merely mathematical endeavor to the solution of an important problem in
quantum physics: a unified theory of resonance scattering and decay phenomena.
Such a theory will overcome the ambiguity in the definition of mass and width
for relativistic resonances faced by the particle data group, e.g., for the
Weinberg Z-boson or the Fermi pion-nucleon resonance. The theory of resonances,
and connected with it a new quantum mechanical time asymmetry has become the
project of an international group of physicists, The International Quantum
Theory Group (www.ph.utexas.edu/bohmwww/index.html). A computer system in Cairo
will be upgraded to fulfill the needs for communication of scientific documents
and data. The expertise that one of the Egyptian team, H. Kaldass, had acquired
while building computers at DESY, will help develop in collaboration with
members of IQT Group, a system of PC's running linux. This will allow this team
to stay in closer contact with each other and with other experts in the IQT
Group. It will also allow the new generation of students and young scientists to
grow up in closer contact with each other. Dr. Komy who is a mathematical
physicist will be more concerned with the mathematical questions of the Rigged
Hilbert Spaces (also called Gelfand Triplets). He will adapt the general
mathematical theory to the specific needs for Hardy functions, and will also
coordinate the research of the junior scientists and the graduate and under-
graduate students. Dr. Kaldass is a specialist in this field from the physicist
point of view, and will work on the formulation of the physically relevant
questions and compare the theoretical results with the experimental data. In
particular he will apply this theory to resonance production. Dr. Bohm will work
on the question of the interpretation of the semigroup time zero (beginning of
time) with atomic physicists at Texas and in Germany. He will also work on the
theory of relativistic resonance. He will also coordinate the work of the
Egyptian researcher with the members of the International Theory Group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impacts The International Quantum Theory
Group holds annual workshops and publishes proceedings. Both A. Bohm and S. Komy
delivered lectures at the Lisbon meeting, which was a satellite of the
international Congress on Mathematical Physics. The PIs aim to join these
international efforts and hold one of the future workshops on time asymmetric
quantum theory and resonances in Cairo. The contacts via computers, together
with the reciprocal visits will enhance the scientific productivity, and will
lead to transfer of technology and to a better mutual understanding between the
young generations of the different countries. This project is being supported
under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;