* 0421583
* Acquisition of Equipment for Genetic Analyses and Long-Term DNA Storage
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Christopher Puttock, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 101,582.00

A grant has been awarded to the Bernice P. Bishop Museum under the direction of
Drs. Christopher F. Puttock and Shelley A. James to support the acquisition and
maintenance of a DNA genetic analysis system, associated sequence analysis
software and hardware, a gel analyzing system and spectrophotometer, and
equipment for long-term DNA storage. The Pacific Center for Molecular
Biodiversity (PCMB) was established at the Bishop Museum in 2001 to further the
museum's mission to address natural science and cultural history questions of
Hawai'i and the Pacific region through molecular research. Research productivity
has been hindered by instrument availability, prolonged delays due to
outsourcing for sequencing and genetic analysis, and the lack of ultra-cold
storage.

Acquisition of instrumentation through the award will greatly enhance the
research capacity and training for the study of the biota of Hawaii and the
Pacific region in five key areas: specimen preservation; biodiversity;
systematics and ecology; identification and forensic studies; and bio-
anthropology. It will allow the integration of modern molecular studies with
traditional taxonomic studies of Bishop Museum collections. PCMB will store and
provide to researchers aliquots of genetic material of biota that are now rare
or otherwise unavailable for molecular analysis, thus maintaining the integrity
of Bishop Museum collections. New molecular research techniques will be
undertaken, with new protocols being developed in a timely manner unhindered by
instrument and outsourcing delays.

Support provided by this award will result in increased training and education
opportunities for scientists and students, particularly for Hawaiian and Pacific
Island native peoples and citizens of Asian-American descent by offering
internship and traineeship programs. PCMB will provide research opportunities
pertaining to Hawaii and the Pacific to be kept within the Hawaiian Islands,
while expanding the use of Bishop Museum collections by local, national and
international scientific research communities by providing samples of genetic
resources and encouraging the use of the available facilities and equipment.
Results of research are made available to scientists and the general public
through publication using web-based, electronic and traditional media.