* 0421913
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS):     Enrichment and Integration of Networked Computing Resources for the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Chi-Wang Shu, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2006
* USD 92,956.00

ABSTRACT

The Division of Applied Mathematics at Brown University is acquiring research
computing equipment dedicated to support of research in the mathematical
sciences. The main items to be purchased include: (1) high-bandwidth low-cost
storage optimized for use with the Lustre file system and existing Linux
clusters, (2) high-speed network components to support trunked-ethernet
communications between the compute nodes, storage, and graphics systems, (3)
high-end Linux client PCs for data analysis and visualization, and (4) a small
computer experimental facility to support collection and analysis of neural
spike-train data for the mathematical modeling and statistical analysis of
biological vision. The computing equipment will be used to carry out the
research of NSF-sponsored projects in numerical methods for partial differential
equations, mathematical modeling in brain science, and statistical procedures in
experimental neuroscience.

The research in applied mathematics is closely tied to applications in
engineering, physics, and the life sciences. The NSF-sponsored research focuses
on development of new mathematical and statistical methods designed for the
application areas. For example, some of the work on computational methods for
engineering is motivated by the need to design stealth aircraft. Also, the
research on new statistical methods is needed for the advancement of brain
science, to understand how information is encoded in neural spike trains. The
computer equipment provided by this grant is crucial for the ability of faculty
and students to create these new mathematical and statistical methodologies.