* 0421887
* SGER:  Connections between Mathematics and Biology in the High Schools:  An Experimental Program
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 07/31/2007
* USD 175,430.00

This exploratory program will investigate ways to connect the mathematical and
biological sciences in high school classrooms. The program will have a major
instructional materials development component through a module-writing activity
and through a research experience for high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teachers will learn about mathematical biology,
then will use their knowledge to construct modules for classroom use. They will
work with content experts in mathematics and biology, and will try their modules
in their own classrooms. Other teachers will try the same modules in different
classrooms. The modules will then be revised and
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The focus will be on
topics from computational biology and bioinformatics. Teachers will learn about
sequence alignment algorithms, finding the smallest number of mutations of a
certain type to switch one sequence into another, algorithms for finding a
sequence from its fragments, and other mathematical techniques. Specific topics
will involve trees, DNA fragment assembly, phylogenetic trees, tree parsimony
and genome rearrangements. Research projects for teachers will center around
physical mapping and the shortest common superstring problem. Research in
teaching and learning will inform the program, and in turn the program will
provide new insights into the process of interdisciplinary
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The program will train a group of
teachers to develop at the interface between the biological and mathematical
sciences and to bring interdisciplinary activities back to their schools. It
will disseminate the results widely through materials, presentations at
conferences, a website and a report. Teachers will learn about the nature of
interdisciplinary research by doing it. &lt;br/&gt;