* 0421177
* MRI:  Development of a Combination High Resolution and Low Current Density Inverse Photoemission Spectrograph for Research and Eduction
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert Bartynski, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 189,753.00

Recently, tremendous advances have been achieved in the development of new
materials such as highly correlated electron systems, nanoscale materials,
organic semiconductors and promising species for molecular electronics. While
photoelectron spectroscopy has played a central role in establishing key
properties of these materials, there has been markedly less progress towards
understanding the spectral function above EF. Inverse photoemission (IPE)
spectroscopy is the natural choice for probing this energy range, but high
current densities and low energy resolution limit its application to these
interesting systems. The proposed instrument will greatly relieve these
shortcomings and open to experimental scrutiny the spectral function above the
Fermi level of these interesting materials. The information gained from this new
instrument will enable intelligent design of candidate species for molecular
electronics or organic semiconductor applications. Similarly it will test our
current theoretical understanding of highly correlated electron systems by
experimentally probing the energy and momentum dependence of the spectral
function in a new regime. We will develop and construct the prototype for a new
generation of inverse photoemission spectrographs that will serve the dual
demands of modern materials science -- low current density and high energy
resolution -- while maintaining high count rates. This objective will be
achieved by a design principle that exploits the compatibility between a fast
(f/5) normal incidence grating spectrograph and the spatially extended linear
electron spot produced by either of two sources: a modified, high perveance
electron gun, and a high resolution electron energy monochromator. This dual
source approach will enable us to perform rapid exploratory measurements and
then investigate interesting features either with low current densities (~0.1
mA/mm2) or with high resolution (~ 50 meV) at good count rates (~ 100 Hz). The
instruments will serve the research community at the University of Delaware,
Rutgers University, and other neighboring institutions. With the proposed
instrument, the PI's will add to their strong track record of outreach both
within and out of the academic communities, as well as ensure members of
underrepresented groups have direct participation in our research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument will give
previously unattainable experimental access a wide range of problems in modern
condensed matter and materials physics, semiconducting organic materials,
organic molecular electronics, modern electronics, and superconductivity. This
new instrument will probe, with very high energy resolution, the unfilled
electronic levels in conducting systems with minimal perturbation of the other
charge carriers and minimal damage to the materials system. We propose a program
to develop and construct the prototype for a new generation of inverse
photoemission spectrographs that will serve the dual demands of modern materials
science -- low current density and high energy resolution -- while maintaining
high count rates. While traditional photoelectron spectroscopy has played a
central role in establishing key properties of the bonding and charge carriers
in the filled electronic levels of these materials, there has been markedly less
progress towards understanding the unfilled levels. Inverse photoemission (IPE)
spectroscopy is the natural choice for probing this energy range, but high
current densities and low energy resolution limit its application to these
interesting systems. The proposed instrument will greatly relieve these
shortcomings. The information gained from this new instrument will enable
intelligent design of candidate species for molecular electronics or organic
semiconductor applications. Similarly it will test our current theoretical
understanding of highly correlated electron systems, for example,
superconductors, by experimentally probing the energy and momentum dependence of
the spectral function in a new regime. The instruments will serve the research
community at the University of Delaware, Rutgers University, and other
neighboring institutions. With the proposed instrument, the PI's will add to
their strong track record of outreach both within and out of the academic
communities, as well as ensure members of underrepresented groups have direct
participation in our research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;