* 0421945
* Scientific Computing Research Environments in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* S.S. Ravindran, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2008
* USD 99,186.00

The support from this grant allows the Department of
Mathematical&lt;br/&gt;Sciences at the University of Alabama in Huntsville
to&lt;br/&gt;purchase and assemble on-site a 17-node, 34-processor Scyld
Beowulf&lt;br/&gt;Cluster&lt;br/&gt;using commodity personal computer
technology.&lt;br/&gt;This equipment is dedicated to the support of
computationally intensive&lt;br/&gt;applied mathematics research.
&lt;br/&gt;Major thrust areas of this research program include:&lt;br/&gt;Robust
feedback control of fluid flows and combustion,
bifurcation&lt;br/&gt;analysis&lt;br/&gt;for large scale systems, numerical
simulation of relativistic plasma&lt;br/&gt;and the modeling and simulation of
epidemics transmission.&lt;br/&gt;The projects specifically included in the
grant proposal are:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Robust feedback control of fluids and
combustion systems.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Bifurcation analysis for large problems:
algorithms, software,&lt;br/&gt;applications to MEMS.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Detailed
numerical calculation of the equation of state for a&lt;br/&gt;relativistic pair
plasma.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Modeling impacts of environment changes
on&lt;br/&gt;transmission of mosquito-borne
epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They develop complex mathematical
models, feedback control methods &lt;br/&gt;computational algorithms and sofware
for applications such as&lt;br/&gt;combustion instabilty for novel combustors,
reducing drag/increasing&lt;br/&gt;lift&lt;br/&gt;for better maneuverability of
vehicles, dynamics&lt;br/&gt;of Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) products,
dynamics&lt;br/&gt;of mosquito borne diseases and impacts of environmental
changes,&lt;br/&gt;and astrophysical simulations of high energy
sources.&lt;br/&gt;The impact of these projects will be felt across a broad
spectrum of&lt;br/&gt;problems in science and engineering and in the training of
a new&lt;br/&gt;generation of applied mathematicians skilled in parallel
computation.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the machines will greatly enhance
departmental research&lt;br/&gt;and education infrastructure at all levels. They
will be made&lt;br/&gt;available to all departmental faculty, undergraduate
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;