* 0421679
* ChromDB: Integrating Information About Plant Chromatin Proteins and Complexes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Nadja Wehmeyer, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,596,536.00

Eukaryotic cells package nuclear DNA in a variety of highly ordered structures,
collectively termed "chromatin". The primary function of chromatin is to
maintain a restrictive ground state wherein the DNA is inaccessible to the
transcriptional machinery but is accessible to specific transcriptional
activators and repressors that recruit multi-protein complexes capable of
remodeling chromatin locally to allow transcription to occur. ChromDB (Plant
Chromatin Database) was established originally as a project-specific database to
display the results of a previous Plant Genome Research Program grant that
examined the functional genomics of chromatin proteins in Arabidopsis and maize.
The Arabidopsis genomic sequence and, once available, the maize EST collection
were queried using protein domains from known yeast, fly, human, and nematode
chromatin genes to assemble a collection of putative plant chromatin proteins.
Chromatin proteins from rice and the single-celled alga Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii were added to the database to provide more phylogenetic perspective
to the database. This award supports the broad expansion of ChromDB from a
project-oriented database to a community database supporting the entire plant
biology community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complement of chromatin proteins
will be increased to include all plant species for which either genomic or cDNA
sequences are available in order to provide a comprehensive, comparative summary
of predicted protein domains, transcript splicing products, molecular
phylogenetic relationships and molecular signatures of selection. ChromDB will
integrate and display all available community data regarding gene function such
as mutant phenotypes, biochemical activities and properties, transcript and
protein expression patterns, physical and genetic interactions between genes and
proteins, and localization of chromatin proteins within the nucleus. ChromDB
will provide a public annotation forum for researchers to submit and present
this information with the submissions reviewed by an editorial advisory board.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An educational outreach program will provide experience
for high school teachers in the area of bioinformatics and functional genomics.
There are three objectives associated with this outreach: (1) to produce, in
partnership with teachers, a set of web-based, integrated teaching modules to
introduce students to the biological importance of chromatin by way of
discussions centered on DNA, genes, and chromosomes, as well introduce students
to the scientific method and experimental analysis; (2) to provide teachers with
working experience in select aspects of bioinformatics; and (3) to develop a
protocol for experiments to be conducted in classroom locations under
circumstances of limited supplies and equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
project-generated results and materials will be available at the database site,
http://www.chromdb.org/. &lt;br/&gt;