* 0421426
* Development of Submillimeter / Terahertz Instrumentation for Spectroscopy and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jaan Laane, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 08/31/2008
* USD 398,482.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, John Bevan
and colleagues in the Departments of Chemistry and Physics at Texas A&amp;M
University will develop submillimeter/terahertz instrumentation for spectroscopy
and dynamics. The investigators have recently developed a prototype frequency
and phase stabilized backward-wave oscillator based fast scan submillimeter
spectrometer capable of operating over the frequency range 240 to 540 GHz with
sub-kHz precision. This award will allow them to extend the performance to cover
the entire range of 75 GHz to 1.25 THz and beyond. These enhanced capabilities
and improved sensitivity will result in a more versatile instrument for
application to a wide variety of new experimental investigations, including a)
the study of low frequency intermolecular dynamics including model systems of
biological significance; b) spectroscopy of molecular ions at sub-Kelvin
temperatures; c) fundamental reaction processes associated with atmospheric
pollution; and d) the nature of molecular dynamics in ring molecules both in
ground and excited electronic states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed
instrumentation will enhance spectroscopic and dynamics research in the
Chemistry Department and for the recently established Center of Atmospheric
Chemistry and the Environment (CACE) at Texas A&amp;M University. It will be
available to postgraduate, graduate and undergraduate students as well as
students involved in the CACE Summer Research Initiative intended to increase
research participation by underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;