* 0421124
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Informational and Statistical Research Topics on Aging
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Ibrahim Ahmad, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 08/31/2006
* USD 19,368.00

0421124&lt;br/&gt;Ahmad&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research between Dr. Ibrahim Ahmad, Department of
Statistics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida and Dr. Hady Ahmed,
Department of Mathematical Statistics and Operations Research, Institute of
Statistical Studies and Research, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. In life
testing three notions dominate its development, these are the random life
itself, the random residual life at a specific time t and the equilibrium or
stationary random life. Based on various types of stochastic comparisons of
these random variables, classes of life distributions that characterize decay in
life have been introduced and studied in the literature for several decades now.
Past-developed notions, such as the Hazard Rate and the Mean Residual Life, have
proven useful in many areas including medicine, biostatistics, reliability and
quality and insurance. The PIs will study new notions that are important in
different studies as Forensic science (time since death), Geriatrics (studying
old age), Times since Failure (in production lines). These new notions include
the "Reversed hazard rate" and the "Mean inactivity time". From these the PIs
will define new classes that address life from new angles. The PIs will apply
this approach to the interrelations between basic reliability and life testing
functions, all to be defined in terms of stochastic comparison. The research
unifies the treatment of ageing families of life distributions, makes it easier
to relate a large number of such classes to one another and define containment
properties clearly. It also helps in defining physical interpretations of newly
formed classes as related to already known ones, and makes it much easier to
proceed with the statistical inference of classes of ageing distributions via
testing and estimation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broad impact: This
project will develop probabilistic properties of new notions for life estimation
and the classes defined based on them. It will provide characterizations of
these classes, formation of shock model classes and their inference (estimation
and hypotheses testing). The unifying approach gives practical values
(statistical and physical) to some definitions of ageing classes of life
distributions, and develops new statistical and probabilistic properties of such
classes. This should open the door for research in life testing multivariate
distributions via the new technology. The method is hoped to renew research
interest in many areas in reliability and life testing. In the inferential parts
the project will address cases of different sampling schemes usually usable in
the studies of life data such as censoring, truncation, micro-array data, and
panel data among others. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt
Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;