* 0421199
* Acquisition of a Nanoindentation System for Multi-disciplinary Research and Education in Nano and Bio-Mechanics of Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Kyung-Suk Kim, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 06/30/2005
* USD 249,515.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;A state-of-the-art nanoindentation system, which is
critically needed to support current research and teaching activities at Brown
University in the areas of nano and biomechanics of materials, will be acquired.
The equipment will be used for high-impact multi-disciplinary research
activities to be conducted using the nanoindenter. The proposed activities cover
a wide spectrum of programs in three areas of Engineering, Geological Sciences,
Physics and Biology and Medicine. The programs include high impact areas such as
the mechanics and the electromechanical coupling in carbon nanotubes,
nanocomposites with aligned nanotubes, mechanics of biological friction
surfaces, mechanics of surface plasticity, nanotribology, mechanical aspects of
human joint disease, materials with complex microstructures and nanocrystalline
materials. Exploring such a broad range of applications using a workhorse
nanoindenter will enhance the research productivity of all participating
investigators. The shared and coordinated use of the proposed multi-functional
instrument will broaden the scope of research for all participants. More
importantly, the shared access to this instrument will facilitate more
collaborations addressing new scientific questions, and thus fostering
synergistic research activities and fresh directions.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the proposed nanoindenter lies in using it to provide research
training and education opportunities to graduate students, undergraduate
students, especially women and minorities, and in inspiring undergraduate
students from under-represented groups to pursue careers in science and
technology. Building on Brown's successful current outreach programs,
undergraduate students from Historically Black Colleges and Universities will be
offered summer research projects in the proposed facility. In addition, Brown
undergraduate students will be given research opportunities involving
nanoindentation. The objective of these positions will not be to use them as
technicians; it will be to involve them in creative thinking and development
process. Nanoindentation will be added to the teaching curriculum in the course
on experimental mechanics. The proposed nanoindentation facility will be open to
another outreach program, Research Experience for Teachers, by which the local
primary/secondary school teachers will be exposed to nanoindentation research,
so that the knowledge gained by these teachers while working at Brown will also
spread to the schools in which they work, maximizing the instrument's broader
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;