* 0421702
* Children's Understanding of Emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2010
* James Russell, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Kellina Craig-Henderson
* 01/31/2010
* USD 299,997.00

Children need to understand the emotions they feel in themselves and witness in
others. Too little is known about what children understand about the meaning of
emotion words they hear such as anger, surprise, sad or shame; what they take to
be the meaning of frowns, grimaces, pouts, and other facial expressions; or,
more generally, how they steadily acquire the ability to anticipate and
influence emotions. The proposed research seeks to describe age-related changes
in emotion understanding in preschoolers. Children are interviewed individually
with different tasks, such as finding the surprised person in a set of facial
expressions, labeling each of the facial expressions, guessing what made another
child angry or what the child will do next, anticipating what a child would feel
in a certain situation, and grouping together all the people who feel a certain
emotion, such as fear. This research will provide a better descriptive model of
children's emotion understanding, which is important in their early school
readiness and social skills and is the foundation for their later understanding
of emotion. If successful, the proposed research can inform caregivers,
teachers, and peers about possible miscommunication, such as a child thinking
that a worried frown means anger, or that the words sad and angry mean the same
thing. It should help tell us how to nurture emotional intelligence. This grant
will help establish an Emotion Development Lab at Boston College, which will
provide a research infrastructure for undergraduate (many volunteer), graduate
and postdoctoral students, embedded in a network of local researchers. The Lab
will become part of an Affective Science Center, one focus of which is planned
to be public education through schools, museums, journalism, etc.