* 0421318
* MRI:     Acquisition of Instrumentation for Near Field Antenna Measurements Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Allen Glisson, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2007
* USD 164,287.00

The Department of Electrical Engineering (EE) and the Center for Applied
Electromagnetic Systems Research (CAESR) at The University of Mississippi (UM)
seeks support from the National Science Foundation to acquire near-field antenna
range instrumentation which will be dedicated to support ongoing research on
antennas and scatterers in the commonly known technology areas of RF, wireless,
microwave, millimeter wave, infrared, and optics. The equipment will be used to
pursue studies of new, innovative antennas and scatterers, and large planar
phased array antennas for research projects, including studies of dielectric
resonator antennas, printed antennas, cylindrical wire antenna scatterers in
multi-layered media, radar/sensor antennas, spatial power combiners, and meander
and spiral antennas for wireless communication. This instrumentation is needed
because EE and CAESR do not currently have capability for large aperture antenna
measurements. UM EE programs supporting this research have grown to an
enrollment of about 100 undergraduate students and over 45 graduate students
with a faculty having 11 tenure track, instruction/research positions. The
department research areas are in electromagnetic applications and
telecommunications. Seven faculty members are in the area of electromagnetics
and their research will benefit from these facilities. In addition, two
professors emeritus of electrical engineering who are very active in research
and RF measurements will be using this instrumentation. Intellectual Merit: The
research objectives are 1) to continue investigation of developing new DR
antennas with wideband performance and to study the performance of these
radiators in large antenna array environments and 2) to investigate
technological advances in providing basic, state-of-the-art building blocks for
advanced phased array radar systems. Currently, design and construction of new
and innovative large aperture antennas are in progress, and full-scale testing
is needed for design validation. This instrumentation will contribute
significantly to the quality of ongoing research and will add new research
capability and greatly enhance research-relate education, because UM does not
have facilities for testing and measurement of large aperture and phased array
antennas. Broader Impact: This equipment will have significant impact on our
research and the development of highly efficient antenna arrays such as
dielectric resonator antennas. Also, this equipment will help the engagement of
the University with the industry in the area and help in the economical
development of the area. As widely noted by the industry, a shortage of RF,
wireless, and microwave engineers has been evident in the past few years, and
this growing problem must be addressed in order to maintain the leadership of
the United States in the rapidly growing and demanding information and
communication intense areas in the 21st century. The instrumentation supported
by this proposed grant will provide the latest technology for instruction in
antenna design and testing to facilitate technology research and education. The
graduates of our program will be able to use new methods of antenna design and
be able to build and test large array, state-of-the-art antenna components
needed for RF, wireless, microwave, and millimeter-wave systems of the future
based on experiences with this new instrumentation as well as existing
facilities.

