* 0421333
* Equipment Acquisition for the OUHSC Laboratory for Genomics and Bioinformatics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Allison Gillaspy, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 129,995.00

A grant has been awarded to the Oklahoma University Health Sciences Center
(OUHSC) under the direction of Dr. Allison Gillaspy for support of the purchase
of a Genomic Solutions G3S3000 Library Management system, which will be used for
the management of recombinant DNAs derived from a variety of sources, including
bacteria, and domesticated or wild animals and plants. High-throughput DNA
sequencing and its associated technologies are becoming useful for biologists
for a variety of studies that not only include genome sequencing, but high-
throughput methods for molecular evolution analysis, microbial ecology and
structural biology, among others. The Genomic Solutions G3S3000 Library
Management system can replicate and recover individual clones from archived
clone banks, and is extremely flexible, which will increase throughput for each
research project, increase the accuracy of sample tracking and reduce technician
intervention, thereby reducing the costs of taxpayer-supported research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This machine will be located at the OUHSC Laboratory for
Genomics and Bioinformatics, which is a facility responsible for providing a
variety of molecular biological services to the Oklahoma academic community. The
facility provides services to at least 92 users at several academic institutions
in Oklahoma, including OUHSC, the University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma State
University, and Langston University (Oklahoma's only Historically Black College
or University). The Library Management system will contribute to the research-
related education of postdoctoral fellows and graduate students in the
laboratories of the 92 academic users that are currently supported, and
undergraduate students that participate in summer internships at OUHSC. Thus,
the proposed instrumentation will have significant impact on the ability to
provide these services to the academic community in Oklahoma. In addition, two
ongoing funded NSF research projects will benefit significantly from the
availability of this equipment. These two projects are focused on 1)
understanding a novel bacterial parasite, and 2) fish evolution. There also are
two pending projects that will require the proposed equipment, including 1) the
genome sequencing of an insect pathogen that is heavily used as a pest
biocontrol agent and 2) DNA sequencing in support of a peanut genome sequencing
initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader significance of this grant award
is in the ability to provide state-of-the-art education in modern-day genomics
techniques to undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral research
fellows throughout the state of Oklahoma. This will enrich their educational
experience and promote the development of an enhanced research infrastructure
within the state. Studies supported by this grant will enhance the ability to
control a variety of insect pathogens, and enhance the ability to economically
exploit an important agricultural resource. These, in turn, will support the
developing Oklahoma biotechnology industry, and provide economic as well as
educational benefit to the local and state community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;