* 0421312
* NEESR-II:    Dynamic Passive Pressure on Full-Scale Pile Caps
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Kyle Rollins, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* John Daniel
* 09/30/2009
* USD 409,436.00

For bridges and other structures subject to lateral loadings, passive earth
pressure contributes&lt;br/&gt;significantly to overall stability. While the
maximum passive pressure acting on pile caps and&lt;br/&gt;abutment walls can
readily be predicted, the issue of how passive pressure develops as a function
of&lt;br/&gt;deflection is more problematic. Furthermore, essentially all of the
load-displacement relationships&lt;br/&gt;currently used are derived from static
or extremely slow loadings. Under seismic loading conditions,&lt;br/&gt;both
dynamic and cyclic effects are present which alter the load-deflection
relationship. While cyclic&lt;br/&gt;loading effects typically reduce the
strength and stiffness of the soil, dynamic loading effects tend
to&lt;br/&gt;produce an apparent increase in soil strength and stiffness due to
material and radiation damping.&lt;br/&gt;Faced with the lack of well-defined
load-displacement relationships which address the effects of
both&lt;br/&gt;stiffness degradation and increased damping, the engineering
community has often applied static&lt;br/&gt;load-deflection relationships in
seismic design situations. The degree to which this approach
is&lt;br/&gt;conservative or non-conservative is uncertain. What is certain,
however, is that soil stiffness at&lt;br/&gt;abutment contacts is a critical
factor in overall bridge performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our vision for this
project is to develop load-displacement relationships for typical
soils&lt;br/&gt;adjacent to pile caps and abutments based on full-scale testing,
which account for both dynamic and&lt;br/&gt;cyclic effects. Incorporation of
dynamic effects into passive earth pressure relationships would&lt;br/&gt;create
a validated definition of dynamic and cyclic soil response that has previously
been&lt;br/&gt;unavailable. Although shake table and centrifuge models can
provide important guidance regarding&lt;br/&gt;these issues, a reasonable number
of full-scale load tests are necessary to provide ground
truth&lt;br/&gt;information. This research would fulfill this need. In terms of
intellectual merit, the proposed&lt;br/&gt;testing and analysis will provide
practitioners with dynamic stiffness and damping factors based
on&lt;br/&gt;full-scale pile cap tests for a variety of soil types and
densities, as well as for a range of vibration&lt;br/&gt;frequencies and
displacement levels. In addition, the test results, archived in the NEES
database,&lt;br/&gt;will become important benchmarks for researchers interested
in calibrating/verifying new computer&lt;br/&gt;codes or numerical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To obtain the data needed to develop dynamic,
passive load-displacement relationships, a&lt;br/&gt;field testing program will
be conducted. This program will consist of laterally loading a concrete
pile&lt;br/&gt;cap without backfill and then reloading after backfilling with
four different soils type. Since the&lt;br/&gt;resistance provided by the
backfill is a function of density, each backfill will be compacted to
two&lt;br/&gt;different densities and then tested. Loading will be accomplished
by a combined use of a hydraulic&lt;br/&gt;load actuator and NEES-UCLA's
eccentric mass shakers. Initially, a hydraulic load shaker will
load&lt;br/&gt;the cap to a target deflection, at which point the actuator
length will be fixed. Next, eccentric shakers&lt;br/&gt;mounted atop the pile
cap will be activated to produce a dynamic loading. The combined use
of&lt;br/&gt;actuator and shaker will provide levels and rates of strain
previously unobtainable in full-scale&lt;br/&gt;testing. The frequency of the
shakers will be varied to obtain a range of loading frequencies.
This&lt;br/&gt;loading process will then be repeated at increasing levels of
deflection. Subsequent data analysis will&lt;br/&gt;quantify the observed
passive earth pressure relationships in a series of curves and
corresponding&lt;br/&gt;equations. Additional analytical work will determine
dynamic impedances of the backfill based on&lt;br/&gt;spring and dashpot
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include
improved design of structural components&lt;br/&gt;through a better definition
of the geotechnical component of soil-structure interaction.
Additional&lt;br/&gt;impacts include mentored educational experiences for
participating university students as well as&lt;br/&gt;increased awareness of
earthquake engineering issues by junior high and high school
students&lt;br/&gt;participating in an outreach program centered on the research
performed.