* 0421275
* NEESR-II: In Situ Determination of Soil Modulus and Damping as a Function of Level of Strain
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Jose Roesset, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* John Daniel
* 08/31/2009
* USD 447,703.00

One of the two main sources of uncertainties in geotechnical earthquake
engineering and soil-structure interaction analysis is the knowledge of the soil
properties "in-situ" under the existing state of stresses and of their
dependence on the level of strains. In recent years there has been tremendous
progress in our ability to determine the values of the shear modulus in the
field at various depths for very low levels of strain (Gmax). It has been
noticed that these values can be very different from those reported from
laboratory testing. The profession still relies, however, on laboratory tests to
estimate the dependence of the modulus and damping on the amplitude of the shear
strains. The basic assumption has been that the variation of the modulus, once
normalized by dividing it by Gmax, and of the damping will be the same in the
field and in the laboratory. Under the NEES program, the University of Texas at
Austin has developed now equipment that allows us, for the first time, to obtain
reliable measures of modulus and damping as functions of strain directly "in-
situ." This is a very significant development, but additional work has to be
done in order to develop and validate procedures to infer the values of modulus
and damping from the recorded data (velocities or accelerations) at various
points under a mat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to conduct a series of tests
with the new NEES equipment of the University of Texas at the National
Geotechnical Experimentation Site (NGES) located on the Texas A&amp;M Riverside
campus, developing and evaluating the techniques needed to interpret the data
and obtain in the field curves of modulus and damping versus shear strain. The
research will contribute to the fundamental understanding of laboratory versus
field measurements of the dynamic properties of soils. Numerical tools to
estimate modulus and damping as function of levels of strain from the recorded
data will be developed and calibrated. The resulting software will be made
available to the NEES network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide fundamental understanding of the
response of soils subjected to cyclic loading in the field and how it relates to
the properties measured in the laboratory. This is a significant contribution to
the field of earthquake engineering and will allow researchers to better
calibrate their simulation tools for field response and seismic design in
general. Undergraduate education and K-12 outreach will play a significant role
in this NEES research project. Students will participate in summer REU programs
at the University of Texas, Austin and Texas A&amp;M University. The project is
well suited for the involvement of undergraduate students in the research work,
especially as support to the field work, data collection and data reduction. The
undergraduate students will be able to work with the PIs and the graduate
students. Outreach efforts will be directed towards K-12 students, through
demonstrations and teacher involvement in the research activities. Summer
workshops for teachers will be developed within the "E3 Teacher Summer Research
Program for Secondary Math and Science Teachers" already in place at The Dwight
Look College of Engineering at Texas A&amp;M. Regularly scheduled workshops for
the graduate and undergraduate students involved in the research will be
organized to promote exchanges and interactions. The educational and outreach
plan addresses diversity by promoting pedagogies, such as hand-on activities,
increased interaction and integration of research and education, which research
has shown to be effective in the retention of underrepresented ethnic groups and
women in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;