* 0421505
* MRI: Development of Fiber-Optically Coupled Combustion and Flow Sensor for IC Engines and Other Severe Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Steven Buckley, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2008
* USD 430,474.00

Proposal No. CTS-0421505&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: P. V. Puzinauskas,
Univ. of Alabama Tuscaloosa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to develop fiber-
optic-based diagnostics for combustion and fluid dynamics in internal-combustion
engines and other industrial machinery. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
(LIBS) and laser-induced incandescence (LII) will be incorporated in a robust
fiber-optic probe to allow in situ measurements of species concentrations and
particle loading. This combination of diagnostics is expected to provide insight
into in-cylinder and post-exhaust-process particulate formation. The central
challenge will be to facilitate adequate laser light delivery and signal-light
extraction from environmentally harsh, dynamic, and geometrically restricted
environments. With this goal in mind, the internal-combustion engine is a
natural proof-of-concept platform, although the final product will have
application to development of a variety of industrial machines such as gas-
turbine engines, stationary industrial burners, fuel cells, and other platforms.
Investigators from The University of Alabama (UA) Mechanical Engineering and
Applied Mechanics and Aerospace departments will be responsible for fiber-optic
configuration and engine applications, and will develop the fluorescence probes,
while investigators from the University of California at San Diego (UCSD) will
develop the LIBS and LII diagnostics. The spectroscopic hardware and software
will be a collaborative effort, and Systems Planning and Analysis (SPA), Inc.
will provide expertise in fiber selection and design and commercialization. This
research program will have significant direct benefits to the students at UCSD
and UA, as well as investigators at SPA, who often employ student interns from
the University of Maryland. The project will support several graduate students
and a post-doctoral researcher. Results will be incorporated into the
engineering and science curriculum, and disseminated in widely-read peer-
examined journals. The resulting optical sensor will provide significant
improvement in the instrumentation available for measurements of gas phase
composition in harsh environments, which will open new avenues in both education
and research. In particular, the proposed instrument is expected to
significantly impact the validation of computational fluid mechanics models of
IC engines and the development of new ultra-lean burn and homogenous charge
compression ignition (HCCI) engines.&lt;br/&gt;