* 0421156
* MRI:     Development of a Multi-Function Nanomaterials Processing System
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Hong Luo, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2007
* USD 399,926.00

The objective of this is to develop a multi-chamber and multi-function plasma
system to allow for etching and surface modification of a wide range of
materials for nanotechnology, MEMS and photonics. Although conventional silicon
processing uses standard 4 and 6-inch silicon wafers, many specialty materials
come in different forms, such as smaller wafers, squares, or wafer fragments.
Thus, special attention will be paid to developing a methodology for processing
many different form factors of samples, while minimizing cross-contamination
issues between incompatible sets of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this proposed effort is the development of an advanced
research and fabrication processes that will be used by a group of investigators
in several academic and industrial institutions. This leads to fundamental
understanding of fabrication processes that are critical for the microsystems
and photonics devices. The outcome of the research performed using this
instrument is far reaching in the fields of photonics, MEMS, compound
semiconductor electronics, magnetics and ceramics. The broader impact of the
developed instrument will result in an advanced etching facility capable of
etching a wide range of material with greater control. This will impact the way
etchers are designed in the future. The developed instrument will enable and
attract a group of researcher and their students in four universities to
investigate and fabricate innovative micro- and nano-scale devices. The
instrument will be used for the education and training of undergraduate and
graduate student