* 0421282
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Engineering Research in Advanced Security Detection Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Sajal Das, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

This project, constructing an advanced security detection system portal that
integrates many individual functions of current systems, focuses on the physical
security aspects integrating a variety of detection mechanisms, such as chemical
and biological sensors. The work supports research in fundamental areas related
to security detection, monitoring, prototyping, prevention, and recovery.
Investigating fundamental research issues in security detection, the project
involves prototyping a walk-through security portal that uses a variety of
sensors (visible, infrared and millimeter wave images, metal and air detection
data) along with X-ray baggage scanning information and other information about
the individual to determine the threat level. The analysis of the fusion of all
such data from heterogeneous devices is expected to yield more accurate
assessment than any one of more sensors analyzed individually. The equipment
supports research and development of advanced detection systems for secured
entry through the use of multiple, network-integrated sensors. The approach
encompasses several interdisciplinary research areas including
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smart sensors, &lt;br/&gt;Wireless sensor and data
networks, &lt;br/&gt;Sensor fusion, &lt;br/&gt;Pervasive
computing,&lt;br/&gt;Image processing, and&lt;br/&gt;Databases and data
mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in smart sensors improves the ability to
distribute sensors in a secured-entry portal and develop techniques for sensing
at a distance (e.g., gases and materials). Image sensors (visible, infrared and
millimeter wave) support research in image processing and concealed weapon
detection. Biometric sensors and RFID tag technologies also provide a rich
source of information for controlling access to high security areas.
Micromechanical systems (MEMS) research develops wireless microsensors for
detection of toxins. Sensor networking and fusion coupled with database research
develop new methods for collecting, exchanging, processing, and understanding
large amounts of real-time sensory information. Higher-level data integration
and data mining research contribute new techniques for learning and assessing
threat levels, and more efficient personnel and baggage screening. This
instrumentation complements current research on Pervasively Secure
Infrastructures (PSI) by integrating secure-entry capabilities into a more
general approach to securing an environment, such as mass transit and shopping
malls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The instrumentation provides
resources for the Institute for Research In Security (IRIS). This institute
facilitates multidisciplinary, collaborative research to improve the ability to
maintain secure and usable environments. IRIS collaborates with several public
safety and law enforcement agencies in developing and deploying leading-edge
technologies in existing and future environments. The work will be disseminated
through open houses, public demonstrations, publications, multi-disciplinary
course and the web-site. Public demonstrations will target K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds requested include the equipment listed
below and associated expenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MEMS Wireless Sensor
Networking Testbed, Millivision Vela125 Scanning Booth, &lt;br/&gt;PowerView
Stereoscopic PIV systems, Smith Detection X-Ray Baggage scanner, etc.&lt;br/&gt;