* 0421020
* Development of the Single-Crystal Diamond from Chemical Vapor Deposition for the Next Generation High-Pressure Devices
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Ho-kwang Mao, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2006
* USD 350,124.00

EAR-0421020&lt;br/&gt;Hemley &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to continue the
development of the next generation static ultrahigh-pressure apparatus that will
allow an increase in sample volumes in excess of 100 times those currently
available in conventional diamond cells at megabar pressures. This will enable
myriad mainstream analytical techniques currently unavailable for ultrahigh-
pressure research, including those required for the successful utilization of
major neutron and synchrotron radiation facilities that are coming on line. The
new class of high-pressure cells will also improve measurement accuracy for
existing in situ probe techniques, provide well-calibrated hydrostatic pressures
and uniform temperatures, allow higher and more uniform temperatures to be
achieved with laser heating, and provide robust and user-friendly operation.
These capabilities are required to address numerous current problems in high-
pressure geochemistry, geophysics, and planetary science; as such, the proposed
advances are expected to have major impact in each of these areas. The increases
in sample volume for the new cells will result from a combination of
improvements that include enlarged anvils, modified culet shapes, designed
gaskets, and added binding support for the anvils. Single-crystal diamonds
synthesized at high pressures and temperatures will be enlarged by homoepitaxial
chemical vapor deposition overgrowth of single-crystal diamond films to create
anvils reaching 25 carats and above. The larger sample chamber, in turn, will
remove restrictions currently imposed by microscopic volumes and greatly improve
the pressure-temperature conditions and probing capabilities at ultrahigh
pressures. New presses will be built to provide the loads necessary for the
larger volumes. The project will be carried out in coordination with the newly
formed COnsortium for Materials Properties Research in the Earth Sciences
(COMPRES), through which the new high-pressure capabilities will be made
available to the high-pressure geoscience community.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;