* 0421568
* MRI: Development and Fabrication of a Novel Defocusing Ultrasonic Imaging Camera
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Morteza Gharib, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 01/31/2007
* USD 412,384.00

Proposal No. CTS-0421568&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: M. Gharib, California
Inst. Of Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to develop an ultrasound
3-D velocimetry system based on the image-defocusing concept, which will provide
a unique tool for engineering applications and lead to deeper scientific
understanding of many important industrial and biological systems that are
currently inaccessible. Many environmental, industrial and biological flows
occur in three-dimensional, multi-phase, unsteady complex geometries with
significant boundary deformation. In general these flows are not optically
accessible. To study these flows, ultrasound imaging techniques as non-invasive
modalities that can image opaque objects or flows have become methods of choice,
over optical or potentially dangerous x-ray techniques. Despite the very
important advantages that ultrasound imaging offers, it is limited as a two-
dimensional imaging technique. Attempts to resolve this deficiency involve
scanning of the desired volume by mechanically stepping or rotating the
ultrasound beam generated by one or two-dimensional transducers, and have met
with limited success. Currently, there is no research-quality instrumentation on
the market that can facilitate dynamic volume mapping in opaque media. The basic
imaging principles of the proposed ultrasound version are very similar to its
optical counterpart, which has been developed and successfully implemented at
Caltech. Such instrumentation development will yield a substantial step ahead of
present state-of-the-art in ultrasound dynamic volumetric imaging. The broader
impact of the research effort will be the availability of new research and
development tools in the area of experimental fluid mechanics, providing the
opportunity for a deeper scientific understanding. These new discoveries will
enable development and evaluation novel industrial, environmental and medical
devices. In particular, this project will have clinical impact, as it will
provide improved paradigms for cardiovascular hemodynamic studies, as well as
for multi-phase flow investigation. Another important impact will be at
computational fluid mechanics forefront where time resolved 3-D flow information
at all ranges of Reynolds number is badly needed for code validation and testing
of new sub-grid scale models. The Principal Investigators will involve
undergraduate students in their research activities through SURF (summer
undergraduate research fellowship), MURF (minority undergraduate research
fellowship) and work-study programs Caltech. &lt;br/&gt;