* 0421025
* Acquisition of Satellite Communications Systems to Provide Continuous Internet Connectivity for Oceanographic Research Vessels at Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Steven Bohlen, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Shor
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,130,264.00

0421025&lt;br/&gt;Bohlen&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award to
Joint Oceanographic Institutions, Inc. provides funds for acquisition of
satellite communications systems to provide continuous Internet connectivity for
oceanographic research ships at sea. This award increases from three to nine the
number of vessels in the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
(UNOLS) academic research fleet that use the HiSeasNet system for communication
between ship and shore or ship and ship. It outfits all of the large, 'global-
class' UNOLS vessels with full Internet connectivity, offers an economical
methods for electronic and voice communication among researchers, and provides a
testbed for the intermediate-sized 'ocean-class' vessels, using smaller antennas
that potentially offer an appropriate capability for even smaller coastal or
local research ships. It also provides a model for future communications
involving research vessels and unmanned platforms (buoys and observing systems).
The expanded communications capability supported here will conservatively impact
more than 50,000 annual person-days of scientists, technicians and ship's crew
at sea, and a similar number ashore, substantially enhancing research quality
and productivity by shipboard researchers, and improving morale and
communications among cruise participants. The broader impacts of the acquisition
are extensive, as the 'always-on' communications facilitates much-expanded
outreach and educational opportunities bringing together researchers in the
field with students in the classroom, and engaging the general public in many
ways. JOI, Inc. and its academic partner institutions Scripps Institution of
Oceanography (University of California San Diego), Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, University of Hawaii, University of Rhode Island and Lamont-Doherty
Earth Observatory (Columbia University) are, together, providing 30% of the
costs of the project from non-federal funds. This proposal is supported by the
Division of Ocean Sciences at NSF.&lt;br/&gt; ***&lt;br/&gt;