* 0421861
* Upgrading of Infrastructure for Computational Geophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2008
* J Davis, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2008
* USD 214,614.00

0421861&lt;br/&gt;Davis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this grant
will support an upgrade to the general computing environment at the Cecil H. and
Ida M. Green Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics (IGPP) so that
students, staff and faculty researchers can better study some of the many modern
geophysical problems whose analysis requires computationally intensive
manipulation of large data sets and the capability to visualize detailed,
complex images of the results. The resources to be purchased will be used to
advance research in marine seismic methods, interpretation of mid-ocean ridge
processes, global seismology, mantle convection, geomagnetism, infrasound, space
geodesy, and other scientific projects. A compute cluster and high performance
workstations will provide substantial computing power for problems too large to
address with a desktop machine. A network attached storage device will promote
sharing of common data sets in an efficient manner and provide each department
member with a common working directory accessible at very high speed from all
machines on the IGPP local area network (LAN). Workstations will provide
graduate students with a tool to complete class exercises and initiate thesis
research. Overall, addition of these devices will simplify administration of the
IGPP LAN and allow overburdened IT professionals to concentrate their efforts on
more productive activities. Improving the local infrastructure will immediately
provide a more reliable and stable conduit through which outside users can
access several facilities at IGPP that are shared and/or accessed by scientists
in other departments or at other universities. Key examples include the IRIS/IDA
seismic Data Collection Center, the Scripps Orbit and Permanent Array Center,
and the SIO Visualization Center. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;