* 0421557
* MRI:     Acquisition of Seismic Simulating System for Integrated Research and Education in Structural Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Hany Farran, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 125,300.00

Recent catastrophic earthquakes in Northridge, Kobe, Turkey, Taiwan and India
have reminded us of the powerful and potentially deadly consequences of
earthquakes. An essential equipment for the study of structural performance in
earthquake engineering is an earthquake simulator, or shake table, that can
reproduce the ground motion of historical earthquakes. The intermediate shake
table will allow undergraduate and graduate students to do research, and to
learn fundamental principles of Structural Dynamic through Cal Poly's "Learn by
Doing" philosophy. The goal is to expand the capabilities of the structural lab
so that it can be used for research, education, and outreach activities. The
proposed equipment is the Quanser STIII intermediate shake table that is capable
of two-directional impulse, harmonic and random earthquake ground motion
excitation. We have conducted some undergraduate research training projects as
senior design projects using the existing mini instructional shake table.
Students built small-scale buildings, towers, and houses constructed of steel,
aluminum, timber or composite material, and tested them and observed the
structural performance. Through a series of hands-on seismic simulation
experiments of such prototype structures, students develop a better
understanding of the seismic design concepts such as the nature of earthquake
loading, resonance phenomena, the effectiveness of lateral bracing, structural
damping and base isolation on structural control. In addition, students did
failure identification of the structures and related this to the building design
code. Due to the limited features of the shake table, however, all the studies
were qualitative, thus students were not able to compare experimental responses
to analytical predictions yielded through computer modeling. The new equipment
will contribute to the improvement of the quality of undergraduate research
training and to open opportunities for graduate students to do research. The
dual-axial shake table with integrated extensive data acquisition capability and
real-time control functions will be used for research, education, and outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will
include: 1) support graduate research for students in the Master of Science in
Structural Engineering (MSSE) program; 2) engage undergraduate students in
research through their senior design projects; 3) integrate experimental
structural dynamics into the undergraduate and graduate curriculum through
effective "hands-on" learning exercises, with visual feedback of results; 4)
provide students with marketable skills in communication, teamwork, and computer
applications, and; 5) teach students how to use modern structural engineering
testing and data acquisition equipment. By providing opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students to gain research experience in structural
dynamics testing, the department expects to encourage the top undergraduate
students to pursue graduate study and the current graduate students to consider
further study at the Ph.D. level.&lt;br/&gt;