* 0421147
* MRI:  Development of NSTAP: Nanoscale Thermal Anemometry Probe
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Craig Arnold, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2008
* USD 219,328.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. CTS-0421147&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: A.J. Smits, Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
is for the development of a nanoscale thermal anemometry probe (NSTAP) capable
of measuring fluid flow on spatial and temporal scales two orders of magnitude
smaller than can currently be studied with existing instrumentation is proposed.
Through an understanding of the fundamental mechanical and electronic properties
of metallic nanowires, this research will enable the production of a free
standing nanowire suspended between two current carrying contacts. The nanowire,
forming the sensing element of the NSTAP, will be capable of measuring
microscale turbulence in high Reynolds number laboratory flows that is currently
inaccessible due to lack of available measurement techniques. Furthermore, the
increased surface area to volume ratio of the metallic nanowire in comparison to
conventional probes will yield a device that not only has higher resolving
power, but also is more sensitive and rapid in its response to changing flows.
Although the operating principle of the NSTAP is identical to that of successful
existing thermal anemometry practices, unconventional instrumentation is
necessary to calibrate and acquire data from the probe due to the extremely
small scale and high frequency response of the nanowire. The NSTAP will provide
answers to some of the most basic and fundamental questions regarding
turbulence. A secondary benefit that arises from the successful fabrication of
the NSTAP is the ability to reach out across the typical boundaries of fluid
mechanics to study mechanical and electronic properties metallic nanowires for
on-chip interconnects. The development of free-standing metallic nanowires will
enable the study of effects such as electromigration, recrystallization, and
intrinsic stress evolution that occur due to current flow in the wire,
independent of effects caused by the substrate. The success of this work will
have broader implications for researchers in fluid mechanics, materials science
and electrical engineering, and will fundamentally affect the use of nanowires
for sensing applications. This project will greatly benefit from close
collaborations among a diverse blend of student and faculty researchers in fluid
mechanics and materials science enabling both types of specialists to learn
about the other's field. The NSTAP development will be readily accessible for
undergraduate participation through term projects and summer research experience
in the use of standard nanofabrication techniques. The implementation of the
NSTAP will educate students through the disparate practices of both
nanofabrication and turbulence measurements. Finally, the results obtained will
be broadly disseminated to attract researchers and industrial collaborations to
further the implementation of the NSTAP in fundamental fluid mechanics
research.&lt;br/&gt;