* 0421040
* Acquisition of a Molecular Primatology DNA Analysis System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Susan Anton, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2005
* USD 299,992.00

With National Science Foundation Support, Dr. Todd Disotell and his colleagues
in the New York University Department of Anthropology will purchase an ABI 3730
DNA Analysis System and a BioRad iCycler iQ Real-Time PCR Detection System,
along with support equipment. The key features of this instrumentation upgrade
are the improvement in efficiency of data accumulation and an improvement in the
kinds of evolutionary questions which can be addressed. The sequence analysis
system is the latest generation high throughput capillary sequencer and
genotyper, which will become the workhorse data acquisition instrument used in
the group's laboratory's projects. It will permit accumulation of sequence data
at five times the rate possible with the current equipment at less than half of
the cost. The PCR detection system will be central to the laboratory's
increasing use of ancient and degraded DNA recovered from archaeological
materials, museum specimens, and biological detritus such as hair or feces. All
of these sample types yield low quality and quantity DNA but clearly provide an
unprecedented promise for addressing novel questions from such sources. Much of
the support equipment will be used in a new facility being developed in the
Anthropology Department's DNA Extraction Facility, including PCR work-station
hoods and UV decontamination lighting. &lt;br/&gt;Disotell's focus to date has
been on catarrhine (Old World monkey and ape) systematics, population genetics,
and conservation genetics. Di Fiore has similar interests and project involving
New World monkeys. Jolly collaborates closely with Disotell in research
involving population genetics and phylogeography of Old World monkeys,
especially baboons. Di Fiore, Disotell, and Jolly also use molecular techniques
to test and develop hypotheses about primate behavior, social and mating
systems, and dispersal patterns. Anton will be bringing her expertise in modern
human origins by supplying materials and hypotheses to be tested utilizing
ancient DNA. This instrumenation will greatly facilitate all of the above
research programs. &lt;br/&gt;Numerous undergraduates and New York City area
high school students carry out their honors research projects in the laboratory.
Interns from the Departments of Anthropology and Biology at NYU, Howard Hughes
Summer Research Fellows, Columbia University and CUNY graduate students who are
members of the IGERT funded New York Consortium in Evolutionary Primatology
(NYCEP), as well as foreign colleagues and their students train and do research
projects in conjunction with the NYU faculty. Interns in the MA program in
skeletal biology and forensics directed by Anton will also train and carry out
research projects in the molecular facilities. &lt;br/&gt;The data collected by
this instrumentation and hypotheses being tested have a broader impact beyond
the field of anthropology. The training of individuals from high school through
the post-doctoral level is an equally important component of our research and
academic program. The research carried out at NYU ties in with biomedical
research (e.g. evolutionary biology of the SIV/HIV viruses and their host
species) and applied conservation efforts (e.g. assessing genetic variation in
highly endangered species such as lion tamarins in Brazil and chimpanzees and
gorillas in West Africa). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;