* 0421914
* Fatty Acid Signaling Pathway and Its Role in Plant Defense
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Pradeep Kachroo, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 08/31/2009
* USD 520,536.00

Plant diseases have a devastating impact on agricultural production and food
supply every year. The outcome of the interaction of plants with a given
pathogen is governed by several factors, including the genotype, the
physiological state of the plant, environmental signals and, any specific
interactions that might occur between the activated signaling pathways. Among
various signaling molecules proposed to modulate defense responses, salicylic
acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA) elicit distinct responses and undergo extensive
cross talk, which is likely to influence the amplitude and magnitude of various
signals leading to a resistance response. Previous work from the PI's laboratory
has shown that SSI2 encoded stearoyl-ACP desaturase regulates the levels of
unsaturated fatty acids (FA) in the cell and the levels of oleic acid are
critical in regulating defense pathways. Three genes have been identified, which
participate in the prokaryotic pathway of FA biosynthesis, and a loss-of-
function of which restores the various phenotypes in ssi2 mutant plants.
Functional analysis of these genes indicates that oleic acid (18:1) levels
regulated by glycerolipid metabolism play an important role in the regulation of
defense signaling pathways. This project aims to characterize the FA signaling
pathway further by carrying out biochemical and molecular analysis of previously
identified suppressor mutants, by isolation and characterization of additional
mutations that are able to revert the ssi2 mutant to wild type-like and identify
the signal molecule(s) responsible for defense-related signaling.
Characterization of the FA signaling pathway and deciphering its role in defense
would provide critical information about how various pathways interact with each
other. This would have enormous implications, as it would permit the
manipulation of multiple defense signaling pathways at the same time and
engineer crops that are resistant to a wide variety of bacterial, fungal and
viral pathogens. The research will facilitate training of undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral students and enhance the infrastructure of research
through sharing of ideas and materials generated by the project. The aim is to
foster a community of undergraduate students and provide minority students with
progressively sophisticated scientific experiences. The PIs also plan to
integrate research with extension services available at UK to enhance awareness
of the recent advances in crop resistance and improve attitude towards
genetically modified crops among farmers and agribusiness representatives.