* 0421717
* Accelerating Pine Genomics Through Development and Utilization of Molecular and Cytogenetic Resources
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* C. Dana Nelson, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,668,611.00

Loblolly pine (Pinus taeda) is the primary source of pulpwood for the U.S. paper
industry and the most economically important crop of any kind in the
southeastern states. Isolation, sequencing, and characterization of the genes of
loblolly pine represents a means to better understand the evolutionary success
of pine, to develop environmentally sound strategies for dealing with pine
diseases and pests, to effectively manipulate genes responsible for pine's many
economic traits, and to maximize yield per acre. However, the loblolly pine
genome, like other gymnosperm genomes, is exceedingly large and is composed
primarily of non-genic repetitive elements, making characterization of the parts
of the pine genome containing the genes (the "gene space") difficult. In
addition, many of the genetic, molecular, and cytogenetic resources enjoyed by
other crop species are lacking or underdeveloped for pine. We will generate
important molecular and cytogenetic resources for pine and utilize these
resources to provide insight into the structure and evolution of the loblolly
genome. The information generated in this study and the molecular resources
themselves will accelerate physical mapping and sequencing of pine's gene space
and advance pine genome research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific project
objectives include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) construction of a pine 10X
Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) library that will serve as an essential
resource for physical mapping, gene discovery, and eventual genome sequencing,
&lt;br/&gt;(2) production of gene- and repeat-enriched DNA libraries (via Cot-
Based Cloning and Sequencing or CBCS) that will be used to explore genomic
sequence diversity in pine, acquire critical information on pine genes including
regulatory sequences, and characterize the repeats that comprise most of the
pine DNA, &lt;br/&gt;(3) determination of how repeats and low-copy sequences are
spatially organized within chromosomes and BACs via filter- and chromosome-based
DNA hybridization, &lt;br/&gt;(4) association of pine linkage groups with their
cytologically-defined chromosomes as a means of studying relationships between
genetic linkage, chromosome structure, and physical (DNA) distances, and
&lt;br/&gt;(5) education and training of students at graduate, undergraduate,
and K-12 levels with emphasis on engaging individuals from groups traditionally
under-represented in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to project
outcomes&lt;br/&gt;Biological resources resulting from this project (e.g., DNA
libraries and filters) will be made available to the public through the Clemson
University Genomics Institute (http://www.genome.clemson.edu). Raw DNA sequence
data (i.e., trace, quality, and flat files) will be deposited in the NCBI Trace
Repository within one week of generation (as per the Bermuda/Ft. Lauderdale
agreements; http://www.genome.gov/10506537) while annotated sequence data will
be archived in the GenBank GSS database. &lt;br/&gt;