* 0421562
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope with Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy for Materials Characterization
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Hilary Lackritz, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 07/31/2008
* USD 367,644.00

In this project, a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with energy dispersive
x-ray analysis (EDX) will be acquired as the anchoring tool in a new
characterization center. The Materials Characterization and Metrology Center
(referred to as [MC]2 ) in the Chemical and Materials Engineering Department at
San Jose State University, will provide characterization capabilities to the
Department and the Colleges of Engineering and Science. Faculty and students
will use the instrument for undergraduate and graduate (MS level) research
projects, including work in semiconductor processing, microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS) development, biosensors development, neurobiology research,
nanocomposites and nanowires growth. In addition, the microscope will be used
for a variety of engineering and science lab classes as well as outreach
activities.

A large number of research projects already being conducted by SJSU personnel
will be impacted by this facility. Based on the university's location in Silicon
Valley and the networks with Stanford Nanofabrication Facility, NASA Ames
Research Center, IBM Almaden Research Center and many other local companies,
students and faculty are engaged in significant research projects from
nanotechnology to microelectromechanical devices to biological applications. The
broader impact of the work includes activities through which the career and
college choices are affected for hundreds of high school and community college
students every year who visit SJSU and participate in Open House, Discover
Engineering Camp and the Workforce Development Institute. The impact of improved
facilities on campus will be in expanded training opportunities for a large
number of engineering students, including many ethnic minority students.