* 0421342
* Acquistion of Large-Scale Trenchless Technologies Testing and Research Facility (L-STaR
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2007
* USD 272,495.00

A vast world often hidden from public view, America's underground infrastructure
with more than 3.5 million miles of underground utility services (involving
water, sewer, electric, gas, telephone, cable and other services) represents a
substantial resource that affects almost every business and home. Across the
world, countries install approximately 300,000 miles of underground utilities
annually with a market value of over $35 billion per year. Average design lives
of underground utilities are 20 to 50 years but current actual annual spending
on maintaining and replacing these assets implies that they must last hundreds
to thousands of years. Trenchless technologies include systems for installing
and maintaining underground pipes and utilities without the need for excavating
a continuous trench from the surface. Many of the techniques used have been
developed through field innovation and progressive refinement, but they may lack
a fundamental understanding of how critical processes within the ground really
operate and that there is a large gap between the potential of the techniques
and their current implementation. The most cost effective optimization of
solutions to underground utility system problems requires close collaboration
across various branches of engineering and science. Thus, it is proposed to
establish a multi-disciplinary research and testing facility capable of
supporting cutting-edge fundamental and applied research as well as concept
design, development and testing of advanced technologies for trenchless
approaches to solving underground utility problems. The instrumentation request
is to create a large scale (6 m by 6 m by 2 m high) soil-structure testing
chamber as the cornerstone of a multi-disciplinary laboratory for advanced
trenchless technology research and education. The proposed facility will be the
only one of its kind in the southern half of the USA and will be linked to an
existing field test facility. It will enable a broad range of faculty from
different disciplines and different institutions to pursue research using a
closely controlled, simulated field environment. Envisioned areas of research
include soil-structure interaction studies for installation and rehabilitation
systems, prototype testing of novel methods, development and refinement of
design methods, fundamental studies related to non-destructive underground
detection and assessment methods, and the development and testing of advanced
sensors and monitoring technology for buried pipes. The Trenchless Technology
Center (TTC) and College of Engineering and Science at Louisiana Tech University
are in a unique position to develop such a facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed request is in the creation of a facility in
which the circumstances of field installation, assessment and rehabilitation of
buried utilities can be closely simulated in a controlled laboratory
environment. This will provide a means to understand in a more rigorous fashion
the detailed performance of current techniques used in the industry and, more
importantly, assist in the development of novel systems. The broader impact of
the proposed request is that our aging underground utility infrastructure and an
increasing need to use the underground for new facilities combined with high
costs and technical difficulties provide an important incentive for a major
initiative in research, development, and education. This request will provide
the cornerstone of a national research facility that will allow researchers at
Louisiana Tech University to cooperate with researchers across the country in
addressing the research needs.&lt;br/&gt;