* 0421810
* Covalency and Low Dimensionality in Superconducting Pairing
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Warren Pickett, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2008
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports theoretical research in condensed matter physics. Discovery
or synthesis of new materials with unexpected and fascinating properties is a
continuing, perhaps accelerating, process exemplified by the discovery in 2001
of superconductivity in MgB2 at a critical temperature of 40K. Superconductivity
at almost twice the critical temperature of other intermetallics, in a simple
anisotropic compound without d-electrons broke all the known rules for
intermetallic superconductors. Such discoveries attract great interest amongst
materials physicists, and invariably strongly influence subsequent developments
in materials physics, both intellectual and practical.

This project focuses on gaining a deep understanding and computational theory of
this new class of superconductors, for which covalency and low dimensionality
play a critical role. This projected class contains, in addition to MgB2: the
closely related Li(1-x)BC system (predicted critical temperature well above
40K); electron-doped chloronitrides typified by Na(x)HfNCl (Tc=25K); the carbon
dumbbell system Y2C2Br2 (Tc up to 12K) and a newly revived C2 dumbbell material
yttrium sesquicarbide Y2C3 (Tc = 18K); and finally elemental Li under high
pressure (Tc = 20K). These systems display strong covalency, two-dimensionality,
or both. Research interactions in this area of research are strongly
interdisciplinary between condensed matter physicists, solid state chemists, and
materials scientists.

The multi-pronged research plan includes (1) first principles density-functional
based linear response theory, to obtain bonding characteristics, phonon
frequencies, electron-phonon matrix elements, and finally Tc itself; (2) first
principles molecular dynamics simulations, to characterize the dynamics of ions
in situations of extremely strong coupling; (3) diagrammatic techniques to
evaluate perturbative corrections to conventional Migdal-Eliashberg theory for
interacting electron-phonon systems; and (4) construction of effective thermal
distribution functions in systems with strong anisotropy. The objective of this
project is to obtain a unified microscopic understanding, based on first
principles (parameter-free) computational methods, that is detailed enough to
provide not only an understanding of, but also a predictive capability for, the
observed behavior.

The wide range of materials physics issues that are involved here range from
fundamental electronic structure theory, to large-scale dynamical simulations,
to interaction and transfer of energy between the electronic and lattice degrees
of freedom, to the diagrammatic perturbation theory of the interaction. The
combination of these issues, together with close interactions with
experimentalists doing synthesis and characterization, make this an ideal
training ground for broadly educated computational physicists. The materials
research atmosphere at UC-Davis generally, and in the Physics Department in
particular, allow students and postdocs alike to become immersed in exciting
materials research in preparation for careers in academia, research laboratories
and industry. Undergraduates will also participate in the research. %%% This
award supports theoretical research in condensed matter physics. Discovery or
synthesis of new materials with unexpected and fascinating properties is a
continuing, perhaps accelerating, process exemplified by the discovery in 2001
of superconductivity in magnesium di-boride at a critical temperature of 40K.
Superconductivity at almost twice the critical temperature of other
intermetallic compounds, in a simple anisotropic compound broke all the known
rules for intermetallic superconductors. Such discoveries attract great interest
amongst materials physicists, and invariably strongly influence subsequent
developments in materials physics, both intellectual and practical.

The wide range of materials physics issues that are involved here range from
fundamental electronic structure theory, to large-scale dynamical simulations,
to interaction and transfer of energy between the electronic and lattice degrees
of freedom, to the diagrammatic perturbation theory of the interaction. The
combination of these issues, together with close interactions with
experimentalists doing synthesis and characterization, make this an ideal
training ground for broadly educated computational physicists. The materials
research atmosphere at UC-Davis generally, and in the Physics Department in
particular, allow students and postdocs alike to become immersed in exciting
materials research in preparation for careers in academia, research laboratories
and industry. Undergraduates will also participate in the research. ***