* 0421180
* NEESR-II:    Highly Damage Tolerant and Intelligent Slab-Column Frame Systems Through Combination of Advanced Materials and Embedded Wireless Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Carol Shield, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2008
* USD 449,898.00

Structural systems that combine reinforced concrete (RC) slab-column frames with
moment resisting&lt;br/&gt;frames or shear walls find wide applications in zones
of moderate and high seismicity. Due to&lt;br/&gt;combination of lateral
displacements imposed during earthquakes with gravity loads, slab-
column&lt;br/&gt;connections are prone to exhibit punching shear failures.
Traditionally, the required shear strength of slabcolumn connections is achieved
by the use of drop panels or shear stud rails. The work outlined in
this&lt;br/&gt;proposal is to develop a highly damage tolerant and smart slab-
column frame system through the use of&lt;br/&gt;high-performance fiber
reinforced cement composites (HPFRCCs) and wireless sensing technology.
The&lt;br/&gt;development of new materials (HPFRCC) and smart structure
technologies (computationally rich wireless&lt;br/&gt;sensors) have previously
occurred in isolated research communities - this proposal is a first of its kind
to&lt;br/&gt;explore their combination so that an intelligent HPFRCC structure
capable of sustaining large drift&lt;br/&gt;demands and self-performance
monitoring can be derived. The revolutionary features of the
NEES&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure offer exciting paths of exploration that will lead
to a more profound investigation of&lt;br/&gt;intelligent HPFRCC slab-column
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to develop the proposed frame system, a
series of HPFRCC flat slab specimens will be first&lt;br/&gt;tested
monotonically at the University of Michigan to optimize the HPFRCC material for
this application.&lt;br/&gt;A total of six large-scale slab-column sub-
assemblages will then be tested under simulated earthquake&lt;br/&gt;loading.
Four of these sub-assemblages will be bi-directionally loaded using the NEES-
MAST facility at&lt;br/&gt;the University of Minnesota. The MAST facility is
ideally suited to this application as it can be used to&lt;br/&gt;load slab-
column assemblages in a realistic manner to fully assess the shear capacity of
HPFRCC&lt;br/&gt;connections. The results of these tests will be used to develop
models to predict the seismic behavior of&lt;br/&gt;building systems employing
these advanced materials and design provisions for the proposed slab-
column&lt;br/&gt;connections. To further enhance building safety, new technology
in wireless sensors will be incorporated&lt;br/&gt;into the project to develop
instruments that can self-detect and report structural damage due to
seismic&lt;br/&gt;events. The high resolution cameras available at the NEES-MAST
facility will enable the close&lt;br/&gt;correlation of the wireless
measurements with the accumulated damage, aiding in the development of
a&lt;br/&gt;damage index appropriate for this type of connection. An algorithm
for the developed damage index will&lt;br/&gt;be embedded into smart wireless
sensors to track the performance of the structural system, including
selfidentification of damage. Construction operations design studies, through
the use of discrete event&lt;br/&gt;simulation, will also be conducted to ensure
the constructability of the proposed system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The outcome of the proposed work will be a highly damage tolerant and
smart slabcolumn&lt;br/&gt;frame system for use in seismic-resistant
construction. This innovative system integrates the
latest&lt;br/&gt;developments in fiber cement-based materials and wireless
sensing technology to deliver next-generation&lt;br/&gt;slab-column frames
capable of 1) resisting extreme dynamic loads with outstanding damage
tolerance,&lt;br/&gt;and 2) self-identifying structural damage. Hysteretic,
damage, and design models, calibrated with results&lt;br/&gt;from large-scale
multi-axial sub-assemblage tests, will be developed for the safe and optimum use
of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed system. The experiments and associated models may
ultimately lead to significant changes in&lt;br/&gt;the design and construction
of slab column frames in areas of moderate and high seismicity.
Additionally,&lt;br/&gt;smart wireless sensors, with the capability of self-
detecting structural damage, will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Society will benefit from the immediate self-identification of damage
of structures, as&lt;br/&gt;building officials will be able to have access to
the accumulated damage in a building immediately after a&lt;br/&gt;seismic event
and will be able to make better informed decisions on the remaining life safety
of the&lt;br/&gt;building. The use of the NEESgrid capabilities will allow an
array of access to this research, from&lt;br/&gt;construction and design
professionals to high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To encourage female
and minority students to pursue graduate school careers in engineering, special
activities are planned with the University of Michigan's Minorities in
Engineering Program Office and the Women in Science and Engineering program such
as including summer research activities for interested female or minority
undergraduate students. The high-technology features of the NEES grid is a
superb example of the power of interdisciplinary research and would motivate
students to consider careers in Structural Engineering.