* 0421319
* Modernization of the NMR Spectrometer Facility at the University of Mississippi Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Daniell Mattern, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 07/31/2007
* USD 179,989.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Mississippi under the direction of
Dr. Daniell Mattern for partial support of the modernization of the Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer facility in the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry. The grant will enable the Department to refurbish its 13-year-old
300 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer, replacing its console with a
Linux-based workstation. Additional improvements include upgrades to the magnet
control system, RF transmitter, and digital acquisition system, and the
additions of console-controlled probe tuning, an automatic sample changer, and a
variable temperature unit. Also, the console for the Department's other NMR
instrument will be upgraded to a Linux-based workstation. The upgrades will
greatly enhance the Department's ability to continue to operate these crucial
Departmental workhorses.

The majority of the Department's research groups depend on these two NMR
instruments for routine analyses and/or for specialized molecular studies.
Studies that will be facilitated by this grant include the synthesis and
evaluation of polymeric electrolytes for fuel cell use and molecular-scale
electrical rectifiers, the investigation of catalytic radical asymmetric
cyclizations that can help make new organic molecules, the function of the
crucial carboxylesterase enzymes, and how protein folding occurs and how it can
affect gene expression. Concerning the Department's teaching mandate, NMR
spectroscopy is a component of a wide variety of courses. These range from
sophomore to graduate level laboratory courses and encompass a variety of sub-
disciplines, including organic, inorganic, and biochemistry. The modernization
will make the Bruker instruments much more accessible to undergraduate majors
and graduate students.

The NMR upgrade is also expected to provide broader impacts. It will assist the
Department's recruitment and retention of minority students, at both the
graduate level and through the University's Summer Research Institute for
Undergraduates, which gives minority students from historically black colleges
and universities laboratory research experience. Research projects assisted by
the upgrade could benefit society by helping lead to the development of more
efficient fuel cells, nanometer sized electrical devices, new routes to valuable
pharmaceuticals, better antitumor agents, and new treatments for narcotics
abuse.