* 0421219
* MRI:  Development of an In-Situ Neutron-Scattering Facility for Research and Education in the Mechanical Behavior of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Hahn Choo, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,999,996.00

This is award from the Major Research Instrumentation [MRI] Program to the
University of Tennessee supports the "Development of an In-Situ Neutron-
Scattering Facility for Research and Education in the Mechanical Behavior of
Materials". The project is based on partnership between the University of
Tennessee [UT], Oak Ridge National Laboratory [ORNL], and includes collaborators
from 16 universities, 13 industries, and 6 national laboratories with diverse
disciplines that include [1] Materials Science and Engineering; [2] Physics; [3]
Chemistry; [4] Mechanical, Aerospace, and Biomedical Engineering; [5] Civil
Engineering; [6] Nuclear Engineering; and [7] Biochemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art in-situ and real-time characterization
instrumentation for the VULCAN diffractometer at the impending Spallation
Neutron Source [SNS] will be developed. The facility will provide the most
intense pulsed-neutron source in the world and will open new scientific
frontiers and establish the nation's leadership in the field of the neutron-
scattering materials science and technology The instrumentation suite consists
of [1] a high-capacity electrohydraulic-mechanical test system, [2] a high-
temperature vacuum furnace, [3] a miniature-specimen electromechanical test
system, and [4] an electrochemical-environmental cell. The characterization
capabilities to be developed will far surpass anything else available in the
world. The simultaneous neutron diffraction and small-angle neutron scattering
[SANS] during mechanical testing will have a tremendous impact on the
fundamental understanding of the mechanical behavior of materials. The
instrumentation suite will be a major component of the neutron-scattering user
facilities and, therefore, will be available to a broad user community. The
instruments can be used across different disciplines, which will foster the
integrated research/education interactions among the various disciplines and
facilitate the development of new interdisciplinary programs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This is award from the Major Research Instrumentation [MRI] Program
to the University of Tennessee supports the "Development of an In-Situ Neutron-
Scattering Facility for Research and Education in the Mechanical Behavior of
Materials". The project is based on partnership between the University of
Tennessee [UT], Oak Ridge National Laboratory [ORNL], and includes collaborators
from 16 universities, 13 industries, and 6 national laboratories with diverse
disciplines that include [1] Materials Science and Engineering; [2] Physics; [3]
Chemistry; [4] Mechanical, Aerospace, and Biomedical Engineering; [5] Civil
Engineering; [6] Nuclear Engineering; and [7]
Biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will develop a suite of
instruments for in-situ neutron-diffraction studies of the mechanical behavior
of advanced materials at the world's most powerful Spallation Neutron Source
[SNS]. The underlying goal of the proposal is to "accomplish the national agenda
of advancing neutron science and engineering in the US to the leadership
position in the world" by developing and providing the state-of-the-art neutron
instrumentation to the user community, which will be broadened by educating a
diverse cadre of skilled users.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation will
be a major component in the national neutron-user facilities, and will be
available to the entire research/education community. Therefore, the development
of the sample environment for the SNS facility will add a much needed new
capability to the nation's research infrastructures. These instruments will
benefit society through the advances in the fundamental understanding of high-
performance materials, leading to the enhanced reliability/performance of
engineering components. A new generation of scientists and engineers will be
trained in the use of neutron technologies. &lt;br/&gt;