* 0421076
* Development by the Consortium for Advanced Radiation Sources of a New X-Ray Beamline for High Pressure and Interface Earth Science Research at the GeoSoilEnviroCARS APS Sector
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Peter Eng, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 550,001.00

0421076&lt;br/&gt;Eng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GeoSoilEnviroCARS (GSECARS) is a
national user facility for frontier research in the earth sciences using
synchrotron radiation at the Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National
Laboratory. GSECARS provides access for the entire earth science community to
the high-brilliance hard x-rays from this third-generation synchrotron light
source. The research conducted at this facility is advancing our knowledge of
the composition, structure and properties of earth materials, the processes they
control and the processes that produce them. With this support we will design,
construct and commission a new doubly-focused, monochromatic x-ray side station
on our bending magnet beamline (13BM). This will bring to four the total number
of operating experimental stations at GSECARS, all serving the earth science
community, and will help to meet the demand for beam time by our current and
prospective users. This new beamline will provide research opportunities in two
principal areas: (1) Properties of earth materials under extreme conditions of
pressure and temperature through the use of diamond anvil cell (DAC)
diffraction, and (2) Properties of mineral-water interfaces through the use of
surface and interface scattering. The research conducted at this new beamline
will: (1) expand our understanding of the structures of mineral surfaces, how
these surfaces are modified during reactions with water, and the role of micro-
organisms in controlling composition and stabilization of contaminants on these
surfaces, (2) improve our knowledge of the chemical and physical properties of
the deep Earth, including details of phase transitions of mantle minerals and
core alloys and dynamics of core formation, and (3) advance technologies for
x-ray instrumentation and optics. GSECARS provides scientists and students
access to state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation. We are involved in active
outreach in the form of meetings and workshops and are successful in attracting
earth scientists who are novices in synchrotron-based analytical techniques as
well as providing student internship opportunities including underrepresented
Chicago area high school students. Our scientific staff works closely with new
investigators teaching x-ray theory and providing training in measurement
methods and data analysis, thereby advancing the technical and scientific
capabilities of the earth science community. Thus, this new station will enhance
the educational experience of established, as well as new, scientists and result
in direct knowledge transfer to advance the quality of the nation's research
infrastructure. In addition, the research conducted at this new facility will
have societal benefit in addressing human welfare issues, such as remediation of
toxins in our soils and aquifers, and aiding in our understanding of earthquake
generation mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;