* 0421960
* Theory of Highly Correlated Electronic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Steven Kivelson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2005
* USD 165,000.00

This award supports theoretical research in fundamental condensed matter
physics. The Fermi-liquid description of weakly interacting quasiparticles has
been remarkably successful as a framework for treating the properties of the
electron fluids encountered in a wide variety of crystalline materials and solid
state devices, even where the electron-electron interactions are quite strong,
and the Fermi liquid parameters are strongly renormalized from their bare
values. However, there are also many cases where the Fermi liquid approach
qualitatively fails: systems in which whatever dispersing feature there are in
the single particle spectral functions are overdamped in the sense that their
widths are larger than their mean, or where there are phase transitions to
broken symmetry states with temperature and energy scales comparable to
microscopic electronic scales, or that exhibit macroscopic behaviors that are
inconsistent with weakly interacting quasiparticles, such as finite resistance
in a two-dimensional system in the low temperature limit, or metallic(increasing
with increasing temperature) resistivities with magnitudes in excess of the
Ioffe-Regel limit. Non-interacting electrons serve as the appropriate
paradigmatic for well developed Fermi liquids, but simple, solvable models of
strongly interacting electrons are few and far between. It is the principle
purpose of the research envisaged here to obtain well controlled approximate, or
even asymptotically exact solutions to simple models of strongly interacting
electrons as a step in filling this void. More particularly, it is proposed to
study models with purely repulsive interactions between electrons in which the
existence of a superconducting state with a high transition temperature can be
firmly established and the transition temperature reliably estimated. This study
is relevant to elucidating the mechanism of high temperature superconductivity.
On a more phenomenological level, it is proposed to study the effects of
electronic micro-phase-separation, a common occurrence in strongly correlated
"bad metals," on various macroscopic properties such as the optical conductivity
and DC transport. While much of this effort is inspired by an attempt to
understand the remarkable properties of the cuprate high temperature
superconductors, applications of related ideas to low density electron gases in
MOSFET's, and to other highly correlated electronic materials, such as
transition metal oxides and the organic superconductors, are also
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are, by now, many examples of highly
correlated bad metals, where conventional approaches to the theory of electronic
structure fail. Obtaining a simple, qualitative understanding of these materials
is an intellectual question on par with, "What is a metal?" High temperature
superconductivity is only one of the phenomena observed in such materials, but
one of the most exciting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will serve as a fertile
source of research projects for students. The problems are well defined, and of
direct experimental relevance, while at the same time involving mastery of a
large number of methods of many body physics. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research on fundamental condensed matter physics. The
topic is materials which exhibit strongly interacting electrons which produce
effects, such as high temperature superconductivity, that are unable to be
understood with current theory. A systematic procedure will be followed to
develop and solve models, including experimental predictions, which will
contribute to the understanding of these materials. As part of this project,
students will be trained in modern techniques of condensed matter
theory.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;