* 0421108
* MRI:     Development of Nanoscale Probes for Enhanced Vibrational Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Naomi Halas, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is the development
of a new type of a scanning local probe microscope capable of obtaining chemical
information with nanoscale resolution and to utilize this microscope in a wide
range of applications pursued by different research groups at Rice University.
The microscope will consist of a metallodielectric nanoparticle mounted or
integrated as an Atomic Force Microscope tip (AFM) tip. The nanoparticle will be
designed to have plasmon resonant response in the infrared region of the
spectrum (2.7 -10 microns in wavelength; 1000-3600 cm-1). The strong
electromagnetic field enhancements associated with the excitations of plasmons
in the probe tip will dramatically enhance the cross sections for infrared
excitation of dipole active vibrational modes in the tip-sample junction
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will result in a new and unique nanoscale
spectroscopic tool that will be useful across a very broad range of technical
applications, such as fundamental nanoscale studies in the physical and chemical
sciences, a valuable new imaging probe in the life sciences, and a unique,
breakthrough sensor technology for environmental analysis and detection of trace
chemical species. The highly collaborative multidisciplinary instrument
development team consists of researchers in the departments of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Chemistry, Physics, and Bioengineering. Two courses will
be developed during this project addressing the theoretical and experimental
aspects of nanoscale instrument component design and fabrication. A large number
of users for this instrument have been identified within the Rice science and
enginee&lt;br/&gt;