* 0421889
* Regulation of plant osmotic-stress-induced Gene Expression by Unique Ser 5-specific RNAP II CTD Phosphatases
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2009
* Hisashi Koiwa, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2009
* USD 405,999.00

Transcription and mRNA processing are regulated by phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II,
which consists of tandem repeats of a YSPTSPS heptapeptide. Previous studies
showed that members of the plant CPL (CTD phosphatase-like) protein family
differentially regulate osmotic-stress- and ABA-responsive transcription in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Among the CPL genes identified in the Arabidopsis genome,
CPL1 and CPL2 represent a novel CTD phosphatase, which exhibits unique position
specificity for phosphorylated Ser 5 in the CTD repeat, and contains double-
stranded RNA binding domains. This project aims to identify the molecular
network that regulates stress-responsive transcription through CTD
phosphorylation. The in vivo function of each domain of CPL1 will be determined
by expressing mutagenized CPL1 in a CPL1 null mutant strain (fry2-1). Proteins
interacting with CPL1 (CIF: CPL-interacting factor) will be identified using the
yeast two-hybrid system, and will be further characterized by testing genetic
interactions of cpl and cif mutant alleles. Functionality of CPL-CIF interaction
during stress response will be analyzed by testing physiological stress
responses, as well by analyzing stress-inducible transcriptional activation.
Through the project, junior scientists (postdocs, graduate/undergraduate
students) will be trained for integrated studies of core transcriptional
machinery using molecular genetic and biochemical strategies. The
data/materials/mutants generated by the project will be deposited in the public
domain as they become available.