* 0421176
* MRI: Acquisition of a Pulsed Laser System for Quantum Dots and Thin Films Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Branislav Vlahovic, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 352,725.00

North Carolina Central University will acquire a state of the art pulsed laser
deposition (PLD) system. The system will significantly enhance research and
fabrication of quantum dots and multi-junction thin films by adding the
capability to prepare these nanostructures. It brings a new capability for
nanostructure fabrication and characterization at NCCU. The system will
complement existing capability at the institution such as Raman spectroscopy,
Photoluminescence (PL), Deep Level Transient Spectroscopy (DLTS), Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM), Thermo Stimulated Current (TSC), Hall effect, and FTIR
methods. The instrument will also be used for the advanced research and training
of faculty members and postdoctoral students in optics and nanotechnology. It
will contribute to bring more NCCU undergraduates into nanoscience training and
research and produce students with higher intellectual capacity. The instrument
will contribute to enhance the competitiveness of multidisciplinary science
programs at NCCU and improve conditions for the faculty and student. The PLD
system will be open for collaborative use with other HBCU's. The award will help
NCCU expand its training for African American graduate and undergraduate
students. %%% North Carolina Central University will acquire a state of the art
pulsed laser deposition (PLD) system. The system will significantly enhance
research and fabrication of quantum dots and multi-junction thin films by adding
the capability to prepare these nanostructures. It brings a new capability for
nanostructure fabrication and characterization at NCCU. The system will
complement existing capability at the institution such as Raman spectroscopy,
Photoluminescence (PL), Deep Level Transient Spectroscopy (DLTS), Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM), Thermo Stimulated Current (TSC), Hall effect, and FTIR
methods. The instrument will also be used for the advanced research and training
of faculty members and postdoctoral students in optics and nanotechnology. It
will contribute to bring more NCCU undergraduates into nanoscience training and
research and produce students with higher intellectual capacity. The instrument
will contribute to enhance the competitiveness of multidisciplinary science
programs at NCCU and improve conditions for the faculty and student. The PLD
system will be open for collaborative use with other HBCU's. The award will help
NCCU expand its training for African American graduate and undergraduate
students.