* 0421200
* MRI:  Acquisition of CASTOR:  A High-Performance Communication and Storage Backbone for Data-Intensive Science and Engineering Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Y Sheng, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2008
* USD 600,000.00

This project, adding high performance interconnections and true data-intensive
storage facilities, involves a high performance communication and storage
backbone, named CASTOR. With the interconnections, this backbone enables
achievement of the full benefits of the grid strategy to support data-intensive
research in diverse disciplines. Major campus facilities will be linked by a
10Gigabit/s network and supported by 24 Terabyte storage systems. CASTOR's high
performance links are well matched to those of Florida Lambda Rail and National
Lambda Rail. Serving the following research domains, High Energy Physics,
Chemical Physics and Material Science, Coastal and Estuarine Modeling, Medical
Physics, and Computational Biology, the new infrastructure will also serve
Computer Science and Engineering on data-intensive, high-performance grids.
CASTOR is expected to strengthen the collaboration between multidisciplinary
teams across the institution and provide a unique resource for the projects in
which the researchers participate. The infrastructure provides a unique resource
for applications that require storing, processing, and communicating very large-
scale data sets at very high speeds. Reflecting real-world scenarios, the work
involves the following technologies:&lt;br/&gt;* Grid Computing,&lt;br/&gt;*
Distributed Storage, and&lt;br/&gt;* Advanced Networking.&lt;br/&gt;The first
involves the development innovative middleware techniques that complement and
extend virtualization of physical information resources to hide infrastructure
heterogeneity and allow applications to execute on grid-enabled resources with
user control and interaction from various web-based interfaces. The second
provides a trial version of the grid environment to operate queries, providing a
proof-of-concept for deployment in larger systems. CASTOR serves as an "ideal
sandbox" to develop and test algorithms suitable for a distributed data
pipeline. The last enables experiments in a research network operating at ultra-
high speeds and multiple domains, hence contributes to enrich
projects.&lt;br/&gt;