* 0421153
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Ultrahigh-Resolution Photoelectron Spectrometer for Education and Research on Complex and Low-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* E. Ward Plummer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 364,000.00

Nearly all materials properties are determined by electrons close to the Fermi
level, usually within 100 meV. In order to probe the behavior of electrons in
this energy range, one needs to employ spectroscopy with ultrahigh resolution.
This project entails the acquisition of an ultrahigh-resolution photoemission
spectrometer of the Scienta type, which offers the best resolution that is
currently achievable. This instrumentation will be used to investigate the
electronic states in a wide variety of advanced electronic materials, including
complex transition metal oxides, thin film nanostructures, organic
superconductors, and atomic-wire arrays. Coupled with other spectroscopic
methods, such as inelastic neutron scattering for probing spin and lattice
excitations, and optical spectroscopy and Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy for
charge dynamics, it will enable researchers to unravel the highly complex
entanglement of the spin, charge, and lattice degrees of freedom in these exotic
materials. The new instrumentation will be based on campus, not at the
synchrotron, so that students and faculty can have easy access and copious
amounts of high quality photoemission time. The proposed science and new
infrastructure will provide an excellent setting for the education and training
of internationally competitive students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all materials properties are
determined by electrons close to the Fermi level, which represents the highest
occupied energy level. Examples include electrical conductivity, magneto-
resistance, superconductivity, and magnetism. In order to understand these
important materials properties, one should probe the electrons near the Fermi
level with ultrahigh resolution spectroscopy. From the late 1980s, Angular
Resolved Photo-Emission Spectroscopy has been intensively applied to unravel the
origins of superconductivity in high-temperature superconductors. In recent
years the resolution of photoemission experiments has improved so much that
electrons within a fraction of a milli-electronvolt around Fermi level can now
be distinguished. Many of these potentially prize-winning studies have been
published in highly prestigious journals because the ever increasing resolution
unraveled novel properties that challenged the community and triggered new
discovery. This project entails the acquisition of the world's best ultrahigh-
resolution photoemission apparatus for the University of Tennessee. It will be
used to study a wide variety of advanced electronic materials, including complex
transition-metal oxides, thin film nanostructures, organic superconductors, and
atom-wire arrays. A key aspect of the proposed research activities is that the
powerful capabilities of this instrument will be combined with the local,
complementary expertise and capabilities in neutron scattering and materials
synthesis, thus providing researchers in East Tennessee with a competitive edge.
The new instrumentation will be based on the Knoxville campus, not at a national
synchrotron facility, so that students and faculty can have easy access and
copious amounts of high quality photoemission time. The proposed science and
infrastructure will also be accessible to the African American and Hispanic
minority-student population at Florida International University and provide an
excellent setting for the education and training of internationally competitive
students and postdocs from diverse backgrounds.