* 0421115
* MRI:  New Visions:  Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Integrating Research and Research Training in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mark Venable, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven E. Ellis
* 08/31/2008
* USD 351,990.00

This award provides support for acquisition of a modern Confocal Laser Scanning
Microscope (CLSM) to be housed in a microscopy facility accessible to all
faculty of the institution and their students, and to faculty and students at
other academic institutions in the region. A full-time Director of the
Microscopy Facility will train users of the CLSM. The microscope is expected to
both improve and expand research and research training at the Institution
through its use in research experimentation, research training of faculty and
students, integration of experimental design/research training into formal
classroom and laboratory instruction, and community outreach efforts. Among the
research programs to benefit from availability of the instrument are studies of
eye designs in basal metazoans, analysis of arthropod head segmentation, efforts
to elucidate the effect of sphingolipid changes and of senescence on membrane
microdomain structure and function, and studies of embryonic control mechanisms
in model crustaceans. The planned studies will contribute new knowledge to the
fields of cell biology, developmental biology, neurobiology, physiology, and
evolutionary biology. All projects will provide research training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, and, together with faculty users,
students will participate in a monthly student/ faculty research seminar series
where experimental design, bioimaging, and current literature will be discussed.
Student users will be encouraged to present their findings at professional
meetings and to publish their results in peer reviewed journals. Additional
faculty and students in 8 departments are expected to use confocal imaging in
their research and research training activities. Use or demonstration of the
CLSM will be incorporated into biology teaching laboratories and science
education classes at the institution and at some neighboring community colleges.
The microscopy facility is expected to serve as a regional facility, thus
permitting access to a state of the art CLSM for faculty and students at nearby
institutions that currently lack this important tool for modern cell and
developmental biology.