* 0421009
* MRI: Acquisition of a Blue Gene/L Supercomputer for Computational Science Research
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Glenn Bresnahan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/29/2008
* USD 800,000.00

This project, empowering research projects in computational science, aims at
acquiring a 2048-node BlueGene/L supercomputer from IBM. BlueGene/L is a highly
integrated supercomputer based on system-on-a-chip technology focusing on
numerically based scientific problems. The new supercomputer will enable a wide
range of novel, computationally intensive research in areas ranging from
subnuclear physics to bioengineering, space weather and ocean modeling. These
areas will provide a test-bed for BlueGene/L applications in a concrete and
diverse environment. The investigations will be carried out by researchers from
Boston University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Tufts University.
An IBM scientist (Gyan Bhanot) will collaborate with these scientists in the
study of optical techniques to use the machine. The following sixteen projects
will make use of the facility: Computational Investigations of Subnuclear
Particle Phenomena, Computational Investigations of Condensed Quantum Matter,
Photonic Crystals, Quantum Dynamics of Chemical Systems, Accelerated Algorithms
for Multiple Time Scale Simulations of Supercooled Liquids and Biomolecules,
Molecular Modeling of Liquid and Glassy Water, Multiscale Modeling of Materials
Strength, Computational Determination of Regulatory Networks, Dynamics of Spin
Systems and Opinion Evolution, Managing Complex Systems in Manufacturing
Enterprise, Computational Investigations of Topological Issues in Hydrodynamics,
Large Eddy Simulation Models for Three-Dimensional Turbulence, Space Weather,
Electrodynamics of Plasma Processes in the Ionosphere, Non-Hydrostatic Direct
Numerical Simulation of Oceans, and Algorithms for Optimized Computation and
Communication of Blue/Gene/L

Broader Impact: New programs in interdisciplinary training in computational
science (ACES) will take advantage of the facility. The resource will be shared
in a broad basis and open to the national research community.