* 0421519
* Acquisition of Microarray Instrumentation and a High Throughput Capillary Sequencer for Biological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Carl Reiber, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Robyn E. Hannigan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 246,458.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) under the
direction of Dr. Frank van Breukelen for the partial support of the acquisition
of a microarrayer and a capillary sequencing instrument. These instruments will
allow for high throughput characterization of genes and differential gene
expression in research programs covering a wide range of biological questions.
These instruments will have profound effects on furthering research programs
that include physiological responses to stress in plants and animals,
developmental biology, neurobiology, behavioral physiology, bioinformatics,
species interactions, speciation, ecosystem functioning, and plant/microbe
interactions. The acquisition of microarray capacity will allow exploration at
the genomic level and will likely generate significant new hypotheses for future
directions. The increased capacity for DNA sequencing afforded by a new high
throughput capillary sequencer will greatly enhance research programs in fields
as divergent as molecular systematics and basic biochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Training at all levels has always been a major component of research
activities at UNLV and these instruments will further enhance training
opportunities. Undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
fellows will gain access to modern technologies that will allow them to
incorporate these important research tools into their repertoire of skills. We
currently offer courses (and are planning additional courses) targeted towards
capitalizing on the technologies supported by the genomics facility. We have and
will continue to actively encourage the participation of underrepresented groups
in our research programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern Nevada is the fastest
growing region in the United States of America and UNLV's growth has reflected
this with an 18.5% increase in student population in two years. UNLV has an
opportunity to be an epicenter for a diversification of the State's economy
since there are no equivalent institutions for several hundred kilometers. The
further development of UNLV as a research university will provide additional
resources to attract high tech industries. Finally, additional resources will
augment current NSF EPSCoR efforts to make UNLV researchers more competitive for
federal funding. &lt;br/&gt;