* 0421620
* Functional Genomics of Root Hair Infection
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Steven Clough, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2010
* USD 2,500,000.00

Root hairs are specialized, single cell organs that develop on roots to increase
surface area and enhance nutrient and water uptake. These cells are also the
site of infection of legumes by symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria. This latter
process involves extensive cellular changes in the root hair with the formation
of an infection thread by which the bacteria gain entry into the root cortex.
This process culminates in the formation of a novel organ, the nodule, in which
the bacteria fix atmospheric nitrogen. The net result is a system by which the
bacteria gain a nutritious environment, while the plant gains access to
nitrogen, commonly a limiting nutrient for plant growth. Thus, the rhizobial
infection process has great agronomic and ecological significance. Moreover, the
infection process, especially during the early phases within the root hair,
presents interesting cell biology questions. The research will focus on root
hair infection by rhizobia, a poorly characterized and experimentally difficult
step in the symbiosis to study. The research is made possible by using soybean,
from which we can isolate purified root hairs in gram quantities; an amount
enabling the application of both DNA microarray and proteomic analysis. At a
more basic level, the research allows for the detailed analysis, using modern
functional genomic tools, of the cell biology of a single, plant cell type.
Microarray data obtained will be submitted to the GEO database and will be made
publicly available upon acceptance of the relevant manuscript for publication.
The function of genes identified by functional genomic analysis will be further
analyzed by specific silencing using RNAi technology. We will also employ a
comparative approach using the large and growing collection of symbiotically
defective plant mutants in the model legumes, M. truncatula and L. japonicus.
Publications arising from the work will detail methods and results to the larger
scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
research involved will impact education at all levels: high school,
undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate. Specifically, in order to reach more
undergraduate students, we intend to use a distance learning method by which
students, at their home institutions, design DNA microarray experiments, which
then are conducted in our laboratories. The students will then have access to
the data via a dedicated website. In this way, we will bring DNA microarray
resources to the development of undergraduate biology curriculum. The work
proposed has broader biological significance since it represents one of the few
systems in which the cell biology of a single cell type, the root hair, can be
studied in detail. We expect our research to address important basic questions
relevant to plant cell biology; such as, polar cell growth, cytoskeleton
dynamics, calcium signaling, and many others. In order to translate plant
genomic knowledge into crop improvement, genomic knowledge of crop plants, such
as soybean, must be developed well enough to allow information transfer from
models to occur. Our research will contribute to the development of soybean
functional genomics and comparative legume genomics. The increasing knowledge
base of soybean biology will allow plant scientists to respond to new threats
and opportunities that may impact this agronomically important species in the
future. The further development of the genomics of many plant species, including
soybean, will accommodate comparative approaches and will provide synergistic
opportunities to advance plant science. The training provided by the research
described will help prepare the next generation of plant scientists to meet
these challenges.&lt;br/&gt;