* 0421352
* MRI:     Acquisition of Ultra-Wide-Band Measurement and Modeling Facilities for Multidisciplinary Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Hao Ling, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 10/31/2007
* USD 252,298.00

Intellectual Merit Since the approval of the ultra-wide-band (UWB) frequency
spectrum (1.99-10.6 GHz) by the FCC in 2002, many UWB products are currently
under development for both sensing and communications. With a very large
bandwidth at a relatively low frequency, UWB radar is capable of achieving both
high resolution and good penetration. Therefore, UWB radar is well-suited for
detecting and imaging occluded targets, e.g., humans behind walls, caves
underground, or biological tissues. Consequently, it is recognized as a
promising technology for applications ranging from physical security to
biomedical imaging. UWB wireless communications also have unique advantages,
especially for short range urban/indoor environments, because of high capacity,
resistance to multipath and interference, and simple scalability in multi-user
situations. The current debate over IEEE standards for UWB indicates that
industry intends to aggressively pursue this promising market. However, the
physical layer understanding for UWB including scattering, mobile/urban
propagation, and antenna characterization, is still an emerging area. One of the
key challenges in UWB radar and communications technology is how to overcome the
signal distortion caused by propagation through dispersive occluding materials,
dispersion due to frequency-dependent antenna radiation, nonlinear effects due
to embedded semiconductor devices, and the use of oversimplified narrowband
scattering and propagation models. Due to this lack of understanding, current
UWB radar and communication systems are limited from reaching their full
potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team, a collaboration of four
faculty at the University of Texas-Pan American and one at the University of
Texas at Austin, have identified three projects related to UWB radar and
communications that depend critically on a common core of instrumentation; in
particular, high-speed time-domain measurement of UWB electromagnetic fields and
signals. In addition, two related projects in radar imaging and semiconductor
modeling need the ability to make high-speed time-domain measurements. At UTPA
the proposed instrumentation includes 1) a time domain measurement system
consisting of a very high-speed digital oscilloscope and pulse generator; 2)
commercial electromagnetic simulation software; 3) DC and high-power parametric
semiconductor testing equipment; 4) antenna positioning system and absorbers. At
UT-Austin, a single high performance vector network analyzer is requested. The
instrumentation builds upon existing facilities and will greatly extend our
research capabilities for both the current and future projects. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The immediate application of the instrumentation will focus on three
aspects of UWB technology: 1) UWB detection and imaging of occluded targets; 2)
time-domain characterization of UWB antennas with embedded circuits; 3) UWB
electromagnetics for communications and sensing. In addition, the
instrumentation will support two related research projects: 4) maximum
resolution range-Doppler imagery and 5) nonlinear semiconductor device
characterization. While each PI will lead one of the five projects; there is
strong overlap, and three of the PIs already have a history of research
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts UTPA is a public
institution located in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of South Texas. The student
population is 85% Hispanic, the majority are first generation college students,
and most qualify for some form of financial aid. The PIs have employed at least
twenty-eight undergraduate students on research projects, and at least fourteen
undergraduate students have been publication authors or co-authors. For this
project, we have a special opportunity to involve eight to twelve freshmen and
sophomore students per year through an already funded state/industry program
that supports on-campus technical employment for new electrical engineering
students at UTPA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three of the PIs are junior faculty at
UTPA, and UTPA.s master.s program in electrical engineering is still young. By
strengthening our existing collaborations with faculty at major research
institutions, like UT-Austin, we hope to improve the institution.s research
track record and broaden opportunities for Rio Grande Valley master.s students
to transition to doctoral studies. We expect that ten to twenty graduate
students will use the proposed instrumentation for thesis research over the next
eight to ten years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;