* 0421818
* Continuing Success: An I&amp;ET Scholarship Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Daniel Nance, U of Kentucky Madisonville Community College
* Standard Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 07/31/2006
* USD 82,500.00

This project is awarding twelve scholarships per year for two years to students
enrolled in an Associate of Applied Science degree in Industrial and Engineering
Technology. The students are engaged in a learning community that is supported
by Support Services staff, which provides a pathway for academic success and
becoming part of a growing workforce in regional light-manufacturing
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is leveraging a Trio program that
includes Educational Talent Search and Upward Bound programs. These programs
identify and encourage academically talented, low-income and first-generation
students to achieve postsecondary educational goals. The program is using a
well-defined one-on-one recruitment effort by initiating the process through
personalized telephone contact, follow-up contact by faculty members, conducting
on-campus orientation sessions, and having the students engage in on-campus
interviews. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scholarship recipients engage in academic
advising with priority registration. Individual education plans are developed in
collaboration with faculty and Student Support Services councilors. The cohort
scholars are involved in four yearly retention workshops where their Individual
Assessment Plan are assessed, areas of concern are identified, and detailed
plans of action are developed to address these concerns in order to ensure
persistence and graduation. The final workshop facilitates job placement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;