* 0421629
* EPSCoR Conference on Collaboration, June 2004
* O/D,EPS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2005
* NONE NONE, Argonne National Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Henry N. Blount, III
* 03/31/2005
* USD 26,292.00

Argonne National Laboratory will host the seventh annual NSF-DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Conference on Collaboration
in June 2004. A primary objective of this conference will be to define the
successes and challenges faced by EPSCoR universities since the first conference
which was held in 1997 and to attempt to set strategies and new initiatives and
programs for the future. The conference will feature a workshop format focusing
on Research Opportunities for EPSCoR States in Emerging Technologies, along with
sessions dealing with National Laboratory/University collaboration, especially
as it relates to workforce development, and poster sessions that showcase
successful programs in the different states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The conference will expose faculty and students from EPSCoR states to a
large variety of user-facilities and broad-based programs in emerging
technologies at Argonne and other DOE national laboratories. This will have
broad implication for fostering collaborations and developing intellectual
talent and human resource potential in nanoscience and nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This multi-institutional conference is
designed to foster future collaborations between researchers in EPSCoR states
and DOE national laboratories. The conference will also encourage collaboration
of EPSCoR principal investigators with principal investigators for the Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LS-AMP) program. Such interaction
between awardees for these two NSF supported programs (EPSCoR and LS-AMP) is
expected to lead to effective strategies for encouraging participation of both
faculty and students from underrepresented groups in emerging research areas of
nanotechnology and nanoscience. &lt;br/&gt;