* 0421919
* Proection of Personal Data: A Cross-National Overview
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* James Rule, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kelly A. Joyce
* 07/31/2009
* USD 99,986.00

Proposed here is a collaborative study of parallels and differences in the
history and current form of privacy protection measures in nine countries. Over
the last thirty years, virtually all of the world's liberal democracies have
adopted privacy codes aimed at enabling ordinary citizens to exercise some
control over creation, appropriation and use of data files on themselves by
government and private organizations. In the project proposed here, nine privacy
specialists will each develop a succinct overview of the evolution and
distinctive character of such measures in his or her country. These chapter-
length studies will be carefully coordinated and edited so as to address a core
of questions vital to concerns about the intersections of science, technology
and society. These questions include: What groups and interests in each country
have mobilized for and against privacy protection codes? Has the impetus for
such measures stemmed from dramatic public controversies (as in Watergate) or
from some more incremental political developments? Where are key principles
underlying each nation's privacy codes drawn from? Is there any evidence for
influence of distinctively "Asian values" (or European or North American values)
in the privacy codes of countries in these parts of the world? Have privacy laws
and policies demonstrably altered the main flows of personal information in each
country? Where have efforts to create privacy legislation or policy been
blocked? Have privacy-enhancing technologies been deployed to any significant
extent, and have they been successful? Information in response to these queries
should provide a highly informative portrait of how the essentially global ideas
of privacy protection are manifesting themselves in each country. It should also
afford at least the beginnings of answers to more abstract, theoretically
charged questions including the following: Are privacy policies around the world
converging on a single set of principles, or do national differences promise to
endure? Are countries that diverge from patterns prevailing in the U.S. today,
for example, bound ultimately to succumb to pressures to emulate its policies in
this connection? Have early and influential codes of privacy principles such as
the OECD guidelines in fact withstood subjection to the rise of forceful demands
for personal data associated with such trends as the war on terrorism and the
rise of commercial markets for personal data? Creation and publication of these
essays in book form is intended to make accessible and comprehensible to non-
specialists a domain of inquiry and policy-making that has long been needlessly
obscure. It should speak to the concerns of non-specialists everywhere who
wonder whether and how privacy might be protected more fully, or in different
ways, in their own countries. It should serve as a resource for public debate
and policy-making in every country where privacy values are important. These
include not only countries with well-developed privacy legislation like those
covered in the case studies, but also the many countries likely to adopt privacy
codes for the first time in the near future.