* 0421555
* MRI:Development of Quartzite, a Campus-wide, Terabit-Class, Field-Programmable, Hybrid Switching Instrument for Comparative Studies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Larry Smarr, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,154,436.00

This project, building a campus wide ultra high-speed optical fiber network that
supports scientific application and experiments of high volume data, develops an
experimental next-generation instrument to efficiently investigate and compare
campus-scale terabit-class lambda network architectures that span from optical-
circuits-only to packet-switched-only networks (and a range of hybrid
combinations in between). Current commercial approaches to storage systems do
not scale in either performance levels or data abstractions. The proposed
approach builds on the foundation of the shared-nothing compute cluster emerging
from data systems, visualization walls, and high-end instrument interfaces,
having raw horsepower to serve and ingest high volumes of data required by
applications. Constructing a next generation switch for simultaneously switching
10Gbs streams efficiently, the work aims at building a 21st century photonic
instrument to explore the practical tradeoffs of network and application design
in bandwidth-rich infrastructure. Supporting large scientific problems and
enabling big simulations, the project constructs Quartzite, the experimental,
next-generation instrument. While fostering comparative studies, Quartzite, a
data-intensive application breadboard, enables stitching together resources,
bringing them virtually in. Thus, this wavelength-selective switch creation,
communication and delivery project, adds hybrid-networking structure to a unique
campus-scale platform and enables the study of network architecture and
application design in a band-width-rich infrastructure and the sharing of large
data sets across clusters. The work involves high risk, with a promise of even
higher impact, since data intensive scientific exploration can be brought into
the scientists' lab, by using on-demand high-speed data flows to harness campus-
to international-scale resources. The work explores the following
issues:&lt;br/&gt; How surplus of on-demand bandwidth can be exploited by end
user applications,&lt;br/&gt; How distributed systems can be best
architected,&lt;br/&gt; When is a non-shared packet network needed, &lt;br/&gt;
How should control of a hybrid fabric be handled, &lt;br/&gt; Can applications
truly exploit a high-speed parallel infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt; Is dynamic
reconfiguring of campus network to meet transient capacity demands
practical,&lt;br/&gt; Is it beneficial to expose direct circuits to individual
endpoints, and&lt;br/&gt; Do novel packet scheduling strategies for shared links
dramatically improve the capacity.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The Quartzite-
enabled comparisons will influence the network structure of future research
university networks, greatly increasing the capability for data-intensive
research throughout the country. Working with industrial partners, the hybrid
Quartzite core system and software will service us all.&lt;br/&gt;