* 0421661
* SGER: The Spectral Dependence of Thermal Radiation in Micron Scale Spaces on the Optical Properties of Surface Microstructures
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* James Hammonds, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 12/31/2005
* USD 37,136.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: CTS-0421661 Principal Investigator: James Hammonds Affiliation:
CUNY City College of New York Proposal Title: SGER: The spectral dependence of
thermal radiation in micron scale spaces on the optical properties of surface
microstructures

Surface polaritons (SP) are coupled electromagnetic and plasmon or phonon waves
at the surface of a body, and can be driven by visible light or thermal energy.
In the case of thermal energy, the associated radiated energy has a broad
spectral range, while SP's have a relatively short spectral range and thus could
be useful for particular applications such as those using thermophotovoltaic
(TVP) cells, which are typically spectrally selective. SP's however, do not
carry energy away from the body surface, and without the aid of some coupling
mechanism, their special spectral properties cannot be utilized. Recent
experimental and theoretical results suggest that micron and submicron scale
surface texturing can alter the spectral thermal radiation properties at
distances beyond the microscale regime from a substrate surface, because
thermally driven SP's are scattered at the textures. While it has been
demonstrated theoretically and experimentally that the spectral properties of
thermal radiation can be affected by SP scattering at surface gratings,
quantitative analysis of how varying the optical properties of the scattering
sites can affect thermal radiation is lacking. In this research, a first step to
investigating shifting thermal radiation via SP scattering will be accomplished
by developing preliminary methods that will be useful in understanding the
spectral properties of the radiation that results from SP scattering, and how
this spectrum is related to the resonance frequencies of both the substrate and
the islands. To do so, approximate analytical solutions will be obtained by
developing the scattered SP in the far field limit. This work would represent
the first such study and, if successful, would demonstrate that even greater
control of thermal emission is possible, thus allowing for greater optimization
of TPV and related devices.