* 0422946
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Development of Transgenic Wheat  and Fungal Endophytes to Improve Iron Acquisition by Wheat.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Gopi Podila, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2009
* USD 20,000.00

0422946&lt;br/&gt;Podila &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
the U.S.-India cooperative research entitled Towards Development of Wheat and
Fungal Endophytes Capable of Expressing Bacterial Siderophores: A Sustainable
Solution to Global Iron Deficiency Anemia (IDA). The collaborators are
Professors G.K. Podila, University of Alabama Huntsville, Ajit Varma, Jawaharlal
Nehru University (JNU), New Delhi, and Sudhir Chincholkar, North Maharashtra.
Iron deficiency anemia is an extensive worldwide problem that can be alleviated
by improving the proportion of iron in grains, seeds, fruits and vegetables.
&lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of this research is to develop wheat plants with
increased iron nutrition. The investigators propose to develop transgenic wheat
and a fungal endophyte (P. indica) capable of expressing bacterial siderophores
in order to improve acquisition of iron by wheat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope:
This research has the potential to positively impact the nutritional health of
large portions of the world's population and help to alleviate IDA. The
collaborative research is an outgrowth of a U.S.-India workshop on Mycorrhizal
fungi jointly organized by Drs. Varma and Podila in 2003 and supported by NSF.
It involves exchanges of students and faculty between the U.S. and India. The
benefits are mutual for the interacting scientists and students. Having wheat
plants with increased iron nutrition will have expanded use in agriculture in
India and the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;