* 0422180
* The Paschal Scholars Program in Mathematics, Computer Science, and Computer Information Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Jacquelin Dietz, Meredith College
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/2011
* USD 384,996.00

This project addresses the national need to prepare more women for careers in
mathematics, computer science, and computer information systems. It provides 28
Paschal Scholarships per year for four consecutive years to seven academically
talented, financially needy students from each class level who are completing
undergraduate degrees in these majors. Meredith has forged strong partnerships
with faculty and professionals across multiple fields to aid in mentoring and
placing students. The Paschal Scholars Program will recruit talented students
from diverse backgrounds, retain students in these fields to degree completion,
place students in mathematics and IT fields upon graduation, and build a mentor
network during and after the award period. The Paschal Scholars Program will
develop new features, including a speaker series on issues related to the
underrepresentation of women in mathematics and computing and a mentor network,
and will combine these with existing supportive structures to assist in
retaining these students to degree completion.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
Paschal Scholars Program encourage academically-talented women to enter these
demanding fields, enabling a greater proportion to complete their degrees and
increasing their post-graduation opportunities. Faculty and student scholars
will also disseminate research and components of the program through
presentations at national conferences. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Meredith
faculty in mathematics and information sciences will continue their
collaborations with colleagues at NC State University to study "pipeline issues"
and extend the benefits and results of this research to students in the region
and to researchers and practitioners around the country.