* 0422219
* SBIR Phase II:  Direct Conversion of Heat to Electricity with Nanowire Antenna Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Brian Berland, ITN ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 07/31/2006
* USD 488,855.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
enabling nanotechnology that collects and converts infrared radiation (IR) from
heated sources into DC power using nanowire antenna arrays with monolithically
integrated rectifying diodes (IR-AAID). The innovation uses scaleable (square
meters), self-organizing, and inexpensive electrochemical processing with low
cost materials to engineer antenna/diode systems to convert light from heat
sources. IR-AAID can convert heat to electricity at over 40 percent efficiency
and be adapted to different emitters simply by changing the antenna geometry.
The best IR thermo-photovoltaic modules typically operate at less than 5 percent
efficiency, cost more than $300 per Watt, require up to 2000 degree Kelvin
emitter temperatures to match available bandgaps, and require expensive
materials with chemically tailored compositions, that are temperature sensitive,
to match specific energy applications. In Phase I, the team demonstrated the
feasibility of forming nanometer scale IR collecting antenna/diode structures
over large areas, developed unique measurements to independently evaluate
antenna and diode performance, demonstrated materials and diode structures that
will provide the required IRAAID performance, generated DC power from light with
IR-AAID devices, and demonstrated 6 percent conversion efficiency with non-
optimized diodes. For Phase II, the team will develop robust processing to form
inexpensive (less than $2 per Watt), IR-AAID prototypes to efficiently convert
light to DC power.

Commercially, since IR-AAID does not require prohibitively expensive advanced
lithography or direct serial nano-patterning, this effort will produce low-cost
nanowire arrays with high density over relatively large areas, for heat
collection. These applications will vary from portable power packs that use low
temperature heat, to the generation of electricity from high temperature nuclear
and conventional heat sources where noise or other environmental concerns are an
issue. The enabling IR-AAID features are ideally suited for heat recovery
applications, a $100B resource that is virtually untapped at present due to the
limitations and costs of existing technology.