* 0422279
* A Program to Facilitate Scholastic Achievement in Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Daniel Tauritz, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 07/31/2009
* USD 225,464.00

The University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR) is developing and implementing the UMR
CSEM Scholars, a program that is awarding 14 scholarships annually for 4 years
and addresses the following challenges: 1) increase student enrollment and
retention in Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics (CSEM); 2) increase
percentage of students enrolled in CSEM degree programs that originate from low-
income households; 3) increase retention and graduate rate of CSEM low income
students; and 4) increase post-graduation success of CSEM graduates originating
from low-income households. These goals are accomplished by providing the CSEM
scholars with an environment to achieve their best academic performance, and
enable them to succeed in the workforce by guiding them in leadership,
professional development, and personal growth. CSEM scholars are provided a wide
variety of support structures and activities including a set of half-day
seminars in each semester to strengthen their professional development alongside
their academic development in the curriculum. The project is being assessed
throughout the duration to determine effectiveness of recruiting, retaining and
graduating low-income students. The results of this assessment are made
available through local and national dissemination venues including publication
in journals, conference presentations and web-based information.