* 0422062
* Collaborative:     Investigation of the Consequences of Cooperative Motion in Polymers and their Miscible Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Sanat Kumar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 04/30/2007
* USD 60,000.00

Cooperative motion is widely accepted as being important for dynamics of glass-
forming liquids, yet the length scales over which cooperative motion occurs are
poorly understood. Experiments are proposed and computer simulations to address
cooperative motion in polymers. While cooperative motion is thought to be
important for the dynamics of all liquids near their glass transition, polymers
o.er some unique opportunities for probing cooperative motion. Monte Carlo and
Molecular Dynamics simulations will be utilized to directly measure the
distribution of sizes and shapes of cooperatively relaxed regions, with an
emphasis on determining measures that can be applied to real experiments.
Dielectric experiments measuring the distribution of segmental relaxation times
in miscible polymer blends will be used to estimate the temperature dependence
of the cooperative size, for each blend component. Experiments that
systematically vary polymer structure (chain length and side groups) will also
provide less direct measures of the temperature dependence of cooperative size
in single-component polymer melts. Rheology experiments and Molecular Dynamics
simulations will explore the connection between segmental dynamics and chain
dynamics, in parallel studies. This connection will allow our models for
segmental dynamics in miscible blends to be extended to predict the terminal
dynamics, including the blend viscosity, with no additional parameters. The
intellectual merit of this research will be an improved understanding of
dynamics in polymers and their miscible blends, with particular emphasis on the
role of cooperative motion and the connection between segmental and chain
dynamics. The broader impacts of the proposed research are threefold. On the one
hand, the model of miscible blend rheology will find immediate pragmatic use in
the plastics industry, where polymer blends are vital for plastics recycling and
for metals replacement in the transportation industry. The latter enables weight
to be reduced without sacrificing strength, thereby saving fuel. Simultaneously,
understanding of cooperative motion will have far-reaching consequences in
developing an understanding of liquid state dynamics that goes far beyond
polymers. And finally the proposed research will create learning opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students. In addition to the involvement of both
undergraduate and graduate students in the experimental research, the PIs make
extensive use of their growing knowledge of polymer physics in recruiting,
advising and teaching at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.