* 0422378
* Engineering Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Eckehard Doerry, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* John F. Mateja
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

The College of Engineering and Technology (CET) at Northern Arizona University
(NAU) is providing 120 National Science Foundation (NSF) Computer Science,
Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) scholarships for academically
promising and financially needy computer science and engineering students. This
project is an extension to the existing CSEMS program award number 9987153. Over
the past 3 years, CET has provided scholarships to 108 students (91
undergraduates and 17 graduates). The NSF scholarships awarded to these students
have produced 3 notable accomplishments, 1) an increase in graduation rates for
CSEMS recipients versus the general engineering student population at NAU, 2) an
increase in graduation rates for Native American engineering students at NAU,
and 3) an increase in graduation rates for female engineering students at NAU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NAU is building upon the success of the past award and
striving to increase the impact on Hispanics and graduate engineering students.
The disciplines being served include Civil, Environmental, Computer Science,
Electrical, and Mechanical Engineering, as well as the newly established Master
of Engineering program. The objectives of the scholarship program include
improved retention, academic success and graduation rate of low-income,
academically talented undergraduate and graduate students in engineering.
Scholarships provide support for tuition, fees, and textbook charges per
academic semester. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are recruited to apply for the
scholarship program through many existing support services offered to
engineering students. These include the NAU Engineering Talent Pipeline Program
(part of a $1 million Hewlett Foundation Grant), the Multicultural Engineering
Program, Pathways Leading to Success Program, and the 10 nationally recognized
engineering student chapters active at CET. Students eligible for the award
include United States citizens who are enrolled full time in a declared major in
engineering at the baccalaureate or graduate level; have demonstrated academic
potential or ability; and have demonstrated financial need. Preference is given
to minority students reflecting the diverse nature of our college with regard to
under-represented groups, including Native Americans, Hispanics, women, and
students in the first generation of their family to attend a four-year college.
&lt;br/&gt;