* 0422328
* FAST-Phase 2, Financial Aid for Success in Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Marie Mons, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 12/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This project continues a successful CSEMS program at Georgia Institute of
Technology. The objectives are to enable access to a top-quality education to
the most deserving students and to ensure the best guidance for their success as
technology leaders.

The current program has already supported, financially and through mentoring, 87
students. Results from the first two and a half years show (a) a student
retention rate that is considerably superior to that of their peers (b) success
in guiding students to stay in CSEMS disciplines for their choice of careers,
(c) success in identifying and addressing issues that pose both difficulties and
offer opportunities to students most in need of guidance. This project builds on
current success towards developing a self-sustaining activity beyond the period
of this award. Many students are from under-served backgrounds that range from
rural to inner-city environments. The project team is chosen to increase the
recruitment and preparation of graduates from underrepresented groups, provide
expert mentoring, and increase opportunities for students to experience
participation at the leading edge of technology.

Intellectual Merit: The ideas used in the project were considered risky 3 years
ago - solutions focused on the real problems encountered by students new to the
heightened level of competition and expectations. The existing project showed
how to motivate undergraduates to delve into topics that are worthwhile to
explore; how to bring top-notch mentors into a scholarship program; how to
validate a bold model of low-overhead project management, with team effort and
shared concern for students as the guiding principles - a model for effective
use of student and faculty time in intellectual endeavor, while bringing the
best team resources to address individual student's needs. A Progressive GPA
Scale encouraged the student's determination to succeed, emphasizing performance
in the junior and senior years. This successful model is guiding future
scholarship programs.

Broader Impacts: Curriculum-research integration is boosted through seminars, as
well as by guiding students towards research internships. Industry-university
collaboration is enhanced through undergraduate participation in industry
seminars, and students guided towards co-op opportunities. The program channels
those students who need this exposure the most into the wide range of
opportunities available on a technological campus. It utilizes resources already
in place at Georgia Tech, such as the Space Grant Consortium, the Women in
Engineering (WIE) program, CEISMIC, and other programs to reach and influence
the decisions of middle- and high-school students, especially from
underrepresented and rural communities, to choose CSEMS areas. The continuation
is expected to assist another 120+ students, not just to complete, but to
enhance their education and to stay motivated to be leaders in technological
fields.