* 0422821
* US-Ethiopia Planning Visit: Physics and Geophysics Research and Education Collaboration with Addis Ababa University
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Solomon Bililign, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 02/28/2007
* USD 16,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;Bililign&lt;br/&gt;0422821&lt;br/&gt;This award funds planning
activities to initiate a research and educational collaboration between the
Department of Physics at North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCAT) and the
Department of Physics and Department of Geology and Geophysics at Addis Ababa
University (AAU) in Ethiopia. Two areas of collaboration will be developed in
the planning phase: 1) Dr. Solomon Bililign (NCAT) and Dr. Mulugeta Bekele
(AAU), a theoretical physicist with expertise in theoretical statistical
physics, will study the feasibility of using statistical models to study the
photofragmentation dynamics of transition metal organometallics in order to help
understand the experimental studies of chemical reaction that take place within
nanoclusters following multiphoton ionization and dissociation of transition
metal carbonyls. The planning visit will allow reciprocal visits to the labs of
both physicists. (2) Also supported by this award are reciprocal visits by U.S.
and Ethiopian geophysicists who will develop plans for providing international
research experiences for NCAT students to work with U.S. and Ethiopian
scientists collaborating on geophysical research in Ethiopia. With the support
of other NSF awards, the environmental geophysics degree track is under
development at NCAT; the Departments of Geophysics and Physics at AAU have a
long history of research experience and strong international collaborations in
geosciences. Furthermore, Ethiopia provides a natural laboratory for a number of
interesting geophysical phenomena. This planning visit should lay the groundwork
for building a strong research and education collaboration that will provide
NCAT students the opportunity to participate in international field research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an era of globalization where actions anywhere will
affect and influence others elsewhere, our students will benefit significantly
from conducting science in other countries, experiencing other cultures, and
contributing to the global economy. The collaborations in this planning request
will help in this effort. This project can also have a significant impact on the
participation of African-American students in geoscience education and research
in the U. S. and in Ethiopia. We expect that providing strong international
research experiences for NCAT students will strengthen their geoscience course
study, providing first-hand field experience and research skills in geosciences,
and enhancing their ability and likelihood of pursuing academic and/or industry
careers in geosciences. This award is co-funded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;