* 0422337
* Diversifying the High Tech Workforce through Increased Minority Participation
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Don May, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 07/31/2008
* USD 398,864.00

Student success in computer science, engineering, and mathematics is commonly
dependent on several factors. Over the years, the college's experience with both
native and non-native student populations indicates that there are three
particularly prevalent hurdles that the students face: adequate financial
resources, adequate mathematics and science preparation, and academic focus. In
addition, Native American students often face very significant acculturation
issues. Addressing these issues in a student's academic life result in increased
retention and overall academic success. The program is designed to address these
factors through scholarships, early academic intervention and tutoring, and
professional exposure. A significant infrastructure at the college has been
successfully operating for decades that help Native American students adapt to
the traditional college environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The project is infusing seven academic support and retention components with
existing student support services to create a seamless system of academic
support for CSEMS scholars. The objectives are designed to support the goals of
the NSF CSEMS program. The project enhances the national workforce by increasing
the number of Native American students capable and qualified to enter the high
tech workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Increase matriculation,
graduation, and retention rates of CSEMS academic disciplines by 5% each year of
the project. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Provide up to 29 scholarships per year to
financially needy, academically talented students who meet the academic criteria
and show a strong potential to be a successful CSEMS graduate.
&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: Provide academic support services that enhance the
ability for CSEMS scholars to be more successful in degree achievement.
&lt;br/&gt;Objective 4: Strengthen partnerships between the college and industry
partners throughout the Four Corners Region. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The College is located within 150 miles of 25 Indian Reservations and
continues to honor its historic commitment to Native Americans by offering
tuition scholarships to Native Americans of all tribes who meet admission
requirements. Native Americans comprised 17% of the College's 4,347 enrolled
students and represents about 100 tribes. Diversifying the High Tech Workforce
through Increased Minority Participation project helps fill the need nationally
and regionally for minorities in math and science fields. It also serves a model
for other institutions of higher education who work with minority populations.
&lt;br/&gt;