* 0422705
* Collaborative Research:  Part Orienting Devices (PODs) - Novel Devices for Spatial Assembly Tasks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Pierre Larochelle, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2008
* USD 246,683.00

The research objective of this collaborative research grant is to create the
capability to design new and innovative devices for spatial assembly tasks. The
research will produce a design methodology to create low degree of freedom
machines, termed part-orienting devices, capable of producing spatial
trajectories and reorientations. These part-orienting devices provide an
alternative for solving assembly tasks that might otherwise require a robot or
multiple single degree of freedom mechanisms. This research will comprehensively
address the design of part-orienting devices including: (1) their kinematic
synthesis, (2) the creation of an interactive computer-aided design tool, and
(3) guidelines and tools for prototyping, actuating, and controlling these
devices. The result of this research will be new theories and knowledge that
will enable designers to create novel devices for spatial assembly
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will result in
significant contributions to the state of the art in designing devices to
perform automated spatial assembly tasks. Currently, as a product advances down
an automated assembly line, both the product and its component piece parts are
picked-up, reoriented, and inserted into subassemblies or fixtures. To reduce
costs, assembly line designers try to keep these manipulations as simple as
possible. Rotations about vertical or horizontal axes are preferred, often of 90
or 180 degrees. These tasks have a well-established set of efficient solutions.
However, assembly tasks are often inherently 3-dimensional in nature and these
spatial assembly tasks require more complex solutions. Moreover, additional
constraints on the trajectory of the object (for example, collision avoidance or
part meshing) further increase the complexity of these tasks. There exist two
primary paradigms to finding solutions to such spatial assembly tasks. On the
one end are complex and costly multi degree of freedom robotic systems and on
the other is an ad hoc assemblage of simple one degree of freedom devices such
as hinges and sliders. As a result of this research, designers will have another
viable option, a completely new class of devices to realize spatial assembly
tasks. These new part-orienting devices will yield reduced costs and increased
reliability with respect to the existing technologies. Successful completion of
this project will provide designers with a set of new methodologies, techniques,
and tools to design and implement these new low degree of freedom part-orienting
devices for spatial assembly tasks.