* 0422723
* The Impact of New Science and Engineering Graduates on Intrastate Labor Markets
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2005,03/31/2007
* Philip Trostel, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 03/31/2007
* USD 87,788.00

A major policy issue confronting states is the level of state support to higher
education. A crucial question in this policy debate is whether a state's
production of college graduates has a proportionate effect on the level of
college attainment in the state. Although it is widely accepted that rising
college attainment leads to rising prosperity, there is widespread concern that
many new college graduates will take their state-supported degrees to labor
markets in other states. The belief that state support to higher education
subsidizes the workforce development of other states undermines states'
incentives to promote wider access to higher education. Moreover, there is some
suggestive evidence to support this view. There are compelling reasons, however,
to be skeptical of this view and the existing evidence. The proposed study will
explore those reasons and develop an appropriate framework to examine the impact
of a state's production of college graduates on college attainment in the state.
For several reasons, the emphasis will be on science and engineering (S&E)
graduates. This study will use this framework and appropriate econometric
methods on data from the National Center for Education Statistics' Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System and the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Current
Population Survey and Occupational Employment Statistics Survey to quantify the
effects of states' production of S&E graduates on state' labor markets. To be
more specific, this research will estimate the effects of new S&E graduates in a
state on the state's employment and wages of S&E graduates. These estimates will
implicitly test alternative views on the nature of job creation for skilled
labor. This research will also explore the spillover benefits from new S&E
graduates on non-S&E labor markets. That is, this project will estimate the
complementary effects of S&E degrees on the wages and employment in labor
markets for less-skilled workers and for non-S&E graduates.