* 0422845
* Collaborative Research: Knowledge, Innovation, and Virtual Work in Science and Engineering Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Terri Griffith, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 12/31/2007
* USD 202,988.00

Science and engineering organizations are faced with managing virtual projects
as more and more R&amp;D work is distributed across small and large distances.
The innovations flowing from these projects are key to sustaining economic
growth and jobs in today's high technology environment. Yet the organizational
processes necessary to create and disseminate innovation may be difficult when
participants are physically separated, thus making tacit knowledge transfer, in
particular, more difficult. Two critical challenges for managing innovation are
addressed: (1) How to effectively apply social and technical approaches to
transferring knowledge in increasingly virtual environments; and (2) How to
support innovation-focused knowledge transfer in more virtual settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project evaluates and extends models
for understanding the impact of virtual work processes for knowledge transfer
and innovation. Interviews, surveys, and archival data will be combined to
examine organizational practices and technological tools used to support
knowledge transfer and innovation in science and engineering programs in Cisco,
DuPont, and Hewlett-Packard. Measures of tacit and explicit knowledge,
absorptive capacity, communities of practice, and transactive memory as well as
organizational knowledge management and knowledge transfer practices will be
used to test extant theories of virtual work and knowledge and to expand the
theory to include the innovation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
important to better organizing and managing scientific research necessary to
carry out effective innovation in basic and applied research in science and
engineering organizations in both public and private sectors. Presentations and
publications within the academic community will provide an opportunity for wide
discussion of the results and implications for policy. Materials will be made
available to managers of national laboratories, multi-disciplinary university
centers, and industrial research laboratories. Also, results and teaching
materials will inform graduate seminars and various courses focused on under-
represented groups and their ability to advance technologies benefiting
humanity.