* 0422237
* SBIR Phase II:  Nanofluidic Reference Electrode with an Invariant Liquid Junction Potential
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Scott Broadley, Broadley-James Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 01/31/2007
* USD 506,988.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II is for the development
of nanofluidic-flowing liquid junction (NFLJ) reference electrodes using
nanochannel glass arrays developed by the Naval Research Laboratory. While
consuming electrolyte at less than 2 ml/yr, the NFLJ reference electrodes will
allow a flow at velocities of over 0.1 cm/sec to impede back diffusion of sample
solution into the electrode. A variety of challenging test sample solutions,
potentiometric measurements made with NFLJ references varied < 0.5 mV with
response times of less than 60 seconds while measurements made with conventional
reference electrodes varied up to 20 mV with response times of over one hour
have already been completed. The NFLJ reference electrode's exceedingly small
electrolyte consumption makes possible handheld NFLJ pH sensors with
significantly higher precision and longer operational life. The high impedance
of NFLJ reference electrodes, when using modern commercial pH electrodes, has no
measurable effect on the precision, response time, or span of the pH
measurement.

The nanochannel glass nanofluidic-flowing liquid junction (NFLJ) adds a new
dimension to the design and construction of reference electrodes. The unique
ability of the NFLJ design to separate flow volume and flow velocity will
provide scientists with a tool for investigating reference electrode behavior as
a function of flow, velocity, and resistance. It should help to develop a more
fundamental understanding of mass transfer effect on liquid junction potentials.
Initial results indicate that velocity is the critical parameter in stabilizing
the potential.