* 0422553
* Fundamental Understanding of Lotus Effect and Its Application in MEMS Stiction Prevention
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Andrew Hunt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 09/30/2008
* USD 249,999.00

The research objectives of the proposed work are to achieve a fundamental
understanding of the novel Lotus Effect coating, and to implement the Lotus
Effect coating in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) for stiction prevention.
Possessing two indispensable characteristic properties: superhydrophobicity and
self-cleaning, the Lotus Effect materials have a great potential as an anti-
stiction coating for MEMS. The PI proposes novel approaches to produce Lotus
Effect surfaces, including creating nanoscale roughness on a hydrophobic surface
by plasma, and coating functional self-assembled monolayers on nanoporous
substrates. The fundamental mechanism of the superhydrophobicity and the self-
cleaning process of Lotus Effect materials will be studied through the
mathematic modeling of the relationship between surface morphology, surface
wetting, and surface adhesion.

The Lotus Effect coating is an excellent example of bio-mimic nano-materials.
The proposed research work will add to the knowledge base of the nano surface
engineering and contribute to the progress of novel material development through
bio-mimicking processes. In addition, the superhydrophobic and self-cleaning
coatings will have wide applications on glass, ceramics, textiles, building
materials, boat, airplane, automobiles and other surfaces, to reduce or
eliminate the efforts and expenses of routine cleaning, as such, they will
reduce the energy and detergent usages, and thus will benefit our society and
environment. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
grant provides an industrial-university linkage between Georgia Institute of
Technology and nGimat Co. and will enhance technology transfer.