* 0422746
* Career:  The Use of the Geotechnical Centrifuge for Physical Modelling of Geo-Environmental and Geotechnical Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Patricia Culligan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2005
* USD 21,424.00

9875883 Patricia J. Culligan MIT

CAREER: The use of the geotechnical centrifuge for physical modeling of geo-
environmental and geotechnical problems

Abstract

This project will use the geotechnical centrifuge as (a) a research tool to
investigate the behavior and remediation of organic contaminants in aquifer
systems, and (b) an educational tool to integrate physical modeling studies into
civil and environmental engineering curricula. Geotechnical centrifuge modeling
is an experimental method that allows the small-scale physical modeling of
complicated problems affected by gravitational forces under realistic, but well
controlled, boundary conditions. By using this method, both soil stress
distributions and gravity (or buoyancy)-driven fluid displacements can be
replicated at a reduced scale in a laboratory environment. Correct (scaleable)
replication of these effects is not possible outside a centrifugal field unless
a full-scale field experiment is carried out. For this reason, the geotechnical
centrifuge offers an ideal tool for the physical modeling of many geo-
environmental and geotechnical engineering problems.

The research component of this project proposes to use the geotechnical
centrifuge to investigate (i) the effects of unstable nonaqueous phase liquid
(NAPL) flow and soil heterogeneity on NAPL movement through the vadose zone;
(ii) the mechanisms determining NAPL entrapment in saturated soils under a range
of flow conditions, and (iii) factors affecting the performance of two recent
NAPL remediation technologies, air sparging and surfactant-enhanced hydraulic
flushing. The results of this program will produce experimental results
representative of field behavior that can be used to (i) quantify the timing and
rate of aquifer contaminant loading due, for example, to a surface NAPL spill;
(ii) provide estimates of NAPL volume in aquifers under given hydraulic
conditions; and (iii) develop quantitative guidelines for the deployment of two
emerging remediation technologies. Data from the study will also be invaluable
for the parameterization, testing and validation of conceptual transport models
and numerical codes.

The educational plan will use the geotechnical centrifuge as a vehicle for
introducing hands-on-experience and problem based learning into the civil and
environmental engineering (CEE) undergraduate curricula. The objectives of the
educational plan are to (i) develop a means of allowing CEE students to see the
effects of their engineering design, and (ii) to explore whether the
fundamentals of engineering mechanics can be better taught by exposing students
to principles of physical modeling and scaling.

The project will make use of the geotechnical centrifuge facility in the
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at MIT. This facility consists
of a 1.0 m radius balanced arm centrifuge, which is capable of spinning a 90 kg
package of soil around a central axis at 400 rpm, and a new 1.0 m diameter mini-
drum centrifuge, which is capable of spinning a 1000 kg annulus of soil around a
central axis at 1000 rpm. Both centrifuges will be used in the execution of this
work.

