* 0422377
* Increasing Diversity in Computer Science and Mechanical Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Beth Todd, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2009
* USD 330,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CSEMS project is to
increase workforce diversity in computer science and mechanical engineering. To
achieve this goal, the program emphasizes participation by students from
underrepresented groups, such as women and minority students, first-generation
college students and students from economically challenged areas of Alabama. The
project is 1) recruiting qualified students at the high school level, 2)
ensuring a proper support infrastructure exists to enhance success as students
and later as working professionals, and 3) providing financial assistance for
students who have demonstrated a commitment to their studies in these fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer science and mechanical engineering are both
challenging curricula. A lack of diversity in those fields is attributed to a)
fewer female and minority students choosing those majors, b) a lack of a
supportive infrastructure, and c) a lack of willingness on the students' part to
take the financial risks associated with pursuing these careers in light of the
preceding two reasons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these issues, the
project is using the following approach. First, over a four-year time period,
the project provides scholarships for 21 undergraduates and 3 graduate students.
The distribution of the scholarships is 3 each for sophomore, junior, senior,
and first-year graduate students in the Department of Computer Science and 3
each for freshman, sophomore, junior, and senior students in the Department of
Mechanical Engineering. Providing the scholarships helps alleviate some of the
financial risks for students in these fields. The project has a formal structure
for assessing and assisting involved students during their academic career,
including regular meetings with faculty and student mentors, and involvement of
higher-level undergraduate students in research programs for elective course
credit. Finally, the program is introducing the participating undergraduate
students to the possibility of academic careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the diversity of
students participating in the fields of computer science and mechanical
engineering will only come about through the deliberate efforts of educators in
those fields. This project builds on known research results regarding the
recruitment, retention and matriculation of students who are members of
underrepresented groups. Incorporating formal assessment cycles as part of
participants' academic careers not only provides for improved retention, but
also provides further insight into the difficulties experienced by such students
in those fields and allows for the development of new techniques to enhance
student success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The experiences
gained by the students participating in this program should provide a positive
influence on their lives. Beyond those direct beneficiaries, however, a positive
impact is also anticipated on both departments involved, on the College of
Engineering, and on the institution as a whole. More than half of the faculty
serving on this project are members of underrepresented groups who serve as role
models for the students, who in turn serve as role models to students at lower
academic levels. Furthermore, upon graduation, increased diversity in the
workforce in computer science and mechanical engineering impacts our society at
large.