* 0422154
* SBIR Phase II:  Automated Monitoring and Alarming for Elder Care
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Rajeev Sharma, VideoMining Corporation
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 481,203.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop an
automated monitoring system for residents living in elder care facilities. This
system will enable the facility staff to quickly respond to any event or
behavior requiring intervention, such as an accidental fall, using computer
vision for tracking and behavior analysis. Prior Phase I research demonstrated
the feasibility of this approach for fall detection and behavior analysis with
the help of a laboratory prototype. This work also highlighted several
challenges, such as dealing with changing lighting conditions and complex
behaviors. Phase II research will focus on addressing these challenges and
creating twelve beta sites in actual elder care facilities to further develop
and test the algorithms.

The commercial application of this project will be on institutions linked to the
care of the elderly. With over 50% of the growing population of seniors staying
in independent / assistive living facilities or nursing homes, injuries and
deaths resulting from unattended falls represent a serious societal and
economical problem. Over 1.8 million seniors fall each year, with each fall
costing an average of $9,400 in hospitalization. The proposed work could lead to
a solution that provides a way for quickly responding to falls, saving
hospitalization costs up to 26% and more importantly, reducing the likelihood of
death by as much as 82%. It would also help in generating a feeling of security
for the elders and their care givers, without a substantial increase in
healthcare costs.