* 0422454
* Enhancing Transfer Students Graduation Success in Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematics and Statistics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Richard Keltie, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Fitchett
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

The project is awarding 29 CSEMS scholarships annually to transfer students who
have completed one semester of studies at North Carolina State University. The
requirement of one semester on campus helps ensure that students have adjusted
appropriately to the difficulties inherent in study at the university level. The
principle investigator team includes faculty from disciplinary departments as
well as administration to ensure adequate support is provided for scholarship
recipients. The support provided by these scholarships will cover approximately
75% of the tuition at North Carolina State, enabling these students to spend
more time on their studies and consequently, to be successful in their academic
pursuits.

The PI teams has an excellent track record with an existing CSEMS project with a
nearly 100% graduation rate. The scholarships supported under this project
require a significant GPA (3.0) and course load requirement (30 instead of a
more typical 24 hours) to ensure excellent training of a new generation of
students in the CSEMS disciplines. The project supports the CSEM disciplines
with a special emphasis on and support for statistics in this project. An
excellent management, assessment and dissemination plan is in effect to provide
good monitoring, compliance and follow up on the project.