* 0422417
* High Performance Computional and Graphical Work Environment for the Applied Math Group at UNC at Chapel Hill
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2006
* USD 104,154.00

The Principal Investigators develop theory, modeling and computation for diverse
physical and biological systems. A critical two-way link between model
simulation data and experimental data is afforded by the instrumentation of this
award. Numerical databases from computer simulations are handled by the
graphical environment and translated into experimentally measurable predictions.
Examples include: kinetic simulations of nano-composite materials processes are
converted into images that simulate real-time light scattering data; dynamical
systems predictions of mixing in the Gulf Stream are matched with Lagrangian
satellite data collected from ocean buoys; transport and mixing in bio-fluid
layers are compared with in vitro data from medical experiments on lung cell
cultures; and, stochastic model predictions of signaling pathways are imaged and
compared with single cell measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical theory and simulations
of physical and biological phenomena are now capable of predictions that rival
the most advanced physical instrumentation available. The direct link between
these two modes of inquiry is the focus of the proposed research. The
mathematical modeling capability in biology, materials design, and the
environment is made possible through modern computer hardware technology and
advanced mathematical software. The investigators develop mathematics and
computation for diverse applications, including biochemical networks which
regulate cell function, complex fluids which perform vital mammalian lung
function, ocean transport and mixing enhanced by currents such as the Atlantic
Gulf Stream, and high-performance material properties achieved by nano-composite
technology. The immediate impact of the graphical interface is to establish a
direct bridge between virtual simulations and laboratory data. An image
processing interface converts both databases into a common graphics environment,
for direct comparison with one another and for new insights from each mode of
inquiry. The societal impact lies in fundamental understanding and predictive
tools for the specific applications, including cell-to-cell variability in
biology, design and optimization of next generation materials, mixing and
transport across ocean currents which are vital for fisheries and global climate
predictions, and the trapping and remediation of pathogens entering mammalian
lung pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;