* 0422515
* CSEMS Scholarships for CAMP Students
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Michael Batchelder, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lance C. Perez
* 07/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This project is helping a cohort of CSEMS scholars to progress toward their
educational and personal goals by providing (1) increased interdisciplinary
student-to-student mentoring, (2) hands-on real world engineering and science
project experience through competitions, (3) opportunities for teaming and
leadership development, (4) practical experience in fundraising and budgeting
and (5) life/career enrichment activities outside the technical area yet
essential to success. The CSEMS scholarships are increasing the involvement of
financially needy, academically talented South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology (SDSM&T) students in the nationally recognized Center for Advanced
Manufacturing and Production (CAMP). The project is selecting 30 qualified
students to receive tuition and fee assistance in the amount of $3,125 a year.
The balance of each year's budget will be used for salaries for eight student
mentors and materials and supplies. Students are selected on the basis of
financial need, academic ability and motivation. Assessment of the program is
based upon the students' involvement and their persistence and completion rates,
and compares both CSEMS and non-CSEMS scholars to evaluate the effectiveness of
this effort.

The CSEMS project is taking steps to attract more students to experience the
opportunities available in CAMP. The project is specifically targeting
recruitment efforts to attract more women and Native American students.
Dissemination of program outcomes is achieved through presentations and papers
delivered at forums and meetings such as the American Society for Engineering
Education and through the regular SDSM&T communication vehicles -- website,
newsletters, brochures, etc.