* 0422403
* ``Collaborative Research:  Optimal Rules for Monetary and Fiscal Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Michael Woodford, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2010
* USD 176,658.00

This project contributes to the analysis of optimal public policy from the
standpoint of economic welfare. The traditional literatures on tax policy and on
monetary policy often seem to be based on incompatible, possibly contradictory
foundations. One analysis is conducted using microeconomic, purely real models,
and emphasizes the goal of minimizing distortions of private incentives; the
other is conducted using macroeconomic models in which nominal variables affect
real allocations, and is concerned with stabilization of inflation and of
aggregate economic activity. A goal of this project is to show how unified
foundations can be provided for both inquiries, showing not only that these
distinct goals of public policy are not in conflict when properly understood,
but also how both monetary and fiscal authorities should, ideally, take into
account considerations traditionally associated with the other
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important principle of optimal policy in both
domains is that policy should be rule-based, rather than purely discretionary,
owing to the importance of private-sector anticipations in determining the
effects of policy. Commitment to a policy rule is often thought to preclude the
use of policy for short-run stabilization, and rule-based policymaking is often
resisted by policymakers on this ground. This research aims to show instead how
policy rules can be designed, which allow policy to respond to unanticipated
disturbances, without allowing the biases associated with discretionary policy.
Under a "targeting rule", a policy authority is committed to achieve a certain
relationship among the projected paths of certain economic variables, without
defining in advance the required state-contingent adjustments of its
instruments; the inflation-forecast targeting procedures of many central banks
provide an example. This research seeks both to clarify the form of targeting
rule that should ideally be implemented by a central bank, and to establish the
usefulness of targeting rules for fiscal policy as well. It will also address
the degree to which coordination between multiple policy authorities is
desirable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The proposed research aims to
clarify the principles upon which public policy should be based, in the areas of
both monetary policy and tax policy, in order to best serve the goals of
economic efficiency and macroeconomic stability. The results of this research
will be disseminated, not only among academic researchers, but to policymakers
as well - in particular, to central banks both in the U.S. and abroad, and to
international organizations such as the IMF. The research will also be
integrated with the teaching, especially at the graduate level, of the
investigators, and it is expected that graduate research assistants will be
introduced to important research skills and potential research topics of their
own.&lt;br/&gt;