* 0422264
* Scholarships in Computer Science, Mathematics, and Engineering for Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2010
* Scott Wolpert, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 02/28/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This project continues a Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics (CSEM)
Scholarship Program at the university. The primary objectives of the program are
to 1) increase the number of low-income students obtaining undergraduate degrees
in computer science, engineering and mathematics; 2) increase the number of
women and under-represented minorities obtaining undergraduate degrees in
computer science, engineering and mathematics (both contributing to broader
impct); 3) increase retention and graduation in these fields; and, 4) increase
faculty mentoring of students as they prepare for graduate school enrollment or
technology employment (the latter two representing the intellectual merit of the
project). To date, all 60 CSEM-Scholars in the present program have either
graduated with a csem-degree or are in good academic standing and making
progress towards degree attainment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project offers 118
additional scholarships of $3125 to students with financial need and who are
juniors or seniors majoring in computer science, engineering or mathematics. In
addition to financial assistance, CSEM recipients participate in a variety of
activities designed to support their success. These includes faculty mentoring,
faculty/industry research or internship experiences, academic advising, and
enrollment in a special seminar focused on career and graduate schools
information. Finally, a newly created Corporate Advisory Board informs and
advises the program team and CSEM-scholars to enhance current CSEM efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;