* 0422084
* Dissertation Research:  Encoded Hierarchies: Globalization and Governance of the Software Commodity Chain
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Patrick Heller, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 8,000.00

This Research on Science and Technology Disssertation Improvement Grant
addresses research on globalization and industrial development by exploring an
understudied case of globalizing industry: software production. While state-led
and local/regional agglomeration explanations of industrial development focus on
the localized construction of competitive advantage, this study emphasizes the
importance of linkage to lead firms in the global production system as the key
arbiter of global opportunity. Using the Global Commodity Chains framework and
the literature on social networks and inter-organizational ties, a theory is
developed of hybrid governance in the software industry, characterized by a
technology-driven segment and a buyer-driven segment. In the technology-driven
segment, owners of .infrastructural. technologies and standards exercise control
over technological aspects of production for the rest of the software industry.
In the buyer-driven segment, influential software customers transfer their
environmental uncertainty onto software service firms and specialized software
product firms, who are, in turn, induced to structure their organizations around
ever-changing customer needs. The hybrid governance regime in software has
implications for follower countries, which tend to operate in areas of software
production that are subject to the greatest competition and that are squeezed
between lead firms from both the technology-driven side and the buyer-driven
side of the commodity chain. Evidence of the hybrid governance structure in
software will be based on three sources: (1) a database of inter-firm
partnerships and alliances; (2) secondary sources that identify the nature and
content of inter-firm linkages; (3) and semi-structured interviews that probe
into the mechanisms that underlie the formation of partnership ties in the
software industry. Methodologically, this research involves the collection of
new and novel data and applies mixed methods to the study of processes of
industrial globalization. The database under construction for this project is an
opportunity to expand knowledge of an important global industry by taking a
firm-level approach that considers inter-firm networks as well as national
context. Importantly, the database incorporates a larger sample of software
firms than in previous research, includes measures of context and network ties
in software production, and pools data on firms from emerging and advanced
industrial economies. This larger sample will lend itself to the application of
quantitative methods, including the construction of statistical models of how
network ties, firm characteristics, and contextual factors influence firm
performance. Fieldwork in India and the U.S. is an opportunity to build links
within academia and between academia and industry across geographic boundaries.
This fieldwork will pull together information from software professionals,
industry and academic experts, and state and industry representatives from the
U.S., India, and other countries, integrating emerging and industrialized
economy perspectives into the study of an increasingly important industry.
Moreover, this research will cut across many academic disciplines, bringing a
sociological focus to existing research from strategic management, economics,
and computer science. This research is significant for informing the industrial
policies of follower countries and software firms. For states with aspirations
of building a software export sector, evidence of the mixed success of prior
state intervention in software production may guide policymakers towards better
high-tech industrial policies. At the firm-level, an association between
successful outcomes and the structure of partnerships and alliances suggests
that firms should allocate resources to building key ties with industry leaders.
For follower country firms, the theory indicates that creating linkages with
U.S. customers and creating ties with U.S. software firms is of primary
importance.

