* 0422539
* Studies in Aggregate Analyses
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Edward Prescott, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/2006
* USD 221,136.00

Prop ID: 0319050 &lt;br/&gt;P I: Prescott, Edward C. &lt;br/&gt;Organization:
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities &lt;br/&gt;Title: Studies in Aggregate
Analyses &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports two sets of studies related
to aggregate analyses. The first set of studies uses the macro growth model with
productivity and tax rates to analyze some important problems. One of these
studies determines how much of the differences in labor supply of the major rich
industrial countries are accounted for by different tax rates. Another study
deals with the evolution of international income levels to account for
differences in income levels at a point in time. The third study, which is joint
with Fumio Hayashi, examines the pre-war Japanese economy. At the turn of the
twentieth century, Japan with its highly educated work force and a strong non-
interventionist government seemed to be poised to catch up with the United
States. This did not happen prior to World War II and the question is why. A
policy that Hayashi and Prescott conjecture was important in suppressing
productivity growth in this period, and therefore blocking catching up, was the
policy of keeping excessive population in rural areas. A related study will
address the question: what is the connection between financial system problems
and productivity? In particular the study will determine if the reason for the
empirical association between poor productivity performance and government
intervention in the financial system is that the financial system is used to
subsidize inefficient production units in order to preserve jobs at these units.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second set of studies, which is joint with Ellen
McGrattan, is concerned with using macro theory to study the behavior of stock
prices and returns. One study continues the development and application of a new
methodology for determining whether the stock market is overvalued or
undervalued using an overlapping generation structure. The second study in this
project determines the average returns that households realized on savings in
the form of well-diversified debt and equity assets for the period 1880-2002.
These average returns will be compared to the real return on capital, which can
be computed from the national income accounts. These returns are net of tax and
diversification-costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact : The research
addresses a number of important policy issues, e.g., why the Japanese economy is
currently depressed. The methodology developed will be useful in predicting the
consequences of the proposed U.S. tax cut and the recent increase in tax rates
in Germany. It also will be useful for forecasting the consequences of
eliminating taxes on dividends for the stock market and for the consumption of
people when retired by cohort. It will provide guidance to Western European
countries as to how to increase their labor supplies and more importantly the
welfare of their citizens. The software (Macrolab) developed under this project
is used by undergraduates at the University of Minnesota and available over the
internet without charge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;