* 0422099
* SBIR Phase II: MatchBox Display Systems
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Chongchang Mao, Southeast TechInventures
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 09/30/2008
* USD 649,676.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project, matchbox
projection systems, addresses a major opportunity in the multi-billion dollar
projection display market. . The main goal for the phase II project is to
develop a Matchbox projector based on one liquid crystal on silicon (LCOS) panel
using the field sequential color (FSC) method. The development includes the
fabrication of full custom and mixed signal integrated circuit (IC), LCOS panel,
optical light engine, and mechanical assembly. The silicon backplane will
contain 1280 x 768 frame buffer pixels that remove charge sharing and charge
inducement noise, increase charge storage memory time, enhance display
brightness, and increase image contrast ratio. The data loading will use frame-
at-a-time approach, allowing an image to be displayed at full contrast while the
next image is buffered onto the backplane. LCOS panel assembly process will be
developed for implementing panels with high thickness uniformity, high contrast
ratio, fast switching, and high reliability. The optical engine design will
focus on compact FSC system.

The display market is multi-billion dollar market with a wide range of
products. The commercial and military markets rely on highly specialized display
products such as microscope and head mount displays. The LCOS system hopes to
enable low power, high-resolution products in the market place.