* 0422083
* Scholarships for Computer Information Systems, Computer Science, and Mathematics Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Yun Wang, Mercy College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 206,228.00

Intellectual Merits: This project at Mercy College supports (1) recruitment,
screening, and the selection two cohorts of 15 talented, economically
disadvantaged students, enabling them to pursue full-time study towards the
completion of their bachelor's degree; (2) ensures that at least 95% of
participants are retained and make satisfactory progress towards completion of
their degree program; (3) provides a comprehensive series of support services
that will highlight research, professional development, and employment
opportunities for CIS, CS, and Math majors and further placement of students
after graduation; and (4) by the end of grant Year 4 enable 25 project
participants to complete CIS, CS, or Math coursework and requirements towards a
bachelor's degree. Broader impacts: The CSEMS Program at Mercy College plays an
important role in ensuring that underrepresented students have the opportunity
to participate in a structured program of mentoring, research internship
opportunities, and a comprehensive program of support services that will enable
them to depend less on work and experience activities that will prepare them for
post baccalaureate educational or career opportunities. Through special
mentoring programs for CSEMS students, partnerships for internship placements
with research-intensive universities that offer doctoral degrees in the computer
sciences, as well as financial support, Mercy's CSEMS program works to increase
the number of students, underrepresented in the computer science and math
fields, who complete degree programs in this area and pursue graduate education
in these fields.