* 0422976
* Migration and Marginalization:  Social Networks, Inequality, and Health in Indonesia and Bangladesh
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Rachel Silvey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2007
* USD 170,000.00

Health care burdens associated with population ageing are intensifying
internationally. In Bangladesh and Indonesia, health care takes place in the
context of high rates of migration and urbanization. Although household median
income increases with the addition of out-migrants, there is also evidence that
wealth created by migrants fails to translate neatly into the health of non-
migrant household members in these contexts. Indeed, the causal mechanisms
shaping migration-health relationships are only beginning to be analyzed. This
project focuses on understanding inequalities in health status between
households with migrants and those without migrants in rural origin sites in
Bangladesh and Indonesia. Building on recent research on social networks, the
project explores how rural health is differentially affected by the migration
behavior and remittance patterns of particular household members (i.e., working-
age daughters, sons, spouses). In addition, it investigates how health
differences are forged through specific social network inequalities (i.e., in
incomes, gender composition). Lastly, the research analyzes the processes
through which specific, socially differentiated migrant contributions, such as
remittances and social support, lead to changes in health status among the non-
migrant population. The research will analyze existing quantitative data and
collect new qualitative data for both countries to provide a comparative
investigation into the patterns and dynamics linking migrant network
inequalities to health disparities among those left behind.&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute insights relevant to researchers and policy-makers
involved in population and health fields in developing countries. Non-migrants
constitute a particularly vulnerable population, routinely facing higher rates
of poverty and disease than the majority of the migrant population. Kin networks
remain the only safety net available for most rural people in both Bangladesh
and Indonesia. The project will provide understanding of the operation and
effectiveness of these networks in the provision of health resources and
ultimately health status. In so doing, the project will further understanding of
the ways in which out-migration affects the health of rural non-migrants, and it
could help identify new strategies for development and health care intervention
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;