* 0422841
* Workshop:  Student Research in Computational Linguistics, at the HLT/NAACL 2004 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Lisa Ballesteros, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2005
* USD 20,164.00

This award is to subsidize travel, conference, and housing expenses of students
selected to participate in the HLT/NAACL Student Research Workshop to be held on
May 2, 2004 in conjunction with the second annual HLT/NAACL, May 2-7, 2004 in
Boston, MA. The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary
international organization in the field of natural language processing and
language engineering, with two regional organizations in Europe (EACL) and North
America (NAACL). Starting in 2003, the annual conference of the NAACL has joined
with the Human Language Technology (HLT) conference to provide a single venue
for the presentation of cutting-edge research and applications related to
computational linguistics in North America.

The workshop format allows students to present their research and receive
feedback from a panel of established researchers in the field. It provides
students with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on their work at a
critical time in their professional development through feedback from the panel
and other student participants. Also, student participants will be able to see
each other's presentations and feedback, which could lead to a general raising
of standards and expectations, strengthening future student research. The
Student Workshop is an inexpensive yet highly effective means of encouraging
young and upcoming computational linguists. The intimate format encourages the
student participants to begin building a rapport with established researchers.
The workshop should contribute to the maintenance and development of a skilled
and diverse natural language processing workforce, helping to produce a pool of
researchers with the scientific and engineering knowledge required for future
applications of natural language processing. It should help to foster
international scientific exchange, providing merit-based opportunities for
future leaders of the field to attend a conference that might otherwise be less
geographically diverse than is desirable for the field. In addition, by building
a supportive environment for these students, it is more likely that down the
road, they will lend a supporting hand to other students who follow.

Computational linguistics is a multidisciplinary field of increasing importance
to science, commerce, and society. This workshop contributes to the professional
development of young scientists who will lead this growing field in the coming
decades.