* 0422767
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Development and Characterization of Polymer Particulate Nanocomposites
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Arun Shukla, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2009
* USD 30,700.00

0422767&lt;br/&gt;Arun Shukla&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports the U.S.-India cooperative research entitled Development and
Characterization of Polymer Particulate Nanocomposites. This is an in-depth
investigation on the processing of polymer-particulate nanocomposites and their
mechanical, fracture and multi-functional attributes for two different polymer
systems, thermosetting resins and thermo plastics. The cooperative research will
involve Professors Arun Shukla, Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied
Mechanics, University of Rhode Island (URI) and P. Venkitnarayanan, Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur (IITK). The
constitutive response of the nanocomposites will be evaluated at high strain
rates. The behavior of stationary and propagating cracks in polymer
nanocomposites under dynamic conditions will be performed using ultra-high speed
photography and optical interferometry. Evaluation of properties at finer length
scales will be attempted leading to the development of predictive
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The investigators at both institutions have
expertise in processing and characterizing novel engineered materials and have
successfully collaborated in the past under NSF's joint program with India's
Department of Science &amp; Technology. &lt;br/&gt;This project combines the
diverse expertise of the PIs in composites and offers access to specialized
facilities at the respective institutions. This research will involve students,
technicians and faculty members at both institutions and result in senior
projects, technical papers, presentations, and dissertations. Visiting faculty
members and students will receive valuable exposure to the challenges of
material synthesis and various experimental techniques used for mechanical and
fracture characterization of novel materials. There will be quick dissemination
and exchange of knowledge through the respective institutes websites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;