* 0422840
* RUI: Shoot Architecture: A Systems Approach in Pea
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Susan Singer, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P.  Jack
* 06/30/2009
* USD 390,000.00

Susan R. Singer 0422840

Branching patterns (shoot architecture) in flowering plants affect seed and
fruit yield. The long-term goal of this research is to understand the
developmental regulation of shoot architecture in peas using a systems approach.
Process-based, predictive models will be developed to integrate information
about shoot development, especially inflorescence development, at multiple
levels of organization. The evolution of inflorescence architecture involves a
common toolkit of flowering genes used in different ways to create diverse
morphologies, which can dramatically affect reproductive success. Creating and
comparing systems-based models of shoot development in different species may
reveal subtle variations that result in distinct patterns. For example, how are
orthologs of Arabidopsis inflorescence architecture genes used in the
development of pea inflorescences? A long history of the study of transmission
genetics in pea has yielded many developmental mutants that alter shoot
architecture. Many potential candidate genes for these mutants have been
identified and cloned in Arabidopsis. The Singer lab plans to optimize these
resources to continue to identify key regulatory genes in pea shoot architecture
formation and investigate how they interact to create novel shoot morphologies.

The current focus is on mutations affecting determinancy and asymmetry in pea.
Gene expression studies, candidate gene testing, through mapping and cloning
strategies, characterizing genetic interactions, and mathematically describing
the spatial and temporal relationship between branching and organ initiation in
pea will all further our understanding of inflorescence architecture. This
understanding could lead to novel legume architectures that could increase
yield. The work will provide opportunities for undergraduates to integrate
mathematical approaches into the study of biological questions and foster
collaboration with Australian researchers.