* 0422898
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Application of Anaerobic Membrane Bioreactor (AMBR) for Wastewater Treatment
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Shihwu Sung, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 32,736.00

0422898 &lt;br/&gt;Sung&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a cooperative project by Dr. Shih-Wu Sung, Department of Civil and Construction
Engineering at Iowa State University (ISU), Ames, Iowa and Dr. Aysenur Ugurlu,
Department of Environmental Engineering, Hacettepe University (HU), Ankara,
Turkey. They plan to study the use of anaerobic membrane bioreactor (AMBR) in
wastewater treatment. The goals are to develop an AMBR system for efficient
treatment of low to medium strength wastewater, and to investigate the fouling
mechanism and microbial community under a long solids retention time. Anaerobic
process for wastewater treatment has several benefits. However, high biomass
concentration, and long hydraulic and solids retention times are required for
efficient anaerobic treatment due to the low biomass growth. Besides, the
effluent quality of the anaerobic effluent is poorer than that of the aerobic
treatment. These barriers have limited the wide applications of anaerobic
process for the treatment of low strength wastewater. In this respect, membrane
separation is an attractive option. However, membrane technology is highly
energy intensive process, and the membrane fouling associated with anaerobic
process is another issue yet to be resolved. Most importantly, the economy of
membrane process is governed by cost of the membrane per se. In this study, the
PIs will use non-woven fabric material, a waste material from a fabric industry,
to optimize the operational parameters. The AMBR at ISU will be operated using
non-woven filter materials while HU will test several commercial membrane
modules including tubular and flat type microfiltration. Identical lab-scale
AMBRs will be developed at both institutes. The PIs will evaluate optimal
operating condition, especially for fouling control in the two studies. The
results will be compared and an economic evaluation will be carried out. The
project encompasses the skills and experience of respective nation's leading
researchers in the areas of anaerobic process. These broader horizons and cross-
linkage between ISU and HU researchers represent a synergistic approach to
complement the holistic efforts in developing and advancing AMBR process that
aims to contribute a new knowledge in environmental engineering. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impact: The project will help to establish a new
research area at ISU, which can be used for training undergraduate students for
their final year projects. Additionally, summer high school interns will be
encouraged to work closely with the graduate student in the AMBR project. A
website will be developed within the university portal to disseminate the AMBR
research to the students and the public. Through workshops and seminars, the
outcomes of this research work will be disseminated to the U.S. environmental
engineering communities. The results will benefit both the US and Turkey in
developing a long-term research partnership and technology transfer. In the long
term, the AMBR research will improve the environmental quality of nation's water
bodies. &lt;br/&gt;