* 0422959
* Travel Grant for US Academic Faculty to Attend the XI International Conference on Fluidization to be held in Ischia, Italy from May 9-13, 2004
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2005
* John Chen, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 03/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract CTS-0422959 John C. Chen, Lehigh University

This proposal seeks financial support to partially underwrite the travel
expenses of US academic faculty attending the XI International Conference on
Fluidization, scheduled for May 1-8, 2004, in Ischia, Italy. The full title of
the conference is XI International Conference on Fluidization: Present and
Future for Fluidization Engineering. It is the latest in a premier series of
conferences dealing with technologies for handling and processing of solid
particulates, dating back to 1975. The Conference is sponsored by Engineering
Conferences International (EGI), a not-for-profit successor program to the
United Engineering Foundation Conferences Program. Intellectual Merit The focus
of the Conference is on fluidization as a technology to accomplish multiphase
contacting and reactions in the materials, process, pharmaceutical and energy
industries. The phenomenon of fluidizing solid particles with gases and/or
liquids is complicated by the many different flow regimes that are found to
occur. Momentum, mass, and energy interactions between particles, between
particles and fluid, and with boundary surfaces are complex and not well
understood. The spectrum of subjects at the Conference will range from
fundamentals of multiphase physics and chemistry to applications in novel,
emerging and classic technologies. Impact Fluidization and particle processing
is an engineering technology of importance to industries ranging from the
classic (chemical, petrochemical, energy, etc.) to the new and advancing
(biological, pharmaceutical, materials, etc.). U.S. manufacturing processes
involving the handling of particles and powders have been estimated to rarely
reach more than 60 percent of their design capacity, in contrast to over 95
percent capacity for processes that do not handle particles. Motivated by the
combination of wide-application and unresolved scientific/technical issues,
fluidization is actively pursued as a field of fundamental research and applied
development. In many areas of this technology, major thrusts are being advanced
in other nations, above and beyond the level of effort in USA. It is important
to both academic and industrial segments of America, to stay cognizant of the
most recent advances and to participate in future developments in this field.
Participation of US faculty in this conference will clearly enhance their
ability to incorporate the newest advances of particle technology in
curriculums. In selection of faculty to participate in this grant, effort will
be made to actively include women and under-represented minorities. The papers
of this Conference will join the ranks of benchmark books that have resulted
from prior conferences of this series, which will be of direct value to
practicing engineers and scientists.

