* 0422729
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Synthesis and  Characterization  of Useful  Products From  Bagasse
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Adriane Ludwick, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 50,000.00

0422729 &lt;br/&gt;Ludwick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative project by the Dr. Adriane Ludwick and Dr. Heshmat Aglan,
Department of Chemistry at Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama and Dr.
Mohamed Ashour, Faculty of Engineering and Dr. Abdel-Aziz Said, Chemistry
Department at Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt. They plan to study the
properties of bagasse (sugarcane cellulose residue) for utilization in
production of materials for agricultural and pharmaceutical applications.
Specifically, they will implement a scheme for the grafting of agricultural and
pharmaceutical agents to bagasse. These grafted products will be designed so
that the active agent can be time-released. The choice of reagents will be based
on environmental considerations (green chemistry). The
synthesis/characterization and application of these materials will be studied.
Students and faculty from both institutions will be involved. The team of
researchers, and the administrators of their respective institutions, will
present a workshop in Assiut, towards the end of the second year, on the results
of this effort. The purpose will be to display the results to potential end-
users, as well as to develop a plan for the continuation of the project beyond
the two-year period of support. The intellectual merit of the work stems from
addressing a challenging chemical process. This involves grafting functionalized
molecules on the cellulosic bagasse fibers. The process involves the selection,
synthesis and characterization of specific chemical groups to tailor the
properties of the modified material. The utilization of the green chemistry
concept provides another challenge in the development of the materials in this
work. Processing techniques for obtaining desired attributes required in the use
of the modified bagasse with optimum efficiency involve well-designed thermal
and mechanical processes, including heating, mixing, size reduction, and
packaging. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope: The results of this project will
include the advancement of grafting technology for use on agricultural waste,
the conversion of indigenous waste to added value materials, the transfer of the
knowledge gained in the synthesis and characterization of the bagasse to other
natural fibers such as those from the palm tree, the integration of research and
education by training future scientists and engineers, and the introduction of
the green chemistry concept into the Egyptian scientific community. The
strengthening of an extant cooperative arrangement between Tuskegee University
and Assiut University is planned. During the period of 2000 to 2003, the two
universities were involved in a study of the science and engineering aspects of
a modified bagasse for the purification of oil-contaminated water. The project
has resulted in a patent application on the preparation of the modified bagasse.
The process involves the binding of a fatty acid to the cellulose backbones of
bagasse. One intriguing property of the bagasse used in this study is the
nanoscale pores, and this provides a very large surface area for absorption
and/or grafting. &lt;br/&gt;