* 0422914
* Transmission Constrained Supply Function Equilibrium Analysis of Electric Power Markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ross Baldick, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2007
* USD 120,000.00

Restructuring has been both a nationwide and a worldwide trend in the electric
power industry in the last 10 years. With years of experience accumulated, both
successful and frustrating, markets have developed with common main bodies based
on economic theory, empirical knowledge, and intuition. Moreover, power market
designs are tending towards greater uniformity with the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission's (FERC) carrying out a "Standard Market Design" (SMD) for
electricity markets in North America. However, details still differ from market
to market. The reason for these differences lies in the fact that there is no
existing widely accepted method and tool to perform power market analysis and to
provide convincing quantitative results. Theoretical properties of power markets
remain relatively unclear, particularly in the presence of important engineering
issues such as generation and transmission capacity constraints, operation
issues such as price caps and non-decreasing supply functions, and sub-market
interactions such as the interactions between the day-ahead market, real-time
market, and bilateral contracts market. These issues have significant effects on
the economic outcome, but are not well covered in classic economics, and not
clearly understood by market participants and researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to investigate the characteristics
of typical power markets, focusing on the difficulties mentioned above, and
develop an original method to perform quantitative power market analysis. We
will consider the common design elements of the major power markets in the US,
referring to them as a "typical market" compatible with FERC's SMD. By doing
this, we can concentrate on the most important common features of power markets
and develop results that are directly applicable or applicable with minor
modifications to most power markets in United States. In this project, we will
adopt the supply function equilibrium (SFE) approach as our research platform.
SFE involves the closest modeling to power market reality among all the existing
power market modeling methods, as compared for example to a Cournot model. All
our research work will be embedded in the SFE model setting with asymmetric
market participants and an extended time horizon. We will use the SFE platform
to investigate the effects of transmission and generation capacity constraints,
real-time market interaction, bilateral contracts, and price caps. To the best
of the PI's knowledge, no previous work has addressed these topics together in a
sophisticated SFE setting with asymmetric market participants and an extended
time horizon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve theoretical work,
development work, and application work. Theoretically, we hope to investigate
the effects of the power market constraints, and provide valuable insights for
the operation of power market. Specifically, we hope to bring forward and
fulfill the novel idea of a "universal constraints handling framework" for SFE,
which is capable of handling all kinds of constraints, and investigate market
interaction issues with modeling of arbitrage. This part of the work is of great
intellectual merit in both engineering science and economics, and will
contribute to both of them. Another goal of this project is to devise a more
sophisticated algorithm and software for power market analysis. This part of the
work will serve as a good starting point for dispelling the ambiguities about
the characteristics of power markets, facilitating a desirable power market
standard design, and will assist market participants, researchers and regulators
to obtain new insights. Lastly, we hope to apply the theoretical results and
software to the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) market. This
application is not only to test the effectiveness of our proposed method and
software, but also to demonstrate how to apply our research results about a
typical market to an actual large-scale market with its peculiarities. The
proposed SFE analysis is valuable for ERCOT's ongoing market redesign process.
By 2006, the current ERCOT market will change to a nodal day-ahead market. The
insights from this study will be critical for the development of the new market
design in ERCOT, and the results will consist of both analysis of the current
ERCOT market and forecasts of the future ERCOT market. This work is not only of
great value to the ERCOT market, but also of broad impact in the design and
analysis of other markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve
significant interaction between the Principal Investigator and graduate students
and prepare these students for careers that integrate ideas from several
disciplines, including electric power engineering, economics, and finance. The
project involves a mix of theoretical and numerical analysis and software
development, and is expected to result in several publications, both in the
electrical engineering and the regulatory economics literature. The results will
be reported at conferences such as IEEE Power Engineering Society meetings. In
addition, the PI intends to incorporate some of the basic ideas and results
about the SFE into power system engineering courses, and bring the students to
the latest theoretical developments in the electric power industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;