* 0422949
* Intrinsic Interactions Between Superconductivity and Magnetism in Ruthenocuprates and Quaternary and Pseudoquaternary Borocarbides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Donald Naugle, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/29/2008
* USD 47,000.00

This award supports a project to investigate the interplay between two "hostile"
states, superconductivity and magnetism. The project will be carried out in
collaboration with leading scientists in the Ukraine. The rare-earth-nickel-
borocarbide family of compounds which exhibit a wealth of related phenomena and
a system of ruthenocuprates which appear to show coexistence of magnetism and
superconductivity at temperatures as high as 50K have been chosen for the study.
Important length scales can be changed by introduction of point defects. This
will be done by both chemical substitution and irradiation with high energy
electrons in order to separate the effects related to physical disorder from
those related to chemical "pressure". The research will address the role of pair
breaking mechanisms in the region of coexistence of superconductivity and
magnetism, the nature of exotic electronic states in this region and the
anomalies in normal state transport in these magnetic superconductors. The
results are expected to be of general applicability to the understanding of the
interplay between superconductivity and magnetism, valid well beyond the
particular material chosen. Students will receive training that will prepare
them for careers in industry, academia or government. The close contact and
interaction with leading scientists from another country will provide new
perspectives on science and culture for these students. In addition a student
from Texas Agriculture and Mining University will have the opportunity to
perform research overseas in the Ukraine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project, a joint effort by the principle investigator and leading
scientists in Ukraine, will investigate the intricate interplay between
"hostile" physical states, namely magnetism and superconductivity. Two families
of compounds, rare-earth-nickel-borocarbides and ruthenocuprates, which show an
unusual variety of phenomena related to these two states have been chosen for
the studies. The effects of disorder, introduced both by chemical substitution
and irradiation with high energy electrons, on the interplay will be studied.
The interplay between superconductivity and magnetism is a fundamental problem
in solid state physics, and the results of this investigation are expected to
lead to a much better understanding of this interplay that will be applicable
beyond the chosen materials. Students will have the opportunity to collaborate
with leading international scientists while learning state-of-the art technology
and experimental skills. In addition a student from Texas Agriculture and Mining
University will have the opportunity to perform research overseas in the
Ukraine.&lt;br/&gt;