* 0422753
* Summer Institute for Research Design in Cultural Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2012
* Jeffrey Johnson, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2012
* USD 426,333.00

Cultural anthropologists use a large repertoire of theoretical and
methodological approaches in the course of their ethnographic studies. This
eclecticism often obscures the common elements underlying good research. This
project supports a summer institute in research design in cultural anthropology.
Experts in research design and in the link between data and theory will teach a
set of 15 graduate students, chosen competitively from Ph.D. programs throughout
the US, during a period of 3 weeks. Course content will cover a broad spectrum
of issues focusing on the link between theory and the development of research
objectives, concepts, definitions, variables, measures and hypotheses; the
relationship between quantitative and qualitative approaches in the ethnographic
context; systematic data collection procedures; probability and non-probability
sampling; statistical distributions and elementary data analysis. . The emphasis
will be on concepts (e.g., sampling theory), research design, data management in
both a qualitative and quantitative context, and strategies of hypothesis
testing.

The broader impacts relate to the training of graduate students, who may not be
receiving an adequate exposure to these issues in their department, on research
concepts and techniques in scientific anthropology. The results of this workshop
should be to increase the competence of students to do significant dissertation
research projects and to become more proficient social scientists in general.