* 0422450
* ACA NSF Scholars: Encouraging the Study of Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics in Central Appalachia
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Alice Brown, Appalachian College Association
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

This project is allowing the Appalachian College Association (ACA), a non-profit
organization of 34 small, private, liberal arts institutions in the Appalachian
areas of five states (Kentucky, North Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West
Virginia) with more than 38,000 students, to award 30 two-year scholarships of
$2,750 per year to rising juniors at ACA institutions who have declared majors
in computer science or computer information science/systems, engineering
programs; or mathematics or mathematical science. It offers five
research/internship opportunities to scholarship students on a competitive
basis; and supports all scholarship recipients through personal and internet
communication with other Scholars, training in career planning, and support from
academic, research, and business mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: this project continues and enhances a program funded with an NSF CSEMS
grant (2001-2004) that awarded one- or two-year scholarships to 54 different
students at 16 ACA institutions. Based on what was learned from the previous
project, this project is strengthening the content of the annual meetings for
scholarship recipients, adding a competitive research/internship opportunity for
selected scholars, and providing closer connection between students and faculty
mentors throughout the scholarship period and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: communities in the Appalachian area
have many of the economic characteristics typical of such minorities. This
project is having a positive effect on the students selected, the schools they
attend, and central Appalachia.