* 0422896
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Development of Environmentally Benign Processes for the Fabrication of Self-Cleaning and Self-Healing Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Jianzhong Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 56,078.00

0422896 &lt;br/&gt;Wu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports a
cooperative project between a US team, led by Professor Jianzhong Wu, Department
of Chemical and Environmental Engineering University of California, Riverside,
California and a Turkish team led by Professor Husnu Yildirim Erbil, Department
of Chemistry, Kocaeli University, Turkey. The research objective is to develop
environmentally friendly processes for the large-scale fabrications of
superhydrophobic surfaces that promise numerous commercial and military
applications. The teams will study the detailed schemes for the preparations of
nanoscale superhydrophobic particles in supercritical carbon dioxide and the
assembly of these particles at various surfaces. The U.S. team will perform
molecular modeling and simulations to investigate the microscopic details of
particles formation and self-assembly and give a recommendation for the design
and optimization of experimental systems. Concurrently, the PI and his
colleagues from the Turkish team will synthesize fluorinated polymers for the
formation of nanoparticles in CO2 and perform experiments to validate the
theoretical predictions, to fabricate the surfaces following the theoretical
design, and to characterize and test the performance of expected surfaces. It is
likely that this project will lead to significant advances in the area of
superhydrophobic surfaces, and to interesting new methods for fabricating them.
The collaboration is between two teams with complementary qualifications and
institutional facilities, as the U.S. PI has strong experience in theoretical
modeling, and the Turkish team has extensive experience on the synthesis of
superhydrophobic surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impacts:
There is widespread use of carcinogenic organic solvents, which find their way
into the water table, in industrial and chemical applications, and these need to
be replaced. Supercritical carbon dioxide is a benign solvent that may be a
right replacement, as it find its way into more wide spread use. U.S. graduate
students will gain international experience by working in the foreign
institution, and by working with foreign graduate students, and will be involved
in both theoretical and experimental research. This project is funded jointly by
OISE and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;