* 0422133
* Sensitivity Analysis of the Dynamic Fleet Management Problem with Applications in Fleet-Sizing, Pricing and Terminal Capacity Planning
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Huseyin Topaloglu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2009
* USD 199,996.00

This grant provides funding for the development of algorithms that assess how
the performance measures of a fleet management model would change, if a model
parameter, such as fleet size, load availability or terminal capacity, were
modified. The primary objective of the fleet management models is to make
vehicle-to-load-assignment and vehicle-repositioning decisions, so that a
performance measure, such as profit, deadhead miles or number of served loads,
is optimized. However, a question that is commonly overlooked by these models is
how the performance measure in question would change in response to changes in
certain model parameters. For example, freight carriers are interested in how
much their profits would increase if they introduce an additional vehicle into
the system or if they serve an additional load. Railroad companies want to
estimate the minimum number of railcars necessary to cover random shipper
demands. Ideas from approximate dynamic programming, infinitesimal perturbation
analysis and combinatorial optimization will be utilized to build these
"sensitivity analysis" algorithms, which will subsequently be used to make
tactical decisions, such as fleet-sizing, pricing and terminal-capacity
planning.

By and large, freight carriers use separate and uncoordinated models for their
tactical and operational decisions. This research will help them to coordinate
their tactical and operational decisions better. Currently, sensitivity analyses
are carried out by time-consuming methods that involve "physically" adjusting
the parameters and rerunning the models. The developed sensitivity analysis
algorithms will quickly point out the critical parameters to the decision
makers, and thereby, increase the decision quality and efficiency. Findings will
also be used to build price-bidding policies for the freight-matching sites on
the Internet, where the shippers post their loads to get price offers from the
carriers. Finally, this work will contribute to the general theory of
approximate dynamic programming and sensitivity analysis of stochastic control
problems.