* 0422863
* Disparate Treatment: Theories and Evidence
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Petra Todd, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 260,542.00

Racial and gender disparities have been at the forefront of social and cultural
discourse in the US for over half a century. This research has two distinct
projects that contribute to a deeper understanding of the sources of disparate
treatment and how to remedy it. The first project studies disparate treatment in
the context of law enforcement. Previous research on law enforcement focuses on
explaining discrimination based on observable characteristics, but this project
shows that disparities in treatment need not be related to observable
differences. The research develops a theoretical model in which minimizing crime
may require a subgroup be policed more intensely within a group of observably
identical individuals. The analysis suggests that the identity of individuals
subjected to more intense policing may be rotated over time, so that over time
the overall impact of policing is distributed equally. This theory can help
achieve a more comprehensive understanding of the trade-off between fairness and
efficiency. The analysis is also applicable to other settings such as tax
auditing, and it affords comparative-statics results. The theory is used to
analyze data on highway speeding and to compute the benefit, in terms of lives
saved, of a marginal increase in police resources. The modeling methods
developed as part of this project and the estimates produce will be useful for
analyzing the effectiveness of policies that reduce unsafe driving and therefore
accidents.

The second project concerns match complementarities, mentoring and role model
effects. These effects are often used to provide a rationale for affirmative
action (itself a form of disparate treatment). While there has been much
discussion in education, sociology, economics and psychology about mentoring and
role model effects, these effects have proved difficult to demonstrate
quantitatively partly to lack of detailed data to control for the endogenous
nature of the matching process. This project will study matching effects in the
context of higher education. A data set is constructed that allows estimation of
the benefit of pairing students and instructors by race, ethnicity and gender.
The estimation approach takes advantage of randomization in the process by which
students are assigned to instructors. By gathering comprehensive data on the
types of interactions that take place between students and instructors, the
project also provides insights into the channels through which mentoring and
role model effects take place. The goal of this second project is to establish
the notion of mentoring and role model effects on a firm experimental basis.
This research will provide a better understanding of the effects of disparate
treatment.