* 0422499
* California Community College Transfer Scholarship Consortium
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* Dennis Galligani, University of California, Office of the President, Oakland
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2011
* USD 836,450.00

The California community College Transfer Scholarship Consortium (CCCTSC)
continues a Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships (CSEMS)
program in awarding an additional 80 scholarships to qualifying students by
continuing to: (1) provide additional incentives to help them maintain full-time
educational commitments and continuous collegiate enrollment; (2) minimize
pressures to fulfill outside employment responsibilities that impose
difficulties on academic success' (3) provide early access to practical career
related experiences through internships and research opportunities, and; (4)
foster meaningful opportunities for team building, collaboration and workplace
socialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;CSEMS responds to
broader societal concerns voiced by policy leaders and eminent industrialists.
&lt;br/&gt;The demand for trained professionals clearly exists. CSEMS addresses
the supply side of the equation to help mitigate current and future skill
shortages, while providing new pathways to students, families, and communities
separated from the scope of opportunity offered by the technological world.
Approximately one-third (33) of California's 108 Community College's and 80% of
its accredited engineering institutions are partners in the Consortium. Due to
the statewide impact of the Consortium, CSEMS is rapidly becoming a core
component of the MESA Statewide undergraduate community college and university
infrastructure. The comprehensive student support infrastructure
(MESA/Consortium) has been institutionalized at each participating university
and community college to increase retention and transfer services for the
2003-04 scholars. The Consortium is the nation's largest producer of CSEMS
scholars. Of the 277 CSEMS Grants (colleges and consortiums) awarded nationally,
the Consortium successfully transferred 24 % of the Latino scholars and 55 % of
the computer engineering scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;In support of the efforts of this project, universities and community
colleges are providing joint advising sessions for pending transfers to enhance
transfer articulation. Success in demystifying transfer articulation for
thousands of potential transfers in CSEM disciplines will improve California's
transfer rates. The Consortium continues to foster an environment for local
industries to cultivate, recruit and employ technical talent enrolled at the
community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;