* 0422409
* A System for Preparing Individuals from Rural Environments for Success (ASPIRES) in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2011
* Jack Briner, Charleston Southern Univ
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 05/31/2011
* USD 371,249.00

This project evaluates a system for preparing individuals from rural
environments for success in computer science. Moving from a rural setting to a
large, public university can be very intimidating and a recipe for failure.
Charleston Southern University, with small classes and individual attention,
provides an excellent environment for students to succeed. However, even a
bright student, in small school setting, needs a support system and a planned
program to fill-in educational gaps left by some rural, secondary education
programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Fifty-one, economically
disadvantaged students participate in a foundation-building process. University
applicants from rural areas who are in the top quarter of their graduating class
or who meet specific SAT requirements are being screened and selected with
women, minorities and those with disabilities being encouraged to apply.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer, prior to the academic years, students take
special summer classes or participate in research or an internship. During the
summer, the scholarship pays tuition for the courses, and the university
provides an additional scholarship for room and board. The summer courses allow
the students to form a bond among themselves and with the mathematics and
computer science faculty. First year students take a mathematics course and a
computer science, problem-solving course in the summer. During subsequent
summers, second and third year students take a cognate course and act as mentors
to the next cohort. Prior to their final year, students participate in an
internship at a local company or act as a research assistant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate teaching assistants are available in all
laboratories. The Student Success Center provides a study hall environment with
tutors and monitors progress in other academic areas. A freshman seminar
provides a forum to work with students through difficulties in their transition
to college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Overall effectiveness is
being measured by comparing cohort members with past enrollment and graduate
data. Exit interviews and post-graduation questionnaires are being performed.
Employers of graduates and interns are also being solicited for comments. The
results of the program are being published in an appropriate venue such as an
ACM regional or SIGCSE conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students, bolstered by
the proposed system, have a firm foundation in computer science. Graduates, who
otherwise would be unable to either develop the necessary critical thinking
skills or afford a bachelor's degree, are strengthening the nation's computer
infrastructure. Many bright individuals live in rural environments but lack the
educational system to prepare them for college. With support, these individuals
can ASPIRE to become tomorrow's technology leaders. &lt;br/&gt;