* 0422314
* Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Joanne Lin, Houston Community College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 385,000.00

The Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (MET) Scholarship Program is
designed to increase the number of underrepresented students pursuing careers in
computer science, mathematics, and engineering (CSEM). It has the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Recruit and enroll 33 students a semester (28 grant
supported scholarships and 5 contributed by the college) into an Associate of
Science and Associate of Applied Science MET Scholarship Program.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Retain at least 75% of participants to the completion of a degree and transfer
to a baccalaureate degree program.&lt;br/&gt;3. Establish 6 paid summer
internships in CSEM fields for promising students in the scholarship program to
increase collaborations with industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the five
colleges in the system cover a wide geographic area, faculty at each college
mentor the scholarship students. The scholars are brought together as a group
for orientation and interact in small study groups and at lectures and field
trips offered throughout the academic year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The MET Scholarship Program is increasing the numbers of well
educated and skilled employees in technical areas; improving educational
opportunities for students in CSEM fields; increasing student retention to an
associate degree and transfer to a baccalaureate program; and strengthening
partnerships between the college and high technology industry in the Houston
area. The success rate of students transferring from the college to four-year
institutions gives evidence to the quality of academic programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;By targeting underrepresented
minorities, there are both short-term and long-term increases in the number of
underrepresented students entering the college and completing an associate
degree to pursue careers in CSEM fields. The scholarships significantly increase
the ability to draw new students into math, computer science and technology, and
engineering programs. The MET Scholarship Program and a full system of academic
support prepares the participants from a largely minority student population to
compete successfully in baccalaureate degree programs and as working
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;