* 0422459
* The CSE Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Jeanne Murabito, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 396,000.00

The University of Michigan CSE Scholars Program recognizes and supports high
achieving and high potential students in computer science and computer
engineering by creating a community of scholars along the entire undergraduate
curriculum. The CSE Scholars Program uses a multi-faceted approach to provide a
comprehensive educational environment, both curricular and co-curricular, for
students, including underrepresented students, in computer science (CS) and
computer engineering (CE). It permits the integration of current student support
and academic initiatives at Michigan with new and innovative approaches to
provide a comprehensive, exciting and supportive experience for students in CS
and CE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High potential high school and first year
undergraduate students, with special attention to underrepresented students, are
identified and recruited to CS/CE fields and the CSE Scholars Program at
Michigan. A combination of personalized letters, career information and
workshops, mentoring, supplemental instruction, tutoring, hands-on computer
workshops, and speakers clearly illustrate to students the potential and
excitement of a CS/CE concentration and subsequent career. Declared CS/CE majors
who have demonstrated high achievement and potential are invited to be members
of the CSE Scholars Program. As such, they are formally recognized, eligible to
apply for scholarships, attend professional development workshops, and assume
leadership roles within the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSE Scholars
Program creates an intellectually exciting, mutually supportive community
between prospective CS/CE students, current CS/CE students, faculty and staff
within the College of Engineering and the College of LSA, and information
technology partners. It provides much needed financial aid, allowing students to
concentrate solely on the academic experience. It brings together the skills,
experiences and resources of several university offices and departments as well
as expertise from the corporate IT world. It provides a well-coordinated
infrastructure of recruitment and retention while fostering success and
achievement along the entire undergraduate educational pipeline in CS and CE
disciplines. In addition, the evaluation and assessment of the CSE Scholars
model provides insight and data on combined student support and academic systems
that can be applied to other STEM disciplines both at the University of Michigan
as well as other universities nationally. The CSE Scholars infrastructure can be
adapted to support students in other disciplines, particularly in fields where
there are large numbers of underrepresented students. This infrastructure will
last far beyond the duration of the NSA CSEMS support. This much broader impact
of the CSE Scholars Program not only benefit students at the University of
Michigan, but can also impact the disciplines of Computer Science and Computer
Engineering itself.&lt;br/&gt;