* 0422430
* SciMath Scholarship Program:  Support for Achievement in Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Julie Guelich, Normandale Community College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 385,655.00

The goal of the SciMath scholarship program is to attract academically talented
but financially disadvantaged students to the fields of computer science,
engineering, or mathematics (CSEM). The objectives of the SciMath scholarship
project are to: &lt;br/&gt;(a) increase the number of talented, low-income
students enrolled and retained in CSEM degree programs, &lt;br/&gt;(b) increase
the participation of underrepresented and nontraditional populations,
&lt;br/&gt;(c) promote student academic success, and &lt;br/&gt;(d) support
transition to employment or transfer to four-year institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on early identification of low-income
students with an interest in and aptitude for careers in CSEM fields. Students
who are admitted to the program receive financial support and are provided with
support services such as needs assessment, academic and career planning,
counseling, tutoring, and mentoring. Participants seeking employment receive
help in resume writing, interview skills, and industry contacts. Participants
planning to transfer to a baccalaureate institution receive help in preparing
forms and essays and choosing appropriate institutions. The project coordinates
efforts from existing programs and agencies on campus to provide support for
SciMath scholars. Faculty members from CSEMS departments serve as advisors to
students in the SciMath scholarship program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The SciMath scholarship program increases the number of two-year
graduates in CSEM disciplines by providing financial support for students. High-
technology industries in close proximity to the college benefit from the skilled
workers whose education was subsidized by the scholarships. The scholarship
program provide an increased pool of diverse candidates for transfer
institutions that actively recruit students for CSEM baccalaureate degree
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Academic success of CSEM
students is being improved by supporting skills development through tutoring,
mentoring, and counseling. SciMath students are required to commit to completing
an associate degree before subsequent transfer or employment. The scholarship
program requires students to focus on academic and career goals and provides the
support by using both campus and community resources. Collaborations with
industrial partners and four-year institutions enrich and strengthen the
preparation of students in CSEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;