* 0422689
* South Africa Cooperative Research:  Oxidation Mechanisms, Effect of pH and Probing of Possible Metal Ion Catalysis in the Reactions of Organosulfur Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Reuben Simoyi, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/2007
* USD 41,005.00

This award funds a two-year international cooperative research investigation on
organosulfur chemistry, with a particular focus on oxidation mechanisms, effect
of pH, and metal ion catalysis. The collaboration brings the environmental
chemistry expertise of Sreekantha Jonnalagadda, from the University of Durban-
Westville, South Africa, on the role of sulfur in water, soil and atmospheric
chemistry, together with that of Reuben Simoyi's expertise on sulfur compounds
in inorganic and model biological systems. The collaborators will undertake a
series of experiments to elucidate these chemical reactions using potentiometry,
turbidimetry, stopped flow, and Electron Paramagnetic Resonance, and computer
simulation techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will strengthen US-
South African collaborations and would provide international research experience
for one graduate student and two undergraduates from the U.S. and for one South
African student. The scientific results of the project are likely to be of value
because information on the oxidation states of sulfur is frustratingly sparse,
in spite of the pivotal role that this element plays in environmental and
biological systems; more specifically the environmental chemistry results may
help mitigate environmental pollution associated with mining activities in the
U.S. and in Africa, while the biological investigations that address the balance
between the therapeutic vs. toxic potential of thiols may contribute to our
understanding of human health. This award is co-funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;