* 0422393
* A Scholarly Community
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2009
* Wendi Kappers, Seminole State College of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 11/30/2009
* USD 330,000.00

The project is awarding twenty-four scholarships per year for four years to
students in computer programming, networking, engineering, information
technology and E-business majors enrolled in an associate degree program. The
students are engaging in varieties of research opportunities that are exposing
them to multiple learning and work perspectives. Enhanced student services and
expanded resources for the scholars are providing support to develop a community
of scholars, which includes a personalized on-line educational planner that is
developed collaboratively between the student and a counselor. Students are
paired with a faculty mentor on the first day of registration. A myriad of other
more traditional financial, learning and career systems are provided for the
scholars. Faculty members are developing better methods to create a community of
scholars through training opportunities at the nearby Advanced Technological
Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scholarship program is expanding the local
pool of well-educated and skilled employees, which is supporting the local high
technology industry in a state and region that ranks high in the nation in the
number of high-tech jobs. A variety of outreach strategies includes targeting
underrepresented groups of students through a predominately minority local IT
magnet high school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assessment and evaluation are
addressing how well they recruit underrepresented groups of students, how well
the scholars improve their academic performance, the effectiveness of the
support systems, how well the program retains the scholars, and how many
students are placed in jobs and/or transfer to universities.&lt;br/&gt;