* 0422400
* SCREMS: Distributed Environments for Stochastic Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Yuguo Chen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2007
* USD 128,200.00

This grant will allow the Institute of Statistics and Decision
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;(ISDS) at Duke University to purchase equipment for a high-
speed&lt;br/&gt;computing cluster which will be dedicated to support research
in&lt;br/&gt;computational statistical sciences. It will be used for five
projects&lt;br/&gt;specifically directed at developing statistical methodology
for complex,&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional hierarchical models using distributed
computing&lt;br/&gt;environments. Specific research problems involve sequential
importance&lt;br/&gt;sampling in latent variable models, combinatorial search
for data mining&lt;br/&gt;applications, adaptive stochastic search for high
dimensional model&lt;br/&gt;spaces, multivariate nonparametric function
estimation, and multivariate&lt;br/&gt;spatial-temporal modeling. These
problems, which are typical of&lt;br/&gt;applications in many scientific
disciplines, require substantial&lt;br/&gt;computational power, in both speed
and memory, and require development of&lt;br/&gt;new methodology for efficient
implementations in modern distributed&lt;br/&gt;computing environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern statistical methodology has allowed researchers to
propose more&lt;br/&gt;complex and realistic models for many scientific
problems, however,&lt;br/&gt;powerful computing environments and sutiable
methodology are necessary&lt;br/&gt;to make progress as larger datasets become
available. This grant will&lt;br/&gt;allow the Institute of Statistics and
Decision Sciences (ISDS) at Duke&lt;br/&gt;University to purchase a high-speed
computing cluster, dedicated to&lt;br/&gt;support research in computational
statistical sciences. Projects&lt;br/&gt;include spatio-temporal models to
integrate information at multiple&lt;br/&gt;levels, with applications in climate
change and ecology, new classes of&lt;br/&gt;models for identifying protein
biomarkers for early cancer detection,&lt;br/&gt;novel algorithms for exploring
high-dimensional collections of models&lt;br/&gt;and combining them, new
techniques for modern data mining, and efficient&lt;br/&gt;methodology for
sequential analysis of data collected over time. These&lt;br/&gt;are all areas
at the forefront of statistics with broad applicability to&lt;br/&gt;widespread
problems in the statistics, science and beyond. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;computing
system will be both extensible and upgradeable. Serving&lt;br/&gt;initially the
five projects, it will also provide for future expansion&lt;br/&gt;as these
projects evolve and generate new directions in collaborative&lt;br/&gt;research
involving the primary investigators. The proposed research&lt;br/&gt;will have
significant immediate impact on education through involvement&lt;br/&gt;of Ph.D.
students and postdoctoral researchers directly in the
proposed&lt;br/&gt;research, and incorporation of results into graduate courses
at Duke&lt;br/&gt;University. Results will be disseminated to the statistical
and broader&lt;br/&gt;scientific communities via software distributed on the
web, direct collaboration&lt;br/&gt;with researchers in other disciplines,
conference presentations, and&lt;br/&gt;papers to be published in academic
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;