* 0422501
* Increasing Participation in Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics through Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Donna Reese, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2009
* USD 399,972.00

This project provides additional CSEM educational opportunities for students to
help meet the demand for scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians
in order to contribute to the growth of the economy of Mississippi, the
surrounding region and the nation. Encouraging students to pursue degrees in
CSEM and providing financial support to CSEM majors are two of the major goals
of the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of the project include: 1) to
increase participation of academically-talented low income students in CSEM; 2)
to increase participation of underrepresented groups in CSEM; 3) to better
prepare students for the workforce by enriching the educational experience of
CSEM students through connections of academic content to the work environment;
4) to increase awareness of STEM employment opportunities through existing and
new industry partnerships; 5) to strengthen existing industry partnerships by
creating linkages between students and potential employers; 6) to increase
enrollment of academically-gifted students from community colleges in CSEM at
Mississippi State University; 7) to encourage scholarship recipients to pursue
advanced degrees in CSEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thirty CSEM Undergraduate and
Graduate Fellows are selected from applicants recruited from state and regional
high schools and community colleges, Historically Black Institutions, and four-
year institutions using connections established during an earlier successful
CSEMS project. The number of applicants from each academic program and level
determine the allocation of the 30 scholarships. The majority of the
scholarships are awarded to undergraduates, with some graduate student awards
made to those who provide evidence of economic hardship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eight operating departments and two centers in the
Bagley College of Engineering and the Department of Mathematics and Statistics
in the College of Arts and Sciences participate in the program. Each
participating department has a representative to the CSEM program who plays a
lead role in coordinating activities and assigning mentors within the
department. Fellows are mentored one-on-one by faculty and by their peers. They
participate in research and design projects, present results of their research
professionally, and interact with industry. MSU's Cooperative Education and
Career Services offices aid Fellows in career placement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project fosters industry/academic
relationships that help enhance the future technological competence of the
workforce in the state of Mississippi and surrounding region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impact of this project is to
increase the numbers of underrepresented students with the skills necessary to
be successful in CSEM areas upon graduation. The success of these students
directly impacts the workforce in the state of Mississippi as well as provides
role models for future generations. &lt;br/&gt;