* 0422555
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Molecular Mechanism of Vitreoscilla Hemoglobin (VHb) Function : Identification and Characterization of Cellular Partner(s) of VHb (s)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Benjamin Stark, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2008
* USD 26,500.00

0422555&lt;br/&gt;Stark &lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports cooperative
research in molecular biochemistry between India and the U.S. Its title is:
Molecular Mechanism of Vitreoscilla Hemoglobin (VHb) Function: Identification
and Characterization of Cellular Partners of VHbs. Professors Benjamin Stark and
Dale Webster, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago will collaborate with
Professor Kanak Dikshit, Senior Scientist, Institute of Microbial Technology,
Chandigarh. Hemoglobins are essential oxygen carrying proteins and microbial
hemoglobins are important for optimal growth of certain organisms. Vitreoscilla
hemoglobin, which has been used in genetic engineering, has resulted in the
improved ability of organisms to acquire and utilize oxygen, and has enhanced
their abilities to degrade certain toxic chemicals. The investigators will
perform experiments to characterize and obtain understanding on the biochemical
function of the "hemoglobin" of the bacterium Vitreoscilla and how, when
introduced into a hemoglobin-less bacterium by genetic engineering, it changes
the biochemical pathways of its new host's metabolism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This research is of great scientific and practical
value and will contribute to fundamental knowledge. Greater understanding of the
mechanisms by which VHb enhances cell growth will help advance technologies in
which the use of VHb has been found to be beneficial. Chief among these is the
US PIs work on enhancing bacterial degradation of aromatic compounds including
those, which have environmental contaminants. The collaboration will exploit the
complementary expertise of the two groups of investigators (biochemistry and
physical chemistry of proteins on the US side and recombinant DNA technology on
the Indian side). The researchers have an established collaboration and have
worked successfully. This research and exchange of scientists will be mutually
beneficial for graduate and undergraduate students at both
institutions&lt;br/&gt;