* 0422628
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Proposal: Investigating Late Pleistocene Hunter-Gatherer Mobility Patterns in Northern Spain
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Lawrence Straus, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2006
* USD 11,958.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Lawrence G. Straus, John Rissetto will examine the
geographic mobility and territoriality patterns of Magdalenian (17,000-11,500
B.P.) hunter-gatherers from Cantabria, Spain. It is currently hypothesized that
these groups, who existed at the end of the last Ice Age and created the famous
Altamira cave paintings, maintained small, regional-based territories. However,
because of the diverse artistic and technological similarities shared between
these groups and other groups from north of the Pyrenees, it is also assumed
that there was a great deal more trans-Pyrenean contact and interaction than
originally interpreted through the existing archaeological record. It is the
goal of this research to investigate the actual size of Spanish Magdalenian
hunter-gatherer territories though the tracking of transported stone materials
as they moved from their original geologic outcrop to their eventual
archaeological context.

This research will focus on the collection, use, and discard of stone artifacts
made of chert raw material from five Magdalenian sites located in the Ason River
basin in eastern Cantabria, Spain. Chert, which is a hard, fine grained,
sedimentary rock, was used by Magdalenian hunter-gatherers for the production of
>90% of their everyday and specialized stone tools. The ubiquity of this raw
material type within Magdalenian sites, across Western Europe, makes it ideal
for identifying artifacts that people may have carried substantial distance from
their original geologic outcrop. Because of the heterogeneous nature of chert
formation, there is no single "silver-bullet" analytical technique that can
exactly trace an individual piece of chert back to its original geologic
formation. But, when the analytical evidence from various techniques is
combined, a compositional "finger-print" can be established that accurately
represents the structural characteristics of individual chert artifacts or
entire chert outcrops. This research program will use a three-tiered analytical
methodology that incorporates macroscopic, petrographic, and trace element
analyses to geological source discarded chert artifacts in order to better
understand and identify the geographic movements of Magdalenian hunter-
gatherers.

This research, which is associated with the NSF co-funded, Spanish-American
excavation of El Miron Cave in the Ason Valley, will help to promote teaching
and training, . In northern Spain and in the United States, public outreach
associated with this research will be incorporated into the existing local,
regional, and nation outreach campaign currently in place for El Miron. This
campaign includes public and professional presentations, website development,
museum and interpretative displays, and the publication of existing research in
both English and Spanish language refereed journals. In addition, the funding of
this research will assist greatly in the author's continued graduate training
and the timely completion of his doctoral dissertation. Through this research
Spanish society will directly benefit from a greater understanding of its
prehistoric past, while the global community will benefit from an increased
understanding of how past human groups used geographic movement, much like we do
today, as a means of dealing with social or ecological change or adversity.

