* 0422569
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Transformation Of A National Party System.
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Allan Kornberg, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2005
* USD 8,584.00

Intellectual Merit: Conventional wisdom asserts that elites drive opinion change
in advanced democracies (i.e. Converse 1964; Chubb, Flanigan, and Zingale 1980;
Carmines and Stimson 1989). In Canada, the behavioral ramifications of the
ongoing transformation of the party system, a process that began in 1993 after
fifty years of relative stability, calls into question this assumption. This
proposal hypothesizes that: a) vote choice in Canada is best modeled using a
variant of the "issue priorities" model (c.f. Budge and Farlie 1983) in which
positional issues are mass rather than elite driven; and b) tests this model
against rivals contending that both positional and valence issues vary by region
(c.f. Gidengil et al. 1999); and c) a multidimensional variation of the spatial
model with both positional and valence issues (c.f. Groseclose 2001).
&lt;br/&gt;To test these models, pseudo-panels employing national samples of the
Canadian electorate generated in a number of cross-sectional and panel studies
since the 1980s will be employed. These include both studies of national
elections and studies conducted in the interim between elections. A variety of
multivariate statistical techniques such as modeling both partisanship and
ideology on a latent variable level and making use of multinomial probit
techniques will assess the validity of the hypotheses. &lt;br/&gt;Advances in
adapting these quantitative approaches for use in the analysis of political
behavior will enable the modeling of the stability of both ideology and
partisanship within the multi-wave panels while controlling for measurement
error (e.g. Green, Palmquist, and Schickler 2002). These measurement techniques
will also provide insight as to whether the much noted unstable nature of
partisanship in Canada (c.f. Meisel 1975; Clarke et al. 1996; Clarke et al.
2000) was "time bound" and a byproduct of the party system that existed before
1993. Since the set of parties available to the Canadian voter differs from
region to region, and even between neighboring ridings, the "independence of
irrelevant alternatives" (IIA) assumption is likely violated in standard
analyses of voting behavior in Canada (Greene 2003). If this is the case
estimation of modeling parameters will be done using Breslaw's (2002) GAUSSX
multinomial probit procedure. Since the Canadian national election of 1993, two
new parties, the Bloc Quebecois (BQ) and the Reform/Alliance have become major
players in national electoral politics, whereas two old-line parties, the
Progressive Conservatives (PC) and the left-of-center New Democratic Party (NDP)
have become distinctly minority participants in national elections. However, a
merger has been arranged between the old-line Tory and the Alliance who will
henceforth run under the label, Conservative Party of Canada (CPC). The models
to be tested have the additional merit of analyzing and explaining whether the
proposed merger of these two parties will be consummated, and also whether the
merged party will be successful in the sense of either winning the next election
or seriously challenging the governing Liberals. Funding will be utilized to add
several questions to a pre-post study of an election anticipated during spring
2004 that is being undertaken by Dr. Allan Kornberg. Additional funds are sought
for a mail- back questionnaire that will employ issue questions that are
pertinent to the investigation of the hypotheses and the testing of the above
models. The pre-post telephone interviews will constitute the fourth and fifth
wave of a panel begun by Dr. Kornberg with a pre-post 2000 election study and a
2002 interim study. &lt;br/&gt; b) Broader Impact: The study will be the first
to systematically assess whether the so-called "Absent Mandate" model (c.f.
Clarke et al. 1996) that has largely driven the study of Canadian elections
since the 1970's is time bound and in need of serious revision given the changes
that hypothesized to have occurred at both the elite and mass level of one of
the world oldest, continuing democracies. &lt;br/&gt;