* 0422964
* Simulation of Tropospheric Chemistry over the United States, with Particular Focus on the Free Troposphere and the Role of Lightning Reactive Nitrogen Oxides (NOx)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Noor Gillani, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Pszenny
* 08/31/2010
* USD 567,192.00

This study involves addition of specific free tropospheric processes to the
EPA's CMAQ (Community Multi-scale Air Quality) model, and examination of their
impact on free tropospheric chemistry, and subsequent influence on boundary
layer ozone. These processes include stratosphere-troposphere exchange,
planetary boundary layer - free troposphere exchange, and production of reactive
nitrogen (NOx) from lightning. These model additions will make significant use
of available in situ and remote observational data, and global model results.
The CMAQ model is widely used in the community, but is known to perform poorly
in simulations of the free troposphere. The goal of this project is to improve
that situation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include
the support of a graduate student and two post-doctoral fellows, and likely
improvement of well-used models for tropospheric chemistry research and air
quality management. These model improvements will allow better assessment of the
effectiveness of US air quality policies, and more reliable testing of
alternative air pollution control scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
involves significant synergism with activities sponsored by other agencies. In
addition to the 3 senior scientists, 2 post-doctoral fellows and graduate
student from the University of Alabama in Huntsville, and the senior scientist
and graduate student from the University of Nevada Las Vegas sponsored in this
project, there will be coordination with 2 senior scientists from NASA, a senior
scientist from NCAR, and several senior scientists from EPA.