* 0422997
* Dissertation Research: Libre Software: Nation and Innovation in the French Non-Proprietary Software Movement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Rayna Rapp, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Focusing on the popularization of non-proprietary (NPS) software in France, this
Social and Behavioral Sciences Dissertation Improvement Grant illuminates the
emergent strategic and political uses of computer technology in transnational
activism while also exploring how they are inflected through national
discourses, anxieties and histories. NPS (also called "open source" or "free
software," e.g. Linux) regroups a variety of initiatives and agendas worldwide;
however, in France it has been made into a prominent political and cultural
cause. This project investigates how the French NPS activists catalyze support
for a politicized vision of computer technology, by asking: (1) How do claims
about the democratizing potential of NPS in France draw on and feed into
longstanding national conceptions of technological innovation and of public
service? (2) How does the NPS movement's commitment to invigorating the "public
good" in France resonate with efforts to resituate France internationally? To
answer these questions, the co-PI will work with four of the most active and
well-established NPS associations in France, all based in Paris and selected to
capture a cross-section of persons and missions in this movement. She will
employ participant observation (in voluntary associations, NPS-related
gatherings, on-line debates and collaborations), in-depth interviews, network
analysis, and analysis of websites, online archives and media representations
related to NPS in France. This study will intervene in literature that
privileges the transnational potential of computation and computer networks for
democratic and/or corporate expansion by looking at a case in which local
actors, through a conjunction of online and face-to-face interactions, inflect
computer technology with specifically national framings and effects. To do so,
this project will (1) map out the relationships, activities and debates around
the NPS in France; (2) illuminate how the practices of the NPS advocacy and
popularization give meanings to the vision of democratization through
technology; (3) track how the NPS notion of "public good" in France implicates a
certain vision of the nation. Beyond mapping the variegated field of non-
proprietary software production and advocacy, this project will contribute an
anthropological perspective to cross-cultural understanding of computing,
national and transnational dimensions of technological innovation, and the role
of the Internet in cultural and political activism. Computing is increasingly
understood to be the infrastructure for research and education; yet, social
scientists have only begun to investigate the cultural and political dimensions
of computer technology. This research will illuminate the cultures of computing
by considering the networks of actors, claims and practices that ground, and are
constituted by, the vision of democratization through the diffusion of
technological development. By tracking how a "geek counterculture" is
maintained, refracted, or disavowed through a broad social movement, this
research will foreground conditions in which NPS can potentially catalyze a
broader trend of strategic use of computer technology. Further, it will
illuminate the meanings of computer literacy in stratified national and
transnational spheres, delineating how and for whom specific practices of
computing might indeed be successful or democratizing, and which groups might be
underrepresented in such initiatives. This project will provide groundwork for
understanding how politicized activism around, and increasingly relying on,
computer technology, can advance or limit the participation of diverse groups in
scientific research or education.