* 0422795
* SGER: Lake Sediment Cores and Surface Exposure Dates Near the Epicenter of the 1872 Washington Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2004,09/30/2005
* Juliet Crider, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2005
* USD 46,502.00

he 1872 Washington State earthquake is the largest known crustal earthquake in
the Pacific Northwest, with an estimated magnitude exceeding most recent
damaging U.S. earthquakes. The fault that produced the 1872 earthquake is not
known, nor has a record of earlier events been produced. Recent work on the
precise relocation of modern earthquakes traces a blind thrust in the presumed
1872 epicentral region around Lake Chelan, Washington. Preliminary mapping
suggests observable deformation of glacial terraces along the Columbia River
that may be associated with the 1872. This project is exploring two hypotheses.
First, The 1872 earthquake was produced by slip on a northwest-striking, blind
thrust (delineated by hypocenter relocation) that produced a broad fold visible
in the topographic deflection of glacial deposits along the Columbia River
valley between the Okanogan confluence and the city of Wenatchee. Mapping and
detailed GPS surveying of the terrace surfaces coupled with surface exposure
dating methods are being used to test this hypothesis. Second, ground shaking
caused deformation of sediments in Lake Chelan and other near-by lakes. Earlier
events are recorded by similar deformation at lower stratigraphic horizons.
Cores are being collected from Lake Chelan to determine if deformation related
to the 1872-event is present and to seek evidence for earlier large earthquakes,
lower in the stratigraphic section.