* 0422402
* Access for Engineering Excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* John Chovan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John F. Mateja
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This project assists students with good but not honors status in the College of
Engineering through programs and financial aid to enable better performance in
their coursework and improve their grade standing to honors status. Specific
goals include: improve midrange (GPA 3.0-3.4) student study skills and sense of
group identity for engineering majors; improve the amount of student time
available for coursework and special projects that expand the student experience
in engineering; and improve opportunities for off quarters work experiences. The
advantages of students gaining honors status include priority scheduling of
classes, eligibility for selection in discipline honoraries, and eligibility for
in-depth honors experiences such as honors internships and senior honors thesis
research projects. Furthermore, students graduating with GPA &gt; 3.4 are better
positioned for job placement and entrance to graduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals, the project is providing a
combination of financial scholarship aid to reduce job related workload,
academic support programs, and extended access to off quarter internships.
Approximately 50 students are anticipated to participate annually, with
continuation in the program through graduation. Eligible students include
undergraduate students from all years and fields of engineering. In addition,
this project is a pilot project generating preliminary data to present to
industrial sponsors who will be solicited to provide ongoing operating support
for a long term program with more participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the Access for Engineering Excellence includes the
generation of new tracking data on the assessment of financial aid and academic
support mechanisms to improve grades of midrange GPA students and to enable
these students with more opportunities for rich undergraduate experiences and
better positioning for post-graduation job placement and graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed project is a higher
number of better educated engineers entering the workplace or graduate school.
Furthermore, the target grade range for students in the project is rich with
women and minorities, producing better prepared engineers in these
groups.&lt;br/&gt;