* 0422096
* Improving Graduation Rates of Financially Needy Engineering, Computer Sciences, and Mathematics Students through Scholarships, and Academic and Professional Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Christos Christodoulou, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* James Hamos
* 09/30/2009
* USD 394,268.00

This Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships (CSEMS) project
aims to continue helping financially needy computer science, engineering, and
mathematics students to obtain their baccalaureate degrees. It provides a total
of 30 scholarships to 20 undergraduate and 10 graduate students within the CSEM
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project include:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Recruit, identify, select and evaluate potential students entering
CSEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;2. Provide adequate services so that CSEMS students
maintain satisfactory academic progress. &lt;br/&gt;3. Provide adequate support,
financially and otherwise, to CSEMS scholars so they may complete their
educational goals. &lt;br/&gt;4. Connect participants with their faculty
advisors &lt;br/&gt;5. Encourage undergraduate students to experience research
either at UNM, other universities or to experience internships at private and
governmental research institutions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Students are selected
on the basis of financial need, academic merit, and potential for professional
success. The program utilizes UNM financial aid office procedures and
regulations to establish financial need of students. Academic merit is
determined by students' grade point average, the quality of the recommendation
letters, the students' resume, and the goal setting essay submitted by every
applicant. A committee reviews applications. Tutoring, mentoring, and
professional development are an integral part of the program since these
services foster students' growth and interest in their field of study. Students
are referred to the UNM Career Services office for career placement. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project is that it provides opportunities
for students, especially minority students, to succeed in the CSEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is in the
strength of the CSEM academic programs, the close interaction between students
and faculty in the CSEM fields, and the ability of graduates to obtain good jobs
in the CSEM fields.