* 0422017
* Computer Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Engineering Technology Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Madelaine Bates, CUNY Bronx Community College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 429,508.00

This proposal expands the highly successful CSEMS scholarship program at Bronx
Community College. Its goal is to increase the number of women and minority
students majoring in computer science, mathematics, engineering, and engineering
technology in order to prepare them for careers in high technology fields. The
student population of the college is over 95% minority and 66% female. To date,
the project has awarded 101 semester scholarships to 46 individual students, 18
women and 28 men. An Advisory Committee, supervised by the Vice-President of
Academic Affairs, consisting of seven faculty members from the science
departments chaired by the Principal Investigator, selects student scholarship
recipients. The faculty develop selection criteria and evaluation procedures for
student scholars. New students are being recruited from mathematics and science
courses at the college and from local high schools. Intellectual Merit: Student
scholars and the faculty constitute the CSEMS Academy, similar to the Science
and Liberal Arts Academies and the Honors Program at the college. Each student
is assigned a faculty member who is the student's mentor and advisor throughout
the student's participation in the program. The Academy sponsors talks by alumni
who are continuing their education or working in the high technology industry.
It is a place where students form study groups and receive tutoring. Students
are directed to the Office of Career Services for workshops on interviewing
skills and resume writing. Eligible students have an opportunity to participate
in paid research projects through the Alliance for Minority Participation
program at the college and at Brookhaven National Laboratory. The program also
seeks internships for students at local colleges and industries through
coordination with other science division programs and projects. Broader Impacts:
In addition to providing opportunities for students (most of whom are first
generation college students) to see first hand what kinds of professional
careers are available to them, the program has an impact on student retention.
The overall success of the program is being based on the number of students who
graduate and transfer to a four-year college or are employed full-time in a high
technology area.