* 0422938
* Polyhydroxybutyrate/Polyphosphate Complexes as Conductive Cores of Ion Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Rosetta Reusch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Intellectual merit. The premise of this research is that complexes of two
ubiquitous polymers, poly-(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate and polyphosphate (cPHB/polyP),
form the conductive cores of protein ion channels. It has previously been shown
that cPHB/polyP complexes, isolated from bacterial plasma membranes or prepared
from the synthetic polymers, create selective ion channels in planar lipid
bilayers. This project will examine the putative modification of inherent
cPHB/polyP channel selectivity by polypeptides of the Streptomyces lividans
potassium channel, KcsA. Phosphates have a divalent negative charge above pH 7.0
and a monovalent negative charge below pH 7.0. Consequently, cPHB/polyP
complexes are highly selective for divalent cations above pH 7.0, but become
selective for monovalent cations when the pH is below 7.0. KcsA demonstrates
similar cation selectivity in planar bilayers at room temperatures; the channels
prefer divalent cations at pH 7.2, but are highly selective for K+ at pH 6.8.
However, at temperatures above 26 C, KcsA is highly selective for K+, regardless
of pH. The hypothesis is that KcsA undergoes a thermal transition that results
in the placement of basic residues at the ends of the intracellular strands of
KcsA polypeptides close to the end units of polyP; the effect of the positive
charges on these residues on selectivity of polyP would be comparable to that of
a lowered pH. In this project, mutants of these basic residues will be prepared
by PCR site-directed mutagenesis, the proteins will be overexpressed in E. coli
and purified by affinity chromatography. The cation selectivity of these mutant
KcsA channels in planar lipid bilayers will then be compared to that of wild-
type KcsA to test the hypothesis. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. This project offers
a novel mechanism for ion transport. Moreover, the cPHB/polyP channels are
putative vehicles for DNA transport and they may serve as nanosensors for
cations, pH or temperature. In terms of training and education, postdoctoral,
graduate and undergraduate students from Michigan State University and other
institutions will be involved in various aspects of this research. In addition,
a web site will be developed to provide information about cPHB and polyP and
their complexes at both elementary and advanced levels in order to foster a
greater understanding of the important structural and metabolic roles of these
fundamental cell constituents among students, scientists and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;