* 0422476
* Scholarship Program to Support Underserved Computer Science Students
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Jean Mehta, Saint Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/2009
* USD 398,672.00

This project is providing financial, academic, and career-preparation assistance
to twenty-nine economically disadvantaged, academically promising undergraduate
and graduate students each year for four years. Located on Chicago's ethnically
diverse south side, with a student body that reflects the demographics of the
geographical location, the university targets first generation college students
from populations that are under-represented in the computer science discipline:
African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, women and students with
disabilities.

The scholarship program serves to identify, attract, and recruit qualified
undergraduate and graduate students. Computer Science faculty are promoting the
program at Chicago-area high schools and community colleges whose demographics
match the targeted populations. Scholarship awards can be made to community
college graduates who have received prior CSEMS support, and also to other
eligible SXU students. It also attracts deserving scholarship recipients into
the professional graduate degree program. By creating financial aid packages
with this and other scholarships, the project makes it feasible for eligible
undergraduate students to pursue full-time majors in traditional computer
science or applications-based computer studies programs; and for graduate
students to pursue full-time study in the two-year professional degree program.

To meet the objectives of encouraging students' academic success, retaining them
through graduation, and enabling them to find employment as computer
professionals or placement in graduate schools, the project is extending and
strengthening existing department-level and university-wide programs, and
developing a broad network of support. Scholarship recipients have faculty and
student service mentors throughout their affiliation with SXU. A rich array of
opportunities are available to the scholarship recipients' cohort, including a
monthly CSEMS seminar, a comprehensive career counseling plan, tutoring,
internship and service learning positions, faculty-student collaborative
research, support for attendance at computer science conferences, a laptop
loaner program, and alumni mentoring. Three themes run throughout the support
activities: sharpening students' problem-solving abilities; building students'
confidence in their abilities to succeed in a challenging major; and exposing
them to the breadth of the computer science discipline, the range of career
opportunities that exist for them, and the variety of skills and strengths
required in today's high tech workplace.

The project has significant intellectual merit and broad impact to society. The
scarcity of minorities and women in the computer science discipline and high
tech workforce is a well-documented problem. SXU's experience in an urban
setting has shown that academic institutions must proactively attract and engage
underserved students. By implementing these ideas and reflecting on and widely
disseminating the results, the project can contribute significantly to the body
of knowledge in this crucial area. Increased diversity of the student body
enriches the experiences and perspectives of all faculty, students, and staff;
upon graduation, scholarship recipients can enrich the entire computer
profession.