* 0422507
* Increasing Participation in Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics through Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Gordon Woodward, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This project is awarding scholarships of $3,125 per year for 4 years to 30
talented low-income, full-time students to obtain degrees in computer science,
engineering, or mathematics at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL). The
recruitment efforts specifically target low-income students in these
populations: women, minorities, first generation students, and students from
rural communities. The objectives are to increase the academic and graduation
success among low-income students; to increase the number of students in the
target populations who earn baccalaureate degrees in a CSEMS discipline; to help
place all of the students before their senior year in a meaningful summer or
semester internship, a research experience, or a career related job; to provide
a sound basis on which the students can make informed and reasonable career
choices; and to prepare students for successful entry into a career upon
graduation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Offices of Admissions, Scholarships and
Financial Aid, Minority Affairs as well as the Colleges of Engineering and Arts
and Sciences all help to identify and recruit qualified students for the
program. Key faculty in the CSEMS disciplines have volunteered their time to
help foster a connection between the CSEMS students and the departments.
Freshmen are required to participate in one of four very successful retention
programs. Freshmen and sophomores are assigned a junior or senior CSEMS mentor.
These together with a weekly CSEMS seminar form the backbone of the CSEMS
learning community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the program
lie in its effect on the target population. According to a survey conducted this
year, 22% of UNL's undergraduates are first generation college students. There
are a large number of high-achieving students with financial need. Nebraska's
cultural and racial minority population has grown by more than 150% in the last
ten years. About 30% of Nebraskans live in rural communities. The CSEMS program
will accelerate the transition of this population to careers in the highly
marketable, technical employment sector. It offers a chance for rural Nebraska
to develop its potential for technical industrial growth. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the program lies in the sharing of academic
and career interests in the weekly seminar and through the mentors. At the
seminar senior CSEMS students present the results of their junior/senior
projects, research, and internships; and faculty share their ideas for
undergraduate and professional research. This encourages all CSEMS students to
take advantage of the many opportunities for research and internships, either
off campus in industry or summer programs or on campus through senior projects,
faculty mentors, the UNL UCARE undergraduate research program, the Ronald McNair
summer REU, and the NSF funded Nebraska REU in Applied Mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;