* 0422336
* Support, Mentorship, Accountability, Research and Training (SMART):  A Sustainable, Thriving Program in Mathematical Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Rohan Attele, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Bert Holmes
* 07/31/2008
* USD 275,000.00

This project awards 20 scholarships of $3,125 per year for 4 years to full-time
undergraduate and graduate financially disadvantaged talented students to follow
a challenging program in mathematics and computer science. It sustain the gains
made in building graduate program by a previous CSEMS grant; supports
mathematics and computer science students in the newly formed Honors College;
and increases the number of minority individuals employed in the fields of
mathematics and computer science. It includes student research experience;
participation in departmental colloquia; provides internships for students in
banks, hospitals, and industry; and increases the number of well-prepared
African American and Hispanic students who successfully compete for admission to
graduate programs in mathematics and computer science. The project includes a
built in strong support system that enables students to handle the rigors of the
program.

Intellectual merit: The program continues a successful previous CSEMS project
and extends it into new areas with the University Honors Program. Forums for
intensive informal interaction between faculty and students are designed to
bring out latent talents in students.

Broader impact: Graduates of the program are hired in area high schools and
colleges, and impart the philosophy of teaching mathematics and the culture of
success in the program to their students and colleagues.