* 0422823
* Agreement on Demand: Studies in the History of Demand Theory 1930-1950
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Douglas Wade Hands, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 12/31/2005
* USD 141,284.00

The demand curve is one of the most important theoretical concepts in modern
economic analysis. The standard textbook interpretation is that demand curves
are the sum of the demands of individual consumers, which are in turn based on
the maximization of a well-behaved utility function subject to a linear budget
constraint. In Agreement on Demand: Studies in the History of Demand Theory
1930-1950, the PI investigates the various forces that contributed to the
stabilization of demand theory around this now standard interpretation. Three
broad themes emerge from the history of demand theory during this period. First,
a wide range of different interpretations of "demand" were available within the
economics literature of the 1930s. While many of these approaches contained
elements of what is now the standard view, there was wide disagreement among the
various contributors, even those who accepted that market demand was the
summation of the individual demand curves generated by maximizing agents.
Second, while stabilization did occur during this period, the movement was from
the many to the few, rather than the many to the one. There were three broadly
identifiable "schools" that coalesced into the now standard view, and while they
obviously have much in common, there are also substantive differences. Finally,
the historical narrative involves a complex story of interests, contingency and
negotiation; rather than a simpler and more epic tale of the victorious theory
overcoming the various competitors in a decisive and clearly progressive way.
Specific topics examined in the historical investigation include the question of
integrability, the character of the ordinal revolution, and the problems raised
by the heterogeneity of economic agents. Intellectual Merit: Demand theory is a
key feature of modern economic analysis and is involved in every (at least
micro) economic policy application. Applied microeconomic theory is based on
cost-benefit analysis, which in turn relies on demand curves derived from
individual utility maximization. Understanding how demand theory came to be
stabilized in its current form, is essential to understanding the development of
microeconomics as a tool for social and economic policy. Broader Impacts:
Outcomes of the research include a series of papers on these topics in the
history of demand theory that will be submitted to professional journals and
presented at conferences in both science studies and the history and philosophy
of economics; pedagogical integration into a variety of undergraduate courses;
and substantive steps toward a larger, co-authored, project on the history of
demand theory.

