* 0422762
* RR:CISE Instrumentation: Wireless and Sensor Networking Laboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Jie Wu, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 10/31/2007
* USD 57,263.00

This project, establishing a wireless and sensor networking laboratory, supports
the following research projects:&lt;br/&gt; Area Coverage in Wireless Ad-Hoc
Sensor Networks,&lt;br/&gt; Efficient Broadcasting in Wireless Ad-Hoc Sensor
Networks, and&lt;br/&gt; Topology control in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks with Hitch-
Hiking.&lt;br/&gt;In the 1st project, an energy-efficient localized and
distributed area coverage protocol will be designed that provides sensor network
connectivity and a reliable retrieval mechanism. The performance of the protocol
will be analyzed for a sensor network through simulation using the Opnet network
simulator, and the protocol will be implemented and tested on the MICA mote
sensor platform. This area coverage problem has applications in disaster
recovery, environmental monitoring, and homeland defense. In the 2nd project,
efficient broadcast protocols that fit the wireless sensor network
characteristics will be designed, these protocols will be simulated for large
networks using Opnet and implemented and tested on the MICS mote sensor
platform. Broadcast, an important operation in wireless ad-hoc sensor networks,
is often encountered, for example, in data diffusion and on-demand gathering.
Because of transmission redundancy, a factor that increases heavily contentions
and collisions, broadcast by flooding does not constitute a feasible solution.
Thus, the forwarding node needs to be selected carefully, considering the basic
characteristics of a wireless sensor network, such as lack of global sensor
information and resource limitation. In the 3rd project, an efficient topology
control protocol will be designed, simulated in large networks using Opnet, and
implemented and tested in the lab, for a mobile ad-hoc network of laptop and
palm computers. Moreover, a distributed topology control mechanism will be
designed that assigns a transmission power to every wireless node such that the
resulting topology is strongly connected and the total energy consumed is
minimized. This last project addresses topology control in mobile ad-hoc
networks needed, for example, in proactive routing protocols. A new energy-
efficient mechanism proposed, the Hitch-hiking model, addresses this topology
control problem. Exploring the advantage offered by this model, successfully
decoding a packet by combining partial receptions, the investigators will strive
to minimize the total power expenditure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
This infrastructure provides a research facility in a minority serving
institution for students to conduct research in wireless and sensor networking
areas. The lab impacts the education mission, including course work, and student
projects. Thus, new educational opportunities will open providing better
training and motivation. Results will be disseminated via web pages, invited
talks, conference, presentations and journal publications.&lt;br/&gt;