* 0422155
* SBIR Phase II:   Integrated Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) 3D Micro-Opto-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MOEMS) Optical Switch for Dynamically Reconfigurable Network
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Roger Helkey, Calient Networks
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2006
* USD 499,925.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project will integrate
Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) with Micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) optical switching to make the critical network element needed for
reconfigurable, transparent, high capacity fiber optic networks. This
technological advancement will facilitate the transition from today's point-to-
point opaque networks with optical to electrical to optical (OEO) electrical
switches to transparent, dynamic all optical networks. The design involves free
space optical design, fiber optic design, MEMS design and optical coating design
in order to make a wavelength switch which has low loss, low polarization
independent loss, low temperature sensitivity, low vibration sensitivity,
properly shaped pass bands (flattop with good adjacent channel rejection) and
low crosstalk. The design will be developed, constructed and tested in Phase II,
significantly advancing the field of optical switching from where it is today.

This integrated wavelength switch should have numerous applications in
commercial and government networks. The capacity is huge: 4 fibers with 40
wavelengths each carrying 40 Gbit/s of data results in 6 Terabit/s switching
capacity. This allows continued growth in the Internet, and enables a much lower
cost solution to higher capacity wavelength services. Continued expansion of
access to information requires continued expansion of worldwide core optical
networks.