* 0422225
* Promoting Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics with Scholarships and Student Support Services
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Sylvia Sorkin, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 396,000.00

The Community College of Baltimore (CCBC) is awarding thirty scholarships
annually to students in one of the six A. A. degree programs eligible under the
CSEMS guidelines. Three of the programs, Computer Science, Engineering, and
mathematics are designed for students intending to transfer to four-year
institutions, the remaining three, Computer Information Systems, E-commerce, and
Multimedia prepare students for a technology career. Twenty percent of the
scholarships are being reserved for students transferring to a four-year
institution. CCBC faculty are continuing to mentor those who have transferred
via telephone, email and in person consultations. This program is allowing
talented students who could not otherwise continue their education because of
financial considerations to earn a bachelor's degree. The project's advisory
board consists of a CCBC financial officer, two local business partners, a
student services counselor, and a representative from one of the six targeted
programs. Other outstanding features of the project include a three-day summer
career experience workshop and an excellent student support system. During the
summer workshop students with the guidance of an academic counselor are creating
individual academic learning plans for their four-semester degree program. These
plans are updated as the students progress through their programs of study. The
CSEMS scholars are doing very well as compared to the general college populace.
The college dropout rate of 58% is reduced to 15% for CSEMS scholars. The 44%
success rate for the CSEMS scholars after only 2.5 years is nearly double the
three-year success rate for the college. The remaining 41% are still continuing
their college studies. Not all the dropouts can be considered failures; among
them are several individuals who are employed fulltime in their elected CSEMS
supported fields.

