* 0422985
* Collaborative Research: High-Performance Computational Methods for Continuous-Time Markov Processes in Financial Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Michael Marcozzi, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 09/30/2008
* USD 70,392.00

This grant provides funding for the development of high-performance
computational tools for financial engineering. The goal is to develop
computational methods to evaluate complex financial products used to manage
foreign exchange, interest rate, equity, commodity, energy, and credit risks,
manage portfolios of assets, and evaluate financial contracts and equipment
leases in manufacturing industries. The methodology is based on the extension to
financial engineering of finite element methods used to solve numerically
partial differential equations. Partial integro-differential equations arise in
Markov jump-diffusion models and associated optimal stopping and stochastic
control problems in financial engineering. Finite element methods will be
applied to jump-diffusion processes to develop computational tools to be used by
practitioners in the financial services industry, as well as researchers in
financial engineering, applied probability and operations research. Applications
include pricing algorithms for a wide range of financial contracts (equity and
foreign exchange options, interest rate derivatives, commodity contracts, and
equipment leases in manufacturing), as well as portfolio optimization with
transaction costs and trading restrictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
methodologies developed in this project will help financial institutions,
corporate treasuries of manufacturing and service firms, and energy companies
accurately value complex financial instruments and efficiently manage financial
risks. This project will also have a broader impact on research and application
areas that use continuous-time Markov processes, such as heavy traffic limits in
queueing theory, inventory control, scheduling, and manufacturing. The results
on constructive approximations to the valuation, optimal stopping and stochastic
control problems will also help simulation and stochastic optimization research
by providing reliable benchmarks for simulation and stochastic optimization.
This grant supports the Ph.D. concentration in financial engineering at
Northwestern. This will result in training highly qualified researchers in
financial engineering for academia and industry. The grant will also help the
Department of Mathematical Sciences at the University of Nevada establish a
research program in financial mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;