* 0422883
* Comparative Analysis of Identified Neurons &amp; Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Christopher Comer, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mark Kirk
* 08/31/2009
* USD 436,677.00

An important general aim of neuroscience is to understand the design principles
of brain circuits that control behavior and insects provide ideal models for
understanding brain circuitry. Their brains are comprised of relatively few
cells, and they have well-defined behavior patterns. The present research
project will analyze how specific brain cells are organized into functional
circuits controlling behavior in a group of related insects. The comparison of
brain circuits in closely related species will provide understanding of the
general principles by which brains are engineered by nature to control behavior.
&lt;br/&gt; In previous work funded by NSF, it was established that specific
brain cells ("DMIs") of some insects trigger evasive responses to antennal
contact from predators. The antennae are under visual guidance, apparently in
part by a brain cell referred to as "DCMD". Preliminary evidence suggests that
in some insects the DCMD acts as a visual sensor and the DMIs control
directional movements so that as an ensemble these cells form a circuit to
coordinate directional motor behaviors specific to each insect
species.&lt;br/&gt; A specific hypotheses will be tested: that the visual
sensing part of this circuit has remained fairly constant across different
insects, but that the way in which the circuit delivers information to movement
systems has changed to account for the differing behavioral requirements of each
species. This hypothesis will be tested by mapping the structure of the cells,
recording their responses to an array of sensory cues, and recording how they
signal during behavior. The cells also will be selectively inactivated. A
diverse group of students will receive neuroscience training during the project.
Finally, the studies will lead to new tools such as a database of identified
brain cells for researchers and this information could be used for designing
"biologically inspired" circuits for applications in robotics and for building
intelligent interfaces between people and machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;