* 0422506
* Representations and Cohomology of Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2004
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2004
* USD 86,644.00

Principal Investigator: Sarah Witherspoon Proposal Number: 0245560 Institution:
Amherst College Abstract: Representations and Cohomology of Algebras

Witherspoon's work involves various types of algebras, such as Hopf algebras,
quantum groups, group algebras, and crossed products. Witherspoon studies
representations of these algebras as linear transformations on vector spaces,
and their cohomology, which measures properties of the algebras and their
representations. Witherspoon will compute the Hochschild cohomology of certain
crossed product algebras arising from group actions on spaces. There are
expected connections to some new theories of cohomology of orbifolds, and
Witherspoon's research will inform the effort by many mathematicians to
understand these cohomology theories. At the same time it will be of interest to
quantum group theorists as Witherspoon expects, based on her current work, that
deformations of these crossed product algebras come from representations of
certain quantum groups on these algebras. Related work that Witherspoon proposes
will involve progress on some basicquestions about Hopf algebras and quantum
groups, such as finite generation of cohomology, and three-manifold invariants
arising from finite quantum groups. Another project involves fundamental
questions about how representations of an algebra are related to those of a
subalgebra. Witherspoon will continue her work in generalizing Clifford theory
from groups to certain types of algebras, with the goal of finding constructive
answers to these questions, and will apply such a theory to answer questions
about representations of algebras.

Algebra is the expression of physical objects as equations or functions. A curve
or surface is the graph of an equation, and its physical properties may be
determined directly from the equation. More general algebraic systems such as
collections of many functions, called algebras, encode information about more
complicated physical objects. For example, if an object (such as a crystal or a
molecule) exhibits symmetry, this symmetry is expressed in its corresponding
algebra. Many such examples are well understood, and the mathematics involved is
exploited in physics, chemistry, and other sciences. However there are many
systems that are less well understood, such as the quantum groups that arose in
mathematical physics less than two decades ago. Witherspoon's work involves the
study of properties of such algebras and their representations as physical
objects. One technique that is used frequently in Witherspoon's work is
cohomology. Witherspoon will compute the cohomology of various types of
algebras, as well as use other methods to study them and their representations.
Witherspoon's proposed activities will result in a collection of publications on
a wide range of topics within algebra that will also impact fields outside
algebra such as geometry and mathematical physics. Most of the activities
address questions, in which many mathematicians are currently interested, while
others are new ideas that will find an interested audience upon publication.

