* 0422126
* Tessellation, Fairing, Shape Design, and Trimming Techniques for Subdivision Surface based Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Fuhua (Frank) Cheng, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop the necessary geometric algorithms and design
technologies that support subdivision surface based modeling in computer
automated product realization (CAD/CAM) applications. Subdivision surfaces have
already been used as primitives in several commercial systems such as
AliasIWavefront's Maya, Pixar's Rederman, Nichiman's Mirai, and Microspace'
Lightwave 3D. However they have not been used as a major surface representation
in CAD/CAM systems as yet because the necessary geometric algorithms and
modeling techniques in surface tessellation, surface fairing, shape design and
surface trimming are still lacking. These algorithms and technologies are
important as they will be the building blocks of many subdivision surface based
modeling operations for next generation surface representation in CAD/CAM
systems. Specific research will address surface tessellation through error
control techniques and adaptive refinement techniques; automatic surface fairing
through fairness indicating methods and automatic surface irregularity detecting
and correcting techniques; shape design through interpolation-based shape design
and control mesh manipulation methods; and new surface trimming curve
representation schemes to avoid excessive computational requirements. The
proposed research will provide significant advancement in subdivision surface
based modeling, with a precise and efficient way to generate input to the finite
element process while also addressing manufacturability issues. Design engineers
will be provided with effective tools to sculpt a surface into a desired shape
that has not been created before. This is expected to be accomplished through
the new Boolean operations to form more complicated objects. The resulting tools
are expected to be more reliable in supporting next generation surface
representation for CAD/CAM product design and development. Graduate courses in
both Geometric Design and Freeform Solid Modeling will be enhanced with the
integration of these research results.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;