* 0422889
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Microstructural Studies on Carbon Nanomaterial-Modified Carbon-Carbon Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Danny Edie, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2009
* USD 29,585.00

0422889&lt;br/&gt;Amod Ogale &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is
for international cooperative research in carbon nanotechnology entitled US-
India Cooperative Research: Microstructural Studies on Carbon Nanomaterial-
Modified Carbon-Carbon Composites. Clemson University's team consists of
Professors Amod Ogale, Danny Edie, Mark Thies, and Daniel Sweeney (PhD student);
the Indian collaborators are Professors L. M. Manocha and S. Manocha, Sardar
Patel University, India. The proposed research is directed towards advanced
carbon-carbon composites modified with carbon nanotubes. The objectives are to
study the evolution of graphitic microstructure due to the addition of carbon
nanotubes and to characterize the transport properties of the multi-scale
carbon/carbon composite materials. Among various nanomaterials developed in the
last decade, carbon nanotubes have drawn maximum attention from scientific and
industrial researchers because of their extraordinary properties. These
materials have potential applications in sensors, energy storage devices,
electrodes for lithium ion batteries, microelectronic and communication devices,
and in conventional polymeric composites.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scope: The US
team, which has significant expertise in carbon fibers, has chosen to
collaborate with Indian scientists, who have significant experience in carbon
matrix composites. Thus, complementary research skills of US and Indian
scientists will generate synergy that will advance the field of carbon
composites. This collaborative effort will provide international research
experience to both students and faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;