* 0422110
* SBIR Phase II:   Geiger Mode Avalanche Photodiodes for Photon Counting from 0.9 Micrometers to 2.0 Micrometers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* John Dries, Sensors Unlimited, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2006
* USD 355,578.00

This SBIR Phase II project is to develop an InGaAs/InP avalanche photodiodes for
use in Geiger mode photon counting with wavelength response extended from the
conventional cutoff wavelength of 1.7 microns to 2.1 microns. Commercial
InGaAs/InP avalanche photodiodes developed for linear operation in optical fiber
communication systems have limited quantum detection efficiency and relatively
high dark count rates when operated in Geiger mode, and are unable to detect
radiation from important laser sources such as Tm/Ho near 2 microns. Using our
experience as manufacturers of commercial linear-mode avalanche photodiodes and
our epitaxial growth facility, we will design and fabricate avalanche
photodiodes optimized specifically for Geiger-mode operation. The goal will be
to obtain enhanced quantum detection efficiency, reduced dark count rate, and
extended wavelength response to 2.1 microns. &lt;br/&gt;The two primary impacts
of this work will be to enhance the understanding of the physics of Geiger-mode
avalanche photodiodes, and to provide the broader research community with
improved detectors that will significantly enhance the usefulness of photon-
counting techniques in the near-infrared spectral region. Although the basic
theory of Geiger-mode operation of avalanche photodiodes is several decades old,
there continues to be a significant quantitative discrepancy between the quantum
detection efficiency predicted by the theory and the quantum detection
efficiency observed experimentally. Part of this study will pursue this
discrepancy, not only to design improved devices but also to better understand
the fundamental performance limits. By developing improved near infrared photon-
counting detectors this study will take a major toward making such detectors
commercially available to the larger research community, which will enable
photon-counting techniques to be more widely applied in the near-infrared
spectral region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;