* 0422097
* A Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program:  Building Upon an Industry-Academia Foundation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* David Russomanno, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 08/31/2009
* USD 343,750.00

The "Next Generation of Manufacturing Engineers for the Automotive Sector"
project provides scholarships for students interested in all aspects of
manufacturing for the automotive sector. All College of Engineering programs, as
well as computer science and mathematics benefit from the project. The project
strengthens existing alliances and resources, as well as partnerships with
community colleges and industry sponsors throughout the Mid-South
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is to
supplement existing resources within the University to facilitate a life-
altering, environmental change for financially disadvantaged, upper-division
undergraduate CSEM students with academic potential. Scholarships are provided
supplemented with summer industry or research internships between the junior and
senior years. CSEMS students become an integral part of the academic culture and
take more advantage of tutoring, peer mentoring, career development, research,
student collaboration, as well as other academic and personal advantages gained
by being fully engaged in the University community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the project is achieved via the following objectives, each
with specific, measurable outcomes, which are analyzed to continually improve
the program: i) to decrease the financial debt of CSEM graduates via
scholarships and counseling, ii) to decrease the number of CSEM students working
in non-intellectually engaging jobs by increasing opportunities for students to
work on a faculty member's funded research or through approved co-op or summer
internships with industry partners of the project, iii) to improve employment
placement in highly sought-after positions via the institution's relationship
with industry partners who support seamless transition of internships into full-
time positions, iv) to increase the graduation rate of CSEM students,
particularly minority and female students, v) to decrease the average time to
degree completion for CSEM students and, vi) to increase the number of CSEM
graduates who enroll in graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives
are achieved through a unique combination of student environment modifications,
one-on-one counseling and tutoring services, scholarships, retention and
intervention, professional development and research activities, and industrial
collaborations while leveraging and not replacing existing resources. The
project strives to maintain the underrepresented participation from our baseline
CSEMS awards, which consisted of 52% minorities and 40% females. A committee of
faculty, staff and industry partners from the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA),
Federal Express Corporation (FedEx), The Solae Company, Wright Medical
Technology, Inc., and the Army Corps of Engineers will select and mentor the
recipients.&lt;br/&gt;