* 0422397
* Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Robert Tannenbaum, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John F. Mateja
* 08/31/2009
* USD 200,000.00

This project furthers the successful undergraduate scholarship program for low-
income, academically talented students in Computer Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics (CSEM) at the University of Kentucky (UK) and the Lexington
Community College (LCC). The initial CSEM scholarship program enabled many
underprivileged students to obtain degrees in the focus areas of computer
science, engineering, mathematics, and computer information systems. The past
project had a 100% retention rate and clearly demonstrated that many of these
students could not have attained their degrees without this support. The primary
purpose of this project is to continue to help academically talented students
with financial need achieve a high level of success in their educational and
career goals. A secondary aim is to improve upon the initial program through
recipient participation in a variety of educational and research activities that
will foster their interest, expertise, and enthusiasm for the CSEM fields. In
addition, the project targets students from underrepresented groups and those
with non-traditional backgrounds who might otherwise not be able to pursue
careers in CSEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is being overseen and
coordinated by the Principal Investigator and an interdisciplinary CSEM Program
Advisory Committee comprised of the Co-Investigators and the student support
staff of the College of Engineering, the Department of Mathematics, and the
mathematics and CIS programs at Lexington Community College. The Advisory
Committee meets regularly to evaluate and update program activities as well as
to select students into the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project stipend
amount is $3125 for full-time students at UK and $1562 for full-time students at
LCC with 57 UK and 14 LCC full-time scholarships awarded over the total four
years of the project. &lt;br/&gt;