* 0422512
*  CSEMS Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Junae Bitter, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Lesia L. Crumpton-Young
* 07/31/2008
* USD 396,000.00

The project is awarding thirty scholarships per year to students who are
enrolled in a computer science, engineering or mathematics transfer program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes support systems to monitor,
intervene, promote and foster academic achievement and successful completion of
a degree and continuation of studies to a four-year degree program. Individual
education plans provide a foundation for continually assessing student progress,
which provides a support mechanism to help students persist towards achieving
their degree. The principal investigators are monitoring early intervention
strategies. Assistance in solving problems is being provided by mentors, staff
and college services. A referral process is used to connect students with
outside agencies that provide no-cost services to low-income individuals and
their families. Students interact with peers, faculty members, university
faculty and industrial representatives through the STEM Club that was created
and staffed by students, the STEM Club Web Site, Engineering Day and Engineering
Week that are supported by technology companies such as Honeywell and Intel,
hosting the Science Olympiad, and a monthly speaker series. The project targets
women and minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is using the structure
of a previous successful CSEMS grant. The project supports many transfer
initiatives that provide opportunities for students to transfer to Arizona's
universities and the college's systemic reform efforts to develop effective
educational innovations. &lt;br/&gt;