* 0422447
* Academic and Professional Development for Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Students.
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Andrea Richa, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2008
* USD 399,968.00

This project is a continuation of a previously and currently successful CSEMS
program at Arizona State University. The project implements a comprehensive
mentor driven scholarship program that significantly improves the retention,
graduation, and placement of low income lower division students majoring in CSEM
disciplines; e.g. computer science, computer technology, engineering,
engineering technology, and mathematics. The program makes use of existing
services made possible by the Arizona State University (ASU) SUMS Institute.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Selected students participate in a variety of
mentor-supervised activities designed to insure success in their undergraduate
studies and successful transition from their undergraduate environment into
graduate school and/or industry. The program builds on an extensive track record
established by the ASU SUMS Institute in managing such programs. This includes
two prior CSEMS programs; one aimed at incoming freshmen and lower division
students; the other aimed at juniors and seniors. These programs provide the
project directors with extensive knowledge - knowledge that serves as the basis
for the program.&lt;br/&gt;The program selects a total of 30 lower division
students to receive CSEMS scholarships each year. Twenty of the selected
students are incoming freshmen. The incoming freshmen participate in a summer
bridge program where they enroll in either calculus (8 weeks) or pre-calculus (5
weeks). This bridge program assists the students in their transition to the
university environment. An additional ten students, already enrolled, lower
division ASU students will also be selected to receive CSEMS scholarships.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As the students transition from lower division to
upper division, efforts are made by the project directors to assist in the
transition of capable students to funded faculty-directed research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;