* 0422678
* Study of Low-Degree-of-Freedom Parallel Kinematics for Multi-Scale Manufacturing Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Placid Ferreira, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2008
* USD 360,435.00

The objective of this research is the systematic exploration and
characterization of low degree-of-freedom parallel kinematics schemes for
manufacturing applications across multiple length scales. The approach to
exploration will employ type synthesis and inversions of known and new schemes.
The characterization will concentrate on kinematic analysis of the schemes, the
results of which will be encoded in software tools to aid in the advancement of
analysis techniques, design methodologies, and experimental techniques for
machine tools based on such kinematics schemes. Proof-of-concept analysis will
address two specific applications: a) high-bandwidth meso-scale stages and b)
conjugation of low degree-of-freedom stages for flexible transfer line machining
stations. In addition to addressing specific research goals, this project will
undertake activities to involve undergraduate engineering students in the
design, analysis and characterization of parallel kinematics stages for various
manufacturing applications. Also, the project will provide opportunities for
underrepresented high school students to experience research through summer
programs.

Upon successful completion, this project will have identified new and novel
parallel kinematics schemes for high performance machine tools. The high-
bandwidth meso-scale stages are expected to immediately contribute to high
performance stages for the growing family of scanning probe instruments that are
used in micro- and nano-technology. The software tools and analysis techniques
will provide machine-tool designers and builders with the means to synthesize
and analyze new machine-tool concepts that use parallel kinematics schemes.
Finally, future scientists and engineers will have gained experience in research
and development of advanced manufacturing machinery.