* 0422778
* Mergers and the Composition of International Commerce
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Volker Nocke, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 294,144.00

In an increasingly globalized world, trade volumes between countries have grown
more rapidly than global output, and foreign direct investment (FDI) even more
rapidly than trade volumes. International investment decisions of multinational
enterprises are thus of great interest to economists, government officials, and
the popular press. Firms expand abroad primarily by buying existing plants in
foreign countries (cross-border mergers and acquisitions [M&A]) rather than by
opening new facilities (greenfield). Despite the predominance of cross-border
mergers and acquisitions in FDI and the substantial evidence that both
businessmen and governments perceive greenfield FDI and cross-border M&A as very
different, the theoretical literature in International Trade has focused
primarily on greenfield investment.

The research involves four components organized around a novel theoretical
framework in which greenfield FDI and cross-border M&A are modeled as two
distinct modes of FDI. This framework is based on three key ideas. First, there
is heterogeneity in firms' capabilities. Second, these capabilities differ in
their degree of international mobility. Third, capabilities are traded in a
merger market, and so the price of capabilities is determined by (endogenous)
supply and demand. The research uses this framework to address two sets of
questions: (1) what are the characteristics of firms that choose the various
modes of foreign market access (cross-border M&A vs. greenfield FDI vs.
exporting), and (2) how does the composition of international commerce vary
across industries and countries?

The first two components of the research involve a theoretical analysis of the
structure of international commerce in alternate economic environments, which
give rise, respectively, to "horizontal" and "vertical" FDI. Since the proposed
theory provides a framework which allows policy makers to evaluate the impact of
a wide array of policy instruments on the composition of international commerce,
the third component of the research is an investigation of optimal government
policies towards greenfield FDI and cross-border M&A. The analysis not only
concerns traditional trade policy instruments such as tariffs but also policies
not commonly thought of as relevant for international commerce, such as
competition policy with respect to mergers and acquisitions. The final component
of the research project is an empirical exploration using firm-level data of the
predictions of the theoretical framework.