* 0422108
* Spatial Signatures of Soils and Sediments: Geomorphic Research on Silty Soils in the Midwest USA
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Randall Schaetzl, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2008
* USD 228,027.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;BCS-0422108&lt;br/&gt;Randall Schaetzl&lt;br/&gt;Michigan
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil geomorphic research usually links
field and lab work in soils and geomorphology to answer questions about
landscape evolution. Working within that framework, this project will produce
spatial data sets, i.e., detailed maps of mineralogical and textural
characteristics, of soils developed in silty surficial sediments, for parts of
the midwestern USA. Put another way, I will ascertain the spatial signatures of
silty soils in three midwestern subregions and compare these signatures to areas
of known loessial soils, to determine if the soils in each of these three
regions have formed in silty loess - or some other silty sediment. Using these
spatial signatures maps I should also be able to ascertain the source areas of
the silts in these regions. The maps, created for three areas of "anomalous"
silty soils in the upper midwest, form the core of the research. These areas,
set within otherwise sandy landscapes, are (1) the Grayling Fingers and (2) the
Buckley Flats regions of northern lower Michigan, and (3) the Peshekee Highlands
in Michigan's Upper Peninsula (UP) and in the NE Wisconsin - western UP border
area. In the field, using existing digital soil maps and a GPS, I will locate
and sample soils that have anomalously silty textures within these three
regions. Samples from these soils will then be taken back to the Quaternary
Landscapes Research Group lab in the Department of Geography, for further
analysis. Data from the soils and their parent materials, e.g., mineral amounts,
colors, textures, particle shapes, lithologies, parent material thickness, etc.,
will then be then analyzed to determine parent material characteristics for each
soil, quantitatively tying it to a specific parent material, i.e., giving it a
sedimentologic signature. Maps of specific soils' sedimentological signatures
are the spatial signatures maps that I refer to above. Ascertaining whether the
silt cap on these soils is loess, which it is likely to be in at least one of
the three regions, will be determined by comparing the spatial signatures of
soils within each of the three regions to spatial signatures and characteristics
of soils that will have already been sampled from the thick loess regions of
western Wisconsin and NW Illinois. The data generated using this protocol should
vary systematically and predictably across space, and may open new doors for
research into landscape evolution that previously would have been fraught with
insurmountable "data needs" obstacles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synergies and
knowledge gains that can be achieved from this research will stimulate new
research on landscape evolution and provide opportunities for the scientific and
lay communities to examine soils and sediment patterns in ways that have
previously been impossible. The research will add to our understanding of wind-
driven and soils systems that have operated in the upper midwest since the end
of the last glaciation. This field- and lab-oriented research will also hone and
expand a method that may become a standard for many soil geomorphology studies,
providing a tested method for detailed resource mapping. This method may also
assist soil mappers as they remap the region's soils and will heighten awareness
of the utility of soil maps in geographic research. Finally, the research
undertaken in this project will provide educational opportunities for several
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as building the scientific
infrastructure of MSU.&lt;br/&gt;