* 0422073
* Scale-Dependent Processing of Clustered Sensory Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Albert Feng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cedric L. Williams
* 07/31/2009
* USD 849,941.00

In natural environments, sensory signals often arise from clustered sources. For
example, during the mating season, the auditory cues that guide a female frog to
a particular male are embedded in a dense chorus arising from hundreds of
calling males of different species. Clustered signals pose a significant
challenge for biological systems as well as for intelligent neural prostheses
and machine perception systems. For example, an intelligent hearing aid should
exhibit robust performance in cluttered environments with other voices in the
background. A multidisciplinary team of investigators will explore the neural
mechanisms and computational algorithms that animals use to detect, identify,
and localize individual signals embedded in an ensemble of similar signals.
Experimental studies will focus on the auditory-mediated approach of female
frogs to a mating chorus and the electrosensory-mediated approach of electric
fish to a cluster of prey. These studies will include audio recordings of frog
choruses at different distances from natural mating ponds and electrical
recordings of active electrosensory signals arising from swarms of zooplankton.
Approach trajectories will be recorded and analyzed using radio telemetry
(frogs) and infrared video recordings (fish, frogs). Theoretical analysis will
draw on algorithms from computer vision including multiscale grouping and
segmentation, target detection and tracking, active vision, texture analysis,
and motion and structure estimation. Neural correlates of clustered signal
processing will be assessed through electrophysiological studies on auditory
nerve and midbrain neurons in frogs and primary electrosensory afferent and
hindbrain neurons in fish. This project will incorporate interdisciplinary
training (engineering and neurobiology) for students, a web site for sharing
data, software and references in this field and could contribute to the
development of improved machine devices for speech recognition and video
surveillance.