* 0422703
* Enhancing Science and Technology Education and Exploration Mentoring (ESTEEM)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Anita Komlodi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2008
* USD 868,776.00

The "Enhancing Science and Technology Education and Exploration Mentoring
(ESTEEM)" project, based at the Center for Women and Information Technology at
the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC), is a three-year, youth-based
ITEST project that seeks to engage 336 middle school students in information
technology (IT) learning experiences related to robotics, digital storytelling,
animation, genealogy and nature. The centerpiece of the project is replication
and adaptation of the NSF-funded "TechBridge" curriculum, developed by the
Chabot Space and Science Center in California. Specifically designed for girls,
the ESTEEM project targets underrepresented middle school students from low-
income communities in the Baltimore, Maryland area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program provides quality IT experiences to girls, while also creating
opportunity for meaningful participation of middle school boys. The focus of
student activities is based on relevant research related to gender equity and
STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six middle schools in the Anne Arundel
School District are involved in the project. Students attend a 22-week
afterschool program at school sites, participate in a four-week summer
submersion experience at the University, and visit local businesses and non-
profit organizations on field trips. Teachers at the participating schools
receive IT training to introduce IT learning experiences in the classroom. UMBC
undergraduate and graduate students in computer science, information systems and
computer engineering serve as fellows to provide school support and to work with
students in the project activities. Utilizing networks established by the Center
for Women and Information Technology, IT role models from the private sector
visit schools as speakers and assist in classrooms. "ESTEEM" has the potential
to serve as a youth-based IT model for young girls in particular, and
underrepresented middle school students in general. &lt;br/&gt;