* 0422604
* Studies of the Electron Injection-Induced Effects in III-Nitride Device Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Leonid Chernyak, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 07/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

The starting point of this project is the PI's recent findings that electron
injection into p-type GaN leads to considerable changes in the material's
electronic properties, in particular longer minority carrier diffusion
length.&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of this three-year project is in
exploration of the novel electron injection-induced effects in the wide range of
p-type Mg-doped AlxGa1-xN (x 0.35) and AlxGa1-xN/GaN superlattices. In addition,
the electron injection effects in III-Nitrides doped with impurities other than
Mg (manganese or iron, for example) and III-N alloys and superlattices other
than AlxGa1-xN and AlxGa1-xN/GaN (InxGa1-xN and InxGa1-xN/GaN, for example) will
be studied. &lt;br/&gt;To fully understand the novel electron injection-induced
effects and to achieve control over device performance, systematic electrical
and optical studies will be carried out in the representative range of III-
Nitride-based structures. Electrical measurements, which include Deep Level
Transient Spectroscopy and Electron Beam Induced Current, will be performed
before and after electron injection. These measurements will be complemented
with cathodoluminescence, photoresponse, as well as photoconductivity
measurements able to provide critical information on optical and optoelectronic
properties.&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of this project is in integration of
research and education at the graduate and undergraduate levels as well as in
partnership with industry (SVT Associates). Two other aspects of the project's
broader impact are in participation of a female Ph.D. student and undergraduates
from a Historically Black (Bethune-Cookman) College in the proposed research.
Finally, the international dimension of the project is in close collaboration of
the PI with a group at the Walter Schottky Institute of Munich Technical
University in Germany. &lt;br/&gt; The practical significance of this research
is in long-term, several-fold enhancement of quantum efficiency for III-Nitride
ultra-violet detectors. This is because the increased diffusion length improves
minority carrier collection and eliminates the "dead space" where carriers
recombine before they are collected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;