* 0422429
* Computing Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Robert Beck, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 399,550.00

This project establishes a four-year scholarship program at Villanova University
that contributes to NSF's goals of increasing the number of college students
pursuing CSEMS majors. Specifically, this project increases the number of
students pursuing a computer science major, with special emphasis on recruiting
and retaining underrepresented groups such as women and Hispanics. The program
has the complementary goal of encouraging all groups of computer science
graduates to consider careers at Pennsylvania and Philadelphia's wide selection
of technology firms. This project integrates the significant academic and
financial student support at Villanova that is available for juniors and seniors
with NSF support and professional development seminars for freshmen and
sophomores. This project's focus on the technical field of computer science will
enhance Villanova's substantial commitment to recruiting female and Hispanic
high school students for all majors. The project's intellectual merit lies in
the integration of a new professional development seminar in the Department of
Computing Sciences with the offering of eleven $3125 NSF-funded scholarships to
first-year students each year of the program. In the initial year, eighteen
additional scholarships will be offered to second and third year students. Both
activities are designed to help students overcome academic or financial
obstacles to remaining in and thriving in a computer science major. The broader
impact of this project is founded in its outreach to underrepresented student
populations and economic development in southeastern Pennsylvania. The project
develops a culture that can attract, nurture and support underrepresented
students. The project also has the broader impact of identifying and refining
best practices in retaining students in CSEMS majors. The project shares these
findings with other CSEMS departments at Villanova as well as disseminates these
findings at national education conferences.