* 0422079
* Collaborative:     Investigation of the Consequences of Cooperative Motion in Polymers and their Miscible Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 01/31/2008
* USD 370,000.00

Cooperative motion is widely accepted as being important for dynamics of glass-
forming&lt;br/&gt;liquids, yet the length scales over which cooperative motion
occurs are poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;Experiments are proposed and computer
simulations to address cooperative motion in polymers.&lt;br/&gt;While
cooperative motion is thought to be important for the dynamics of all
liquids&lt;br/&gt;near their glass transition, polymers o.er some unique
opportunities for probing cooperative&lt;br/&gt;motion. Monte Carlo and
Molecular Dynamics simulations will be utilized to directly
measure&lt;br/&gt;the distribution of sizes and shapes of cooperatively relaxed
regions, with an emphasis&lt;br/&gt;on determining measures that can be applied
to real experiments. Dielectric experiments&lt;br/&gt;measuring the distribution
of segmental relaxation times in miscible polymer blends will&lt;br/&gt;be used
to estimate the temperature dependence of the cooperative size, for each
blend&lt;br/&gt;component. Experiments that systematically vary polymer
structure (chain length and side&lt;br/&gt;groups) will also provide less direct
measures of the temperature dependence of cooperative&lt;br/&gt;size in single-
component polymer melts. Rheology experiments and Molecular
Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;simulations will explore the connection between segmental
dynamics and chain dynamics, in&lt;br/&gt;parallel studies. This connection will
allow our models for segmental dynamics in miscible&lt;br/&gt;blends to be
extended to predict the terminal dynamics, including the blend viscosity,
with&lt;br/&gt;no additional parameters. The intellectual merit of this research
will be an improved understanding&lt;br/&gt;of dynamics in polymers and their
miscible blends, with particular emphasis on&lt;br/&gt;the role of cooperative
motion and the connection between segmental and chain dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research are threefold. On the
one hand, the model&lt;br/&gt;of miscible blend rheology will find immediate
pragmatic use in the plastics industry, where&lt;br/&gt;polymer blends are vital
for plastics recycling and for metals replacement in the
transportation&lt;br/&gt;industry. The latter enables weight to be reduced
without sacrificing strength, thereby&lt;br/&gt;saving fuel. Simultaneously,
understanding of cooperative motion will have far-
reaching&lt;br/&gt;consequences in developing an understanding of liquid state
dynamics that goes far beyond&lt;br/&gt;polymers. And finally the proposed
research will create learning opportunities for graduate&lt;br/&gt;and
undergraduate students. In addition to the involvement of both undergraduate
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students in the experimental research, the PIs make
extensive use of their growing&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of polymer physics in
recruiting, advising and teaching at both the undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;and
graduate levels.