* 0422789
* Characterization of Heat Transport Properties of Polymers for Nanoscale Thermal Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Yongho Ju, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 09/30/2008
* USD 288,028.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-cost high-throughput nano-manufacturing
techniques are critical in ensuring continued progress in diverse areas of
modern engineering, especially the information processing, storage, and
communication technologies. Many emerging nano-manufacturing techniques require
precise thermal processing of thin (&lt; 100 nm) polymer films. The nano-imprint
technique, for example, mechanically deforms polymer layers heated above glass
transition temperature using a rigid template that contains nano-scale relief
patterns. The resulting patterned polymer serves as a masking layer for
subsequent nano-fabrication processes. Localized heating can also be used to
selectively cross-link polymers embedded with nano-particles to produce micro-
and nano-scale features. Controlled heating plays an important role because
kinetics of physical or chemical processes occurring in polymer films is a
sensitive function of temperature.&lt;br/&gt;Physics-based design and
optimization of polymer processing requires fundamental understanding of thermal
transport. The need for fundamental studies is particularly acute at nanoscales
because nano-confinement and other surface/interface effects are expected to
strongly influence the behavior of polymers. The proposed research develops
micro-fabricated experimental platforms to investigate thermal transport in
nanoscale polymer films undergoing physical or chemical transformation, such as
glass transition and polymerization. The thermal transport properties of polymer
films and spatial extent of physico-chemical transformation during localized
transient heating will be determined as a function of temperature and heating
rate.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is highly interdisciplinary in nature and
addresses fundamental aspects of heat transfer in macromolecular systems.
Experimental data from the proposed research will provide useful insight into
nanoscale polymer dynamics that is of great scientific interest. Fundamental
understanding gained through the proposed investigation will also enable
systematic exploration of novel thermal processing schemes as well as
optimization of existing nanoscale thermal processing methods for
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;The research also offers an exciting opportunity to train
graduate and advanced undergraduate students and help them acquire
interdisciplinary skill sets. Students will have a very rewarding experience of
working on projects of great practical relevance and public recognition where
their contribution can potentially make direct impact. These aspects of the
proposed research will be particularly helpful in motivating undergraduate
students to pursue engineering/scientific career.&lt;br/&gt;This award is being
supported by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the
Chemical and Transport Systems Division.&lt;br/&gt;