* 0422322
* CSEMS V at CAL
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* George Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2009
* USD 398,732.00

The Multicultural Engineering Program (MEP) of the University of California at
Berkeley Center for Underrepresented Engineering Students (CUES) administers the
CSEMS V at Cal program. This work builds on previous and current CSEMS at Cal
awards being administered by MEP. CSEMS V at Cal follows a single cohort of
freshman and sophomore students over a four-year period, and awards scholarships
of $3125 per year to twenty-nine economically disadvantaged students, with a
special emphasis on students from underrepresented groups in engineering and
science. Recruitment of the Cal-CSEMS Scholars targets three groups: 1) freshmen
admitted for Fall 2004 or Spring 2005, 2) freshmen participating in the MEP
Summer 2004 Pre-Engineering Program, and 3) freshmen and sophomores
participating in academic workshops and mathematics placement testing during Cal
Summer Orientation (CalSO) offered by the Coalition for Excellence and Diversity
in Mathematics, Science and Engineering. This group will include students from
majors in Berkeley's College of Engineering, chemical engineering majors in the
College of Chemistry, and students in the College of Letters and Science who are
completing coursework to pursue (a) the computer science or mathematics majors
in the College of Letters and Science or (b) a major in the College of
Engineering. Students are chosen by a committee of Berkeley faculty and staff
from Coalition academic support programs, which employ a comprehensive approach
in evaluating each student's academic merit and professionalism. Intellectual
Merit: Cal-CSEMS scholars participate in a variety of retention-related
activities tied to the existing student support infrastructure of CUES, the
Coalition for Excellence and Diversity in Mathematics, Science, and Engineering,
the EECS Center for Undergraduate Matters and other partner programs. This
includes faculty advising, academic excellence workshops, tutoring, mentoring,
advising, internships in industry or research experience, and assistance with
graduate school applications or job placement. A unifying theme of the CSEMS V
at Cal program is increasing student retention by helping each student develop
into a committed member of the engineering and academic community. Programs such
as those available to the CSEMS scholars are practical ways to remove social and
cultural barriers in SME fields and reinforce the value of providing educational
opportunity and equity to a diverse student pool. Broader Impacts: There is an
increasing shortfall in the number of qualified students that will be able to
fill the need for computer science and engineering professionals in the
workforce. Students' financial troubles are increasingly likely to interrupt and
delay their degree completion. Currently, 60% of Berkeley students demonstrate
some type of financial need, and are receiving need-based support in order to
attend college. Financial need is perhaps a more serious impediment to timely
completion of engineering degrees--the technical course load is often not
compatible with long hours of outside work. Indeed, the scholarship support from
the CSEMS V at Cal program may also facilitate students' ability to enrich their
educational experience with activities that are not necessarily tied to
financial obligations, such as undergraduate research, tutoring, and teaching.
By decreasing students' loan debt upon graduation, these scholarships may also
encourage students to pursue graduate degrees before entering the technical
workforce.