* 0422220
* STTR Phase II: Novel Nanocoated Ferromagnetic Materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Karen Buechler, ALD NANOSOLUTIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 07/31/2006
* USD 469,030.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project will build on the great
successes of the Phase I program by proving that the nanocoating of fine
ferromagnetic particles is possible on the large scale and that such
nanocomposite particles have commercial uses. The Phase I program proved that
atomic layer deposition (ALD) of an alumina film can provide these
properties.The objectives of the Phase II program are to prove the scalability
of the process as well as to work with supporting companies to develop specific
products for commercial markets. A pilot scale facility will be constructed to
increase the scale of production to provide the kilogram quantities of material
that most partners require for product development. This facility will be
optimized to provide the best quality coatings at the lowest production cost. It
is anticipated that at the close of the Phase II program, the company will have
developed at least one market for full scale production with 2-4 markets still
being developed. The ALD nanocoating of individual ultrafine particles to
control individual ultrafine particle surface chemistry is enabling technology
that is unparalleled compared to more conventional CVD, PVD, PE-CVD, or wet
chemistry solution processing. The process allows for individual ultra-fine
particles to be nanocoated, rather than coating aggregates of ultra-fine
particles. It is independent of line of sight and provides for chemically bonded
films to the substrate particle surface. It is easily scalable. It is a
forgiving process where the nanocoating thickness is controlled by self-limiting
surface reactions (not flux, temperature, or time of processing like CVD, etc.).
Films are pin-hole free and conformal. Commercially, fine iron particles are
used in a variety of applications such as metal injection molding, radar
absorption, localized drug delivery carriers, electronic devices etc. Most of
these applications would benefit from a smaller initial iron particle size and
reduced oxidation sensitivity. Thus nanocoating of ultrafine particles provides
many opportunities. It is now possible to produce ultrafine particles with
designed electrical, magnetic, optical, mechanical, rheological, or other
properties. Markets for such functionalized ultra-fine powders include
microelectronics, defense, hardmetals, cosmetics, drug delivery, energetic
materials, and polymer/ceramic nanocomposites, among others.

.