* 0422144
* Genetic Diversity in the American Southwest and Mesoamerica
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* David Smith, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 07/31/2006
* USD 139,325.00

Strong connections between the American Southwest and Mesoamerica extend back
thousands of years and include a common language and culture. Part of this
common culture includes the farming of maize that originated in Central Mexico
and spread to the American Southwest. This study investigates the impact of
agriculture on the patterning of genetic diversity in human populations. Central
Mexico is one of the last regions in human history where the innovation in
agriculture originated and spread and is therefore an ideal place to study the
impact of agriculture on human genetic structure and diversity. This research
will also be used to gain insight into longstanding questions about the
relationship between genetic and cultural change in human history. This research
focuses on examining mitochondrial DNA, Y chromosome DNA, and autosomal DNA to
investigate the genetic relationship between native populations in the American
Southwest and Mesoamerica. A focus of this study will be on the differences
between male and female genetic histories and how these genetic histories relate
to linguistic and cultural diversity in the American Southwest and Mesoamerica.
In addition, population history and migrations within North America will be
studied through the creation of a database that will include genetic data from a
large number of Native American groups. These data will be deposited in GenBank
and other genetic databases available to the public and will provide a resource
for other genetic researchers.

This multi-disciplinary study will establish collaboration betweens human
geneticists, anthropologists, and historians from the United States and Mexico.
The focus of this research is of direct interest to researchers in both the U.S.
and Mexico and will foster future collaboration between researchers in these two
countries. Students will be trained in molecular biological techniques and
population genetics. Active participation will be sought from students of a
Mexican and/or Native American backgrounds and individuals who historically lack
opportunities in the fields of anthropology, history, and genetics will be
encouraged to participate.