* 0422394
* Making the Connection: Linking Stony Brook University and Community Colleges via CSEMS
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/2009
* USD 377,000.00

Stony Brook University, in partnership with Nassau and Suffolk County Community
Colleges is providing a scholarship and support program for 20 community college
and 32 Stony Brook students each year who are majoring in CSEMS disciplines at
these institutions. The goals of this project are to significantly increase the
associate and bachelor degree production in CSEM majors and to help the Long
Island Region meet a critical need for high technology and engineering
employees. These goals are met by providing a comprehensive series of support
services at both the lead and partner institutions that include tutoring,
mentoring, internships, and career awareness activities. The project is
bringing, through outreach, Stony Brook's existing freshman and sophomore
seminars in academic success and research development skills to the community
colleges. Students are encouraged to apply for internships provided through
preexisting relationships with Long Island companies and Brookhaven National
Laboratory. The program provides scholarship support for selected students
enrolled as first-year students in all partner institutions, as well providing
support for a seamless transition to students transferring from the CSEMS
community college programs to Stony Brook's four-year CSEMS programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are selected through a competitive application
process from the pools of economically disadvantaged students at each of the
partner institutions. From within this pool, emphasis is given to
underrepresented minorities, women, returning, transfer, and disabled students.
A committee of representatives from each institution meets annually to select
students; the offices of admissions, financial aid, and engineering at each
institution share in promoting and recruiting students to the program. A unique
aspect of this project is an Alumni Mentoring program with graduates who are
currently employed in engineering and high tech companies on Long Island. The
project includes a detailed assessment program that evaluates the effectiveness
of the CSEM scholarships at attracting and retaining disadvantaged
students.&lt;br/&gt;