* 0422848
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:    Minimum Quantity Lubrication (MQL) Grinding Using Nanofluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Stephen Malkin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2009
* USD 181,377.00

The goal of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI)/Collaborative Research project is to develop environmentally benign
minimum quantity lubrication grinding processes using nanofluids in place of
conventional grinding fluids. Nanofluids are a new class of heat transfer and
anti-wear fluids created by dispensing solid particles smaller than 40 nm in
water or oil-based fluid carriers. The superior thermal and tribological
properties of nanofluids make them particularly suitable for minimum quantity
lubrication grinding. In this study, nanofluids using additions of copper,
titanium borate, and carbon nanotube nanoparticles will be evaluated. A new
fluid delivery system will be developed using an injector nozzle to accurately
deliver a jet of high-pressure nanofluid mist to the grinding zone and a water
mist spray to cool the workpiece and grinding wheel. A vacuum system will be
tested to collect the near dry swarf in minimum quantity lubrication grinding.

Grinding is recognized as an environmentally unfriendly manufacturing process.
The selection and delivery of grinding fluids have traditionally been based upon
the need to achieve tangible productivity and cost targets while often
neglecting the seemingly less tangible environmental and safety hazards. If
successful, this project can change this paradigm by developing "green" grinding
processes based on the total cost approach. It can have a profound impact in
industry to bring an awareness of the smart utilization of grinding fluid. This
study can also advance the nanotechnology to environmentally benign
manufacturing. Close collaboration with Argonne National Laboratory and General
Motors are expected.