* 0422775
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Geometric Query-Retrieval Problems on Aggregated Data
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Ravi Janardan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2009
* USD 16,175.00

0422775&lt;br/&gt;Janardan&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the US-
India cooperative research entitled Geometric Query-retrieval Problems on
Aggregated Data. Professors Ravi Janardan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
and Prosenjit Gupta, International Institute of Information Technology (IIIT),
Hyderabad will investigate the design of efficient algorithms and data
structures for various query-retrieval problems defined on geometric objects
that are aggregated in disjoint groups. The goal is to preprocess these groups
into a data structure so that useful questions about the groups, relative to a
query object, can be answered efficiently. The research addresses algorithm
design and analysis as well as software development and testing on application-
specific data. Problems involving aggregated geometric data arise in diverse
applications such as VLSI (Very Large Silicon Integration) layout verification,
retrieval of data from spatial databases, facilities location, sensor networks,
and network traffic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This project has
international implications and mutual benefits expected for senior scientists,
graduate students and undergraduates at both institutions. The investigators
have a 12-year history of successful collaboration that has thus far resulted in
the publication of nearly two-dozen refereed journal and conference papers.
Gupta completed his Ph.D. in 1995 under Janardan's supervision at the University
of Minnesota. The proposed work represents a new research direction for them in
an area in which they both have significant academic and industrial expertise.
The project will provide an opportunity for graduate students to collaborate
across geographic and cultural boundaries; it will also encourage undergraduate
participation in the small, self-contained software development experiments,
which may be incorporated in applied computational geometry courses. The
findings of this research will be broadly disseminated in scientific journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;