* 0422632
* Laser-Assisted Deposition of Polymer-Matrix Nanocomposites: A Combined Experimental and Computational Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 08/31/2008
* USD 306,000.00

The research objectives of the proposed research program are (A) to gain a
better understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of laser-driven matrix-
assisted entrainment of polymer molecules and nanoscale elements and (B) to
apply this understanding for the development and optimization of a novel
technique for deposition of polymer-matrix nanocomposite thin films and
coatings. Using a polymer matrix - carbon nanotube nanocomposite as a model
system, the conditions for efficient fabrication of nanocomposite films with a
uniform dispersion of reinforcing nano-elements in a polymer matrix will be
identified. In-situ characterization of the ablation plume combined with ex-situ
characterization of the deposited films will be aimed at getting insights into
the interplay of different processes responsible for the entrainment phenomenon.
Multiscale computational modeling, performed in parallel with experimental
investigations, will help with interpretation of experimental data and will
guide the exploration of the space of the experimental parameters for deposition
of nanocomposite films with minimum modification of the original molecular
structure and the best control over the distribution of the reinforcing
nanoelements. The results obtained in the proposed study for nanocomposite film
deposition will have a broader impact on a range of current applications based
on the effect of molecular entrainment by a volatile matrix heated by a short
laser pulse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common trend in the production of modern
plastics is the reinforcement of polymers with a high strength/stiffness second
phase. An alternative to conventional polymer composites which has emerged
during the last decade is a class of polymer nanocomposites containing a uniform
dispersion of nanoelements with characteristic sizes less than 100 nm, such as
carbon nanotubes (CNTs). One of the main limiting factors in achieving the best
performance of CNT-polymer composites is the difficulty in producing a uniform
dispersion and alignment of CNTs in polymer matrices. A sharp increase of
material viscosity at high (5-6 wt.%) concentrations of CNTs limits the
capabilities of most fabrication techniques. Matrix-assisted laser deposition
has a promise of overcoming these limitations while widening the range of
compositions and structures accessible for experimental exploration and
application.&lt;br/&gt;