* 0422195
* Investigating the Development of Agriculture in Southern Europe: Recovering and Interpreting Economic Evidence from Neolithic Danilo in Dalmatia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Andrew Moore, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 215,592.00

Farming and settled village life originated in Western Asia about 13,000 years
ago and later spread into Europe. This new way of life made possible population
growth and the development of more complex societies. Thus, farming provided the
foundation for all subsequent major developments in European society. Yet the
mechanisms that underlay the original dispersal of farming, the nature of this
new economy, and its social implications remain unclear. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. Andrew Moore will head an international team
that will address these issues through excavation of early farming sites in
Dalmatia on the Adriatic coast of the Republic of Croatia. The project
represents a collaboration between Rochester Institute of Technology and
colleagues from the tibenik Museum in Croatia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of
the project are to understand the nature of the early farming economy in
Dalmatia at its inception around 8,000 years ago and how it developed
thereafter. This will help settle the question of how farming reached Southern
Europe, and whether the initial agricultural economy was a mix of farming and
foraging or a full agro-pastoral system. The project will also investigate Late
Pleistocene and Holocene environmental changes that will aid in interpreting the
ecological background to early farming in Dalmatia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
seasons of excavation will be conducted in 2004-2006 at the Neolithic sites of
Danilo and Pokrovnik. Danilo has been selected for investigation because it is a
substantial site that previous excavations have shown was inhabited in all three
phases of the Dalmatian Neolithic, or early farming, period. A ground
penetrating radar survey will provide crucial information on where to excavate.
The project aims for total recovery of surviving plant remains, bones, other
organic material, and artifacts and will use appropriate methods to ensure this
outcome. Excavations at the nearby Early Neolithic site of Pokrovnik will
amplify these results and help illuminate the nature of initial village society
in the region. The environmental studies will include examination of the Danilo
Valley and also important geological deposits in the nearby Krka Gorge. The team
consists of highly qualified personnel in relevant fields of study from
universities and museums in the U.S.A., Croatia, and Britain who bring to the
project particular experience of the problems to be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dalmatia is a key region for understanding the
dissemination of farming because it lies between the Balkans and Italy. A suite
of AMS radiocarbon dates from Danilo will establish much needed chronological
precision. The environmental research will have implications for the entire
Adriatic region and beyond for which the record is as yet thin. The results of
the project will be widely published in specialist and more popular
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will introduce new perspectives and
methods to Croatian archaeology. Among the project's Croatian associates are
scientists with rich knowledge of local ecology and ethnography. The project
will help bring this information to a wider public. Participation by Croatian as
well as American students will provide both with valuable training in modern
archaeological techniques, and promote international understanding as Croatia
consolidates its future as a new democracy. Broad media coverage will help
ensure that the public in Croatia and the U.S.A. benefits from the research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;