* 0422116
* SBIR Phase II:    Modular Online Simulations for Math and Science with Integrated Assessment of Complex, Standards-Aligned Learning Objectives
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2004,11/30/2006
* Paul Cholmsky, ExploreLearning
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 11/30/2006
* USD 499,246.00

This SBIR Phase II project will produce a commercial version of PathfinderPlus,
an online system that integrates assessment of complex, standards-based
instructional objectives within interactive simulations and makes the resultant
data available in a timely and efficient manner to students, teachers and
administrators. In order to effectively implement curriculum standards-based
educational reforms (e.g., as mandated by the No Child Left Behind Act),
teachers need guidance in linking students' day-to-day learning to these
standards and in adapting subsequent instruction based on students' progress
against the standards. Existing educational technology products, however, are
explicitly correlated only to the macro-level terminal objectives in each
state's curriculum standards. As a result, these products do not provide
diagnostic information regarding component knowledge and skills, and they
thereby fail to support teachers in understanding more precisely where students
are having difficulties within a given terminal objective. PathfinderPlus
provides a comprehensive online library of highly interactive learning objects
that track student' actions as they use them. The system analyzes the generated
data to create assessment probes which yield results that are indexed against a
hierarchy of component knowledge and skills related to each state's terminal
objectives. This analysis provides students, teachers and other educational
stakeholders with a roadmap to success in meeting their state's curriculum
standards. In terms of broader impacts, the successful production of a fully
functional, commercial PathfinderPlus product will break significant technical
ground in the field of large online repositories of interactive learning
objects. The deployment of ExploreLearning's XML specification HILO ML (Highly-
Interactive Learning Object Markup Language) separates the pedagogical logic of
a learning object's adaptive behavior from its technical instantiation. This
separation enables the efficient development of the volume of scripts required
by a system that covers entire courses (e.g., Algebra). The use of a four-tiered
architecture to link fine-grained pedagogical events (i.e., pedagogically-
meaningful interactions between students and the online simulations) to macro-
level terminal objectives provides a flexible, modular foundation for the
system. In terms of impacts on K-12 education, PathfinderPlus will foster
alignment with standards-based curricula, support teachers in integrating
technology effectively and efficiently into their classrooms, and provide a new
approach for measuring the impact of educational technology on student learning.
In addition, the system's use of interactive simulations as the medium for
assessment enables a broader range of more complex, higher-order instructional
objectives to be assessed (e.g., problem solving strategies and skills), as
compared to traditional probes used in computer-based applications such as
multiple-choice questions.