* 0422348
* Student Success in Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Felix Serna, Green River Community College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 06/30/2009
* USD 357,444.00

This project is enabling the achievement of higher education degrees in computer
science, engineering and mathematics by talented, but financially disadvantaged,
students. This program is especially important at the community college level
where in Fall 2002 twice as many minority students were enrolled as compared to
4-year universities. (Higher Education Coordinating Board.) &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project advances current knowledge of
computer science, engineering, and mathematics preparation programs for two-year
colleges. Key project personnel have demonstrated leadership with past CSEMS
grants and through other projects that have been recognized nationally for
innovative approaches at two-year colleges. The academic and student support
infrastructure for successful graduation of scholarship recipients include
classes and programs in computer science, engineering, and mathematics
departments, faculty advisors for each student in his/her discipline, and
student support groups and organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
This model project advances understanding of how to better prepare and support
students at a community college so they are better prepared to enter programs at
universities. Dissemination activities allow the model to be shared locally and
nationally at conferences. It demonstrates the positive outcomes of financial
and academic support and student support infrastructure as they relate to
student retention toward degree completion and adequate preparation for the
workplace. On an institutional level, this program strengthens partnerships
between the college and other institutions of higher education and computer
science, engineering, and mathematics employment sectors. It enables the college
to further enhance the existing community infrastructure for recruitment,
attainment, and increased educational and employment opportunities of students
of diverse backgrounds with varied career goals while also creating a
reproducible model for other community colleges. Ultimately this program
improves undergraduate education at Green River, other community colleges, and
four-year universities.&lt;br/&gt;