* 0422039
* Novel Memory Devices Based on Silicon Nanocrystal Pyramid-Dot Complexes
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Leonid Tsybeskov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 07/31/2009
* USD 228,450.00

In collaboration with Motorola and Freescale Semiconductor, we propose the
fabrication and study of novel nanostructures based on highly organized, three-
dimensional arrays of size and shape controlled silicon nanocrystals (NCs).
These three-dimensional nanostructures will be prepared in the form of pyramid-
dot complexes where nearly spherical Si NCs (i.e., quantum dots) will be placed
directly on top of laterally ordered Si pyramids. Using this technique, we
intend to exploit these novel structures in new memory devices. These devices
utilize resonant carrier injection from nanoscale Si pyramids via discrete
energy levels of nanometer diameter Si quantum dots. The exciting but
challenging goals of this project are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) Development of a
nanofabrication technique focused on highly ordered three- dimensional network
of Si NC pyramid-dot complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Experimental studies
and theoretical modeling of resonant carrier injection in a system of coupled
pyramid-dot Si NCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Fabrication and testing of ultra-
fast, non-volatile memory device prototypes based on Si NC pyramid/dot
complexes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; By achieving these goals, we will constitute
fundamental advances in faster Si NC-based non-volatile memories and novel
circuit functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The integration of research and education in this
proposal will be done (i) via integrating the proposed research advances into
the undergraduate and graduate NJIT curriculum, and (ii) by offering outreach
programs to pre-college students and school teachers in our local area. For the
youngest students, our new project at NJIT will reach out to the local K-12
community with state-of-the art laboratory tours and mentoring high school
teacher summer classes with focus on modern electronic devices and circuits.
With its ethnically diverse student body and urban location, NJIT has a unique
opportunity to pursue groups historically under-represented in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;