* 0422676
* The Science and Art of Global Collaboration
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Cristina Gibson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2008
* USD 100,512.00

This research investigates collaboration -- a time-limited multi-party effort to
produce an explicit product or service with cooperative and coordinated action
across organizational and/or national boundaries. The model examines key success
features and core attributes of effective global collaborations in the presence
of the contextual conditions. The focus of the investigation is on emergent
processes required to work effectively when workers are geographically
dispersed, culturally diverse, reliant on information technology, and lack
shared history; and when stakeholder requirements are ambiguous, internal
incentives are incongruent, deadlines are urgent, and the physical environment
is in flux. Increasingly, these contextual conditions exist simultaneously,
resulting in psychological, social, and organizational challenges that call into
question assumptions of traditional organizational models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborations in the film industry, including film
production and digital imaging where the contextual conditions are particularly
pertinent, are investigated. The sample represents a large multinational, and
four smaller organizations located in the U.S., New Zealand, France, and India,
which represent different cultures and stages of industry and economic maturity.
Taped interviews will be conducted with many individuals in each organization,
across functions such as producer, director, production manger, director of
photography, software designer, and special effects director. Content analysis
will be used to identify, observe, and codify key collaborative challenges and
solutions, to enable preliminary tests of the model, inductive refinement,
identification of best practices, and to assist in securing collaborations for
subsequent research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings will expand theories of
organizational structure and design, team effectiveness, and human resource
development to better address contextual complexity. Research dissemination
activities will involve academic and practitioner journal articles, a text book
and trade book, conference presentations, and training and workshops for
industry. In doing so, the research contributes a theoretical explanatory model
applicable to a wide variety of complex contexts that will increase the
effectiveness for a multitude of multicultural and multifunctional global
collaborations.