* 0422008
* LaGuardia CSEMS Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Kamal Hajallie, CUNY Laguardia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

LaGuardia Community College is awarding 30 -45 scholarships annually to students
majoring in CSEMS eligible subjects. The amount of the scholarships is dependent
upon the individual student's unmet financial need; a consequence is that
varying numbers of scholarships are being funded each year. The student
population is 83% minority and 65% female; hence the scholarship program at this
institution is increasing the numbers of individuals from these groups entering
occupations in which they are traditionally underrepresented. A pool of over 370
students meets all the requirements (CSEMS major, financial aid and GPA) for
receiving a scholarship. The application and selection process requires a
written essay and an interview by the selection committee.&lt;br/&gt;The
institution has excellent student support services that result in a first year
retention rate of 65% - somewhat above the national rate. Included among the
support services are student electronic portfolios, the LaGuardia Career and
Transfer Center, student mentor program, a supervised internship program,
tutorial centers, an employment and career services center, counseling, and the
use of learning communities. Student surveys repeatedly have shown a majority of
the students dropping out do so because of financial reasons. With the ability
to ameliorate the financial problems with scholarships, the goal of 80% of CSEMS
scholars either transferring to senior colleges or graduating with an Associate
degree and becoming employed in a CSEMS field after two years of study is being
met. &lt;br/&gt;