* 0422599
* A Geostatistical Framework for Downscaling Spatial Data
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Phaedon Kyriakidis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 125,002.00

In many scientific disciplines, spatially distributed models simulating physical
or human-related processes require input parameter maps at a finer spatial
resolution than what is often available. In hydrometeorology, for example,
detailed modeling calls for transforming forecasts of climate-related variables
produced by global circulation models to finer spatial resolutions for climate
change impact assessment studies. Along the same lines, remotely sensed
information must be often processed to obtain finer spatial resolution inputs
for spatially explicit ecological, hydrological, or land use models. Such a
transformation of coarse spatial resolution data to finer resolution
predictions/maps (also termed downscaling) is a fundamental geographical
research theme with wide implications for numerous and diverse scientific
disciplines. Most existing methods for spatial data downscaling, however, tend
to ignore one or more of the following critical issues: (i) the explicit account
of scale differences between the available areal data and the sought-after
predictions; for example, areal data are often treated as point values, (ii) the
coherence (or mass preservation) of downscaled predictions, and (iii) the
assessment of uncertainty regarding these predictions, and most importantly how
such uncertainty is propagated to geographical analyses and model outputs. This
project will employ geostatistics to develop and disseminate novel analytical
tools for downscaling spatial data that satisfy the above critical requirements.
In addition, prototype case studies will be conducted using remotely sensed
imagery, regional climate model forecasts, and census data, to illustrate the
application of such tools in practice. In particular, this project will address:
(i) a wide class of areal data defined as convolutions of point values with
appropriate sampling kernels, including summation and averaging as special
cases, (ii) the estimation of spatial covariance models at fine resolutions from
coarse spatial resolution areal data, accounting for physical knowledge at the
fine resolution, and (iii) downscaling in a stochastic simulation mode; that is,
the generation of alternative simulated realizations of downscaled attribute
values conditioned to available areal data (possibly of different resolutions).
In this latter case, the simulated values will reproduce (in addition to the
areal data) a histogram and spatial correlation model at that fine resolution.
The alternative simulated realizations will be consistent with all available
pieces of information, and will be used in a Monte Carlo framework to assess the
uncertainty in spatially distributed model outputs due to uncertain model inputs
derived from coarse spatial resolution data. Project findings will be
disseminated via: (i) presentations in relevant conferences, (ii) publications
in peer reviewed journals, (iii) development of a public domain Matlab toolbox,
and (iv) development of a set of prototype case studies and associated data
products; items (iii) and (iv) will be made available for downloading from the
project's Web site.

The findings of this project will contribute to a deeper quantitative
understanding of the nature and impact of scale issues in spatial analysis, and
will offer novel solutions to fundamental data integration problems in
Geography. In addition, this project will enhance the proper and cost-effective
utilization of geospatial data in numerous and diverse scientific disciplines
and user communities, such as geographers, developers of geographic information
systems packages (commercial or public domain), urban planners, atmospheric
scientists, hydrologists, environmental engineers, statisticians, geologists,
and ecologists. Last, the bottom-up nature of the downscaling tools that will be
developed in this project will offer a means for accounting for scientific
knowledge regarding processes operating at the finest spatial resolution of
interest. This characteristic will enable truly interdisciplinary collaborations
between geographers and other domain-specific scientists that study spatial
processes at precisely such fine resolutions.