* 0422389
* Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Sanjukta Hota, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2008
* USD 220,000.00

The purpose of this scholarship program is to assist academically talented, low-
income-family undergraduate students majoring in mathematics, computer science
or dual degree engineering to complete their baccalaureate degrees and make a
successful transition from college to work or graduate education. This program
is improving the retention and professional development of students and
strengthening the partnership with the employment sector. This four-year program
supports 16 students a year. Scholarships are linked to existing academic
advising and other student support. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Students must be sophomores, juniors or seniors, enrolled full time and have a
minimum GPA of 2.75. Eligible students are invited to submit a letter of
application, which must contain evidence of interest and motivation, a
description of career and graduate school interests, and an explanation of how
the NSF scholarship would help them complete their degree. Scholars are required
to remain eligible each semester and to meet regularly with their academic or
faculty advisors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An orientation meeting is held at the
beginning of each academic year to acquaint scholars with each other and the
many academic and career-related services that are available to them. The
scholars participate in a mentoring program, field trips, tutoring, faculty-
mentored-research, resume writing and interviewing skills workshops, job fairs
and other project activities specifically designed to increase their
productivity. Expected outcomes are improved retention, increased GPA for
participants, and better preparation for the job market or graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Two types of evaluations are being
conducted: 1) a formative evaluation designed to provide constructive feedback
for the improvement of the program, and 2) a summative evaluation designed to
assess the overall success of the program. A student tracking system is being
implemented to monitor the academic progress and graduation rates of the NSF
scholars, plus a similar, matched group of students who are not scholars. A
variety of data collection methods, such as focus groups, interviews, and
surveys, are being used. Students continue to be tracked one year after
graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;