* 0422492
* BOOST:  Building Occupational Opportunities for Students in Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Deborah Hutti, Lake Land College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2008
* USD 397,348.00

Through Boost (Building Opportunities for Occupations in Science and
Technology), the college is creating 45 scholarships for academically talented,
financially needy students in order to increase the number of well-educated and
skilled professionals to fill high technology positions in computer science and
engineering fields. The targeted two-year programs include Network
Administration (AAS), Telecommunications (AAS), Civil Engineering Technology
(AAS), Electronics Engineering Technology (AAS), Computer-Aided Design (AAS),
and Engineering (AS).

Intellectual Merit: Faculty and staff are working together across institutional
departments to coordinate the project implementation and facilitate BOOST
Scholar success. The project is led by a faculty teaching in Network
Administration, Civil Engineering; and Math/Physics and the college's Associate
Vice President for Educational Services. These leaders conduct recruitment
activities, encourage students to complete the application and enrollment
process, review scholarship applications, and provide mentoring and academic
support for the scholars. Key personnel from Financial Aid and the College
Foundation support them. Student Services personnel assist to actively recruit
new students; help students explore careers in the target disciplines; design
and deliver services to enable BOOST scholars to overcome academic and personal
barriers; and connect students with internship, job shadowing, and mentoring
opportunities within industry.

Broader Impacts: Dislocated workers are being referred through the Illinois
Employment and Training Center. Young women in the district are being encouraged
to apply for the scholarships during Totally Tech, a one-day activity held on
campus to introduce nontraditional careers to young women of high school age.
This project serves 180 low-income, academically talented students in the
district. As a result of the project, the college anticipates a significant
increase in the number of students with financial need enrolled in one of the
six target disciplines and an increase in the percentage of students in the
target disciplines who persist to degree completion and either obtain employment
or transfer to a four-year university.