* 0422806
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Optimization of  Multiphase Transport and Deformation in  Novel Baking Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Ashim Datta, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 19,261.00

0422806 &lt;br/&gt;Datta&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a cooperative project by Dr. Ashim K. Datta, Department of Biological and
Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York and Drs. Servet
Sumnu and Serpil Sahin, Food Engineering Department, Middle East Technical
University, Ankara, Turkey. The PIs seek to validate a previously developed
transport model for describing the complex process of baking of dough. The PIs
have separately conducted engineering research on modeling and experimental
aspects of baking. In this project they plan to combine their expertise to
further enhance understanding of the heat and mass transport in the baking
process. The research addresses a complex operation in which simultaneous heat,
moisture and momentum transfer occur. The PIs will be attempting to optimize the
transfer process, including consideration of properties of biomaterials. The
project addresses an economically important and scientifically challenging
process, attempting to improve the state of fundamental understanding of the
physics, and the knowledge of properties of biomaterials in these cases. The
research will lead to enhancement in fundamental and applied knowledge in
transport processes in foods with potential applications in similar processes in
related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impacts: This project is
likely to have significant impact. The explanation of the relation between
dielectric properties, moisture and microstructure could help pave the way for
the development of sensors for porosity and microstructure, which can be
extended to other complex biological systems, especially to porous media (not
restricted to food). The project will enhance the international collaboration
between researchers at a US and a Turkish university. Results of this
collaboration will have broader benefit to students in both countries as
researchers aim to incorporate the study in courses being taught at the two
universities and a web-based modeling course.&lt;br/&gt;