* 0422425
* Scholarships for Computer Science and Engineering Education in Idaho
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Amit Jain, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

The Scholarships for Computer Science and Engineering Education in Idaho program
provides 30 scholarships each year to students enrolling in computer science,
electrical, civil, materials science, or mechanical engineering at Boise State
University. This scholarship program significantly increases the participation
of underrepresented groups in the College of Engineering. It incorporates
existing activities on campus that promote active learning for the student. The
increased recruitment efforts raise the visibility and interest in the
engineering programs at Boise State, resulting in an overall increase in the
number of students pursuing an engineering or computer science
degree.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit Statement: This project enhances the
relationship between the existing programs and the College of Engineering, with
the goal of significantly increasing the recruitment and retention efforts for
all students, with particular emphasis placed on students from underrepresented
groups. The incorporation of CSEMS students into the Residential College is a
creative concept that provides students a unique living environment and learning
opportunity. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Statement: The scholarship program is
designed to significantly increase the participation of underrepresented groups
in the College of Engineering. It incorporates existing activities on campus
that promote active learning for the student. The increased recruitment efforts
raises the visibility and interest in the engineering programs at Boise State,
resulting in an overall increase in the number of students pursuing an
engineering or computer science degree. Boise State is uniquely positioned to
provide additional benefit to students resulting from the CSEMS program, since
the College of Engineering is relatively new, is growing rapidly, and has
limited scholarship resources. Moreover, Idaho and its growing high-technology
economy more and more depends upon Boise State engineering and computer science
graduates, 88% of whom remain in the state in local industry or graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;