* 0422533
* A Comprehensive Initiative to Enhance Recruitment and Retention
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Xiaoyan Liu, University of La Verne
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2011
* USD 400,000.00

This project is designed to increase the overall number of graduates in computer
science, computer engineering, and mathematics (CSEM). Scholarships provided are
a vital component of the college's plan to achieve these goals. There is a
particular emphasis on increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation
rates of academically talented but economically disadvantaged students from
underrepresented populations in CSEM fields. The university's traditional
undergraduate student body is comprised of more than 53% minorities including
African Americans, Native Americans, and Hispanics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There are commitments from many
faculty members to assure the success of a very diverse student body and a
comprehensive plan designed to assure that scholarship funds provided through
this program are used effectively to meet program objectives. To reach the
program objectives, the project is: 1) working with school districts, community
colleges and community agencies to recruit targeted students, 2) improving the
student support infrastructure available for the CSEM students, 3) expanding
partnerships with business and industry to enhance the scholarship recipients'
opportunities for hands on experience and employment in a variety of high
technology positions common in Southern California, 4) increasing the number of
students that seek graduate degrees in these fields, in part by enhancing
undergraduate research opportunities, and 5) increasing participation in
professional activities. Placement in industry is being enhanced through formal
internships, liaison with government and industry as well as through alumni and
professional networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is
expanding contact and synergy with government and industry, stronger preparation
of students for direct entry into research and technology based positions, and
refinement of a comprehensive model for use by similar colleges and
universities. Strengthening of the technical programs benefits the entire
university through enhanced IT support. Benefits range from administrative
computer programming and support of instructional technology, to high tech
activities such as fuel cell research, molecular modeling, network integration
of analytical instruments and IT based science outreach programs. Students
serving in this capacity on campus or at other institutions carry their skills
into the general technical work force. &lt;br/&gt;