* 0422011
* Characterization of a Dynamin-Related Protein Involved in Endocytosis in Tetrahymena Thermophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Aaron Turkewitz, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 02/29/2008
* USD 488,799.00

All eukaryotic cells communicate with their surroundings by taking up molecules
from the plasma membrane. This uptake, known as endocytosis, can fulfill a
variety of requirements including nutrition and recycling of the plasma membrane
itself. A cell can use several different modes of endocytosis. Although many
proteins involved in endocytosis have been discovered, knowledge of the precise
mechanisms underlying endocytosis, and understanding the regulation and
coordination of multiple pathways are still fragmentary. This project is aimed
at dissecting two pathways of uptake in the ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena
thermophila. The first pathway is specialized for nutrition, and allows these
cells to take up large particles, such as bacteria, by a process that may
resemble particle uptake in human immune cells. The second pathway has been less
well described, but it may be involved in membrane recycling. Preliminary data
suggest that both pathways appear to share some proteins, in particular a
protein called dynamin. This was a surprising result because the function of
dynamin in endocytosis was previously believed to be restricted to higher
eukaryotic cells. A first aim of this project is therefore to confirm the
localization of dynamin in Tetrahymena by using electron microscopy. To
determine whether dynamin affects cellular morphology, electron microscopy will
be performed on cells in which the dynamin gene has been disrupted. A second aim
is to analyze the roles of dynamin and distinguish between direct and indirect
effects following loss of dynamin function. This aim will be achieved by
replacing dynamin with mutagenized variants that are sensitive to rapid
temperature-triggered inactivation. A third aim is to understand how dynamin is
accurately targeted to its site of action. This will be investigated by creating
mini-proteins consisting of small parts of the dynamin protein, and asking which
of these contains sufficient information for proper localization. This project
will provide research training for graduate and undergraduate students.