* 0422900
* Collaborative Research:     A Low-Pressure Plasma Process for Nano-Coating of Micron- and Nano-Sized Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2007
* Farzad Mashayek, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 02/28/2007
* USD 66,000.00

ABSTRACT - 0422900&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micrometer and nanometer size particles
of various materials are building blocks and important constituents of many
chemicals, ceramics and metal composites, pharmaceutical and food products,
energy related products such as solid fuels and batteries, and electronics
related products. The surfaces of these particles can be altered by coating them
with other materials for improving properties such as, adhesion, hydrophobicity,
hydrophilicity, printability, corrosion resistance, etc. The goal of this
proposal is to design, analyze and optimize a continuous, low-pressure plasma
process for the deposition of nanocoatings on nano- and micron-sized particles,
by conducting concurrent computational and experimental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-pressure plasmas are unique in their ability
to handle a broad variety of substrate materials, particle sizes and shapes, and
gas-phase precursors. They offer the advantage of low temperature processing
(300 K to 600 K), wide range of chemistries that can be conducted, excellent
purity control compared to liquid-phase processing, and ability to produce
surface features in the nanometer range. Further, the non-equilibrium nature of
these plasmas produces a population of highly energetic electrons and results in
negatively charged dust particles. A consequence of the high degree of charging
is the resistance of such particles against aggregation, a problem that usually
plagues both liquid and gas-phase processing. Charge stabilization in the plasma
is effective for particles as small as 50 nm thus making it possible to process
sizes well below the limits of traditional fluidization without the detrimental
effects of aggregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Co-PI's group has recently
demonstrated the feasibility of low-pressure plasma process for depositing films
with thickness of the order of a few to several hundred nanometers on micron and
sub-micron particles. The existing setup, however, has certain shortcomings: (a)
it is characterized by non-uniformities of the deposited film that arise from
the immobilization of particles in areas of low reactivity, (b) it is limited in
the amount of particulate matter that it can process, and (c) it is not easily
amenable to optimization because of the asymmetric electrode design needed to
provide stable particle confinement. Here, we propose to use a radially
symmetric plasma for continuous film deposition that does not require particles
to become trapped in the sheath. In this configuration, the decoupling of
gravity from other trapping forces prevents trapping, allowing particles to move
continuously through the reactor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The numerical study
considers the solution to the Lagrangian equations for plasma (ions and
electrons) and dust particles in conjunction with the Eulerian equations for
electromagnetic fields, fluid motion, and transport of the precursor and other
species in the plasma. The chemical reaction process, leading to particle
surface coating, is also modeled and included in the simulations. To adequately
address the issue of coating nonuniformity, the plasma particles will be
simulated using both the direct method of particle-in-cell (PIC) as well as a
more general method involving the solution of the Eulerian equations for ions
and electrons in conjunction with a stochastic approach for dust particle
charging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful design and optimization of the
proposed plasma reactor requires the synergy between simulation and experiments.
The goal of the numerical part of this work is to establish a realistic model of
the dusty plasma, to probe the physics of the process and to explore optimal
operation and design for experiments. The goal of the experiments is to
establish a continuous production process, to provide input and validation data
for the simulation, and to improve the control and quality of the deposited
films. The feasibility of the proposed reactor for uniform coating of particles
has been demonstrated by conducting a preliminary computational study. The
research team covers an interdisciplinary spectrum with extensive modeling and
experimental expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed
study include potential significant advances in several technological and
educational fronts. The development of a continuous production method for the
deposition of nanometer-thick layers onto small particles is significant for
industrial and &lt;br/&gt;