* 0422151
* SBIR Phase II:   Development of Porous Lubricated Nozzles for Suppression of Nozzle Wear in Abrasive Water Jet Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Mark Krymsky, Lubrijet, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2008
* USD 485,362.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
technology for prevention of nozzle wear in abrasive water jets, which limits
the lifetime and accuracy of jet cutting, and currently requires entrainment of
abrasives downstream of the nozzle in a larger mixing tube. The method consists
of a porous nozzle surrounded by a reservoir containing high viscosity lubricant
pressurized by the same pump that drives the slurry in the nozzle. The lubricant
is forced through the porous walls by the pressure difference generated due to
the high-speed slurry flow, and creates a thin film, which protects the nozzles'
interior walls. Pilot tests have successfully reduced the nozzle wear by more
than an order of magnitude. Two systems are being developed: A Porous Lubricated
Mixing Tube (PLMT) that can be retrofitted into existing commercial systems, and
a Porous Lubricated Abrasive Suspension Jet (PLAS-Jet) with premixed particles
prior to injection. The latter enables operation at lower pressures, and cutting
of harder materials with smaller jets (micro-machining). Extensive cutting and
nozzle wear tests during Phase II will optimize the nozzle material, geometry
and manufacturing procedures, and will determine the lubricant properties and
injection rate. Other components will also be improved including the particle
and lubricant feed systems. The broader impact (commercial potential) of the
proposed technology will be abrasive water jets that can be utilized for cutting
and machining of sheet metal, ceramics and composites by diverse users, ranging
from small machine shops to the automotive and aircraft industries. Wear of the
mixing tube in present systems adversely affects all the applications of jet
cutting by limiting the lifetime of the nozzle and accuracy of the cut, by
causing machine-down time, and by preventing commercial applications of micro-
jets. A PLMT retrofitted with minimal investment into the thousands of abrasive
jet systems already in the market will greatly reduce these adverse effects. The
PLAS-Jet with premixed particles has several additional advantages that reduce
the cost and extend the applications of jet cutting technology. Cost reduction
results from the lower pressure required for achieving the same cutting effect
(e.g. 10000 vs. 50000 PSI), the more efficient use of the abrasives, and the
less frequent replacement of nozzles. The lower pressures also simplify the
development of compact portable systems for remote applications in hazardous
environments, such as during decommissioning of nuclear plants, and for military
applications, e.g. removal of mines and other obstacles. Furthermore, unlike
mixing tubes, the PLAS-Jet diameter can be reduced to levels enabling expansion
of jet cutting to precision micromachining.

