* 0422385
* Opportunities:  Scholarships and Integrated Support for Mathematics, Engineering, Computer Science and Computer Networking and Telecommunications Scholars
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* William Saari, Anoka-Ramsey Community College
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Davenport
* 08/31/2010
* USD 384,648.00

The project is awarding twenty-eight scholarships per year for four years to
students enrolled in a computer science, computer networking,
telecommunications, engineering or mathematics transfer program, and/or to enter
the workforce.

The project is creating a coherent learning community that integrates learning
across disciplines to provide a connectedness between CSEMS disciplines and to
create a method to retain students by providing a pathway to other opportunities
within the CSEMS disciplines. Faculty advisors and mentors are providing
continuous academic and career guidance; identifying opportunities for field
experience, conferences, and internships; and integrating CSEMS project services
with TRIO and Concurrent Enrollment Programs. The project is targeting women and
underrepresented minorities, who make up almost half of the K-12 students within
their service area.

A two-credit seminar is being provided to improve interaction with business,
foster awareness across disciplines, and to provide opportunities for site
visits and job shadowing. Second year scholars are being trained to serve as
mentors to first year scholars. Support services are being integrated with CSEMS
activities. Included are math and science clubs, child-care subsidies,
identification of internship opportunities, a competency-based Education/Credit
program, and a career placement system.