* 0422187
* Thomas A. Edison Scholars
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Jack Waintraub, Middlesex County College
* Standard Grant
* Zhanjing Yu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 396,000.00

This project is continuing a successful computer science, engineering, and
mathematics (CSEM) project by awarding 30 scholarships per year to eligible
students enrolled in programs in computer information systems, engineering,
engineering technology and mathematics. This project is recruiting participants
from among current students majoring in CSEM disciplines and those who have not
declared a major, high school seniors, students at local adult schools and
through referrals from community agencies. Emphasis is being placed on the
recruitment of students who are members of populations underrepresented in CSEM
disciplines. Selection of scholarship recipients is based on required basic
eligibility criteria, coupled with academic achievement and maturity as
evidenced by community commitment. The project is administered through NJCATE,
an NSF-ATE funded center of excellence in technician education.

Intellectual Merit: This project builds upon the successes of an earlier CSEMS
project. Of the 57 scholarship recipients in that project, 43.9% (25) graduated
and are pursuing bachelors' degrees in a CSEM disciplines (as compared to 15.9%
for the College). Additionally, 38.6% (22) are still enrolled and eligible for
scholarships. One-third (19) of the scholarship recipients began as
developmental education students who initially were awarded scholarships in
escrow. The college's typical remediation success rate is 50% while that of the
scholarship in escrow recipients is 100%. Specific objectives of the NJCATE
Scholars program are to: (a) increase the enrollment of high-ability, low-income
students, particularly those from populations underrepresented in CSEM
disciplines. (b) increase the retention and graduation rates of students in CSEM
disciplines. (c) enhance transfer opportunities for scholarship recipients. (d)
strengthen partnerships between the college and high technology industry to
provide students with career experiences and support.

The scholars participate in a variety of support activities to enhance retention
and success. Scholarships held in escrow for CSEM majors enrolled in development
education coursework encourage persistence to credit courses. Faculty advising,
group meetings, and career and transfer workshops are designed to form the basis
of a learning community of scholars that provide mutual support and
encouragement. A seamless web of existing support services will buttress
targeted support. A Steering Committee of faculty and administrators from
involved academic and support departments oversee project implementation.

Broader Impacts: 58% of the students supported with the first grant were
minority students. This significant increase demonstrates the impact of
financial assistance coupled with targeted support in encouraging the enrollment
and success of students from underrepresented populations in CSEM disciplines.
Additionally, financial need is often a strong barrier to completion of degrees
among students from both minority and majority populations. Scholarship support
reduces the need for outside employment and enables students to focus more
intently on studies, reducing the time for degree completion.

