* 0422022
* SGER:  Shape-Dependent, Selective Self-Assembly for Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Carol Livermore, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 01/31/2006
* USD 90,000.00

This project will provide an initial demonstration and characterization of
techniques to manufacture complex systems of nanocomponents rapidly,
effectively, and inexpensively to meet a wide array of future nanomanufacturing
needs. The proposed technique uses geometrically-selective self-assembly from
fluid to organize nanoscale components precisely into arbitrary, pre-determined,
non-periodic systems. The technology will enable the creation of integrated
nanosystems from separately fabricated functional nanocomponents in the 10 nm to
greater than 1 mm size range. The substrate is patterned so that its topography
at a given location is the exact inverse of the shape of the desired component
at that location. Both substrate and components are chemically functionalized
with a blanket coating of a hydrophobic self-assembled monolayer (SAM) to
promote component-substrate attachment. The components and substrate are
immersed in an appropriate fluid; components then contact the substrate randomly
and stick. Because component-substrate binding energy scales with contact area,
components attach much more strongly in shape-matched holes than on non-shape-
matched surfaces. Megasonic excitation selectively dislodges the incorrectly-
placed, more weakly-bound components while retaining the correctly placed, more
strongly-bound components. Random contact and selective removal occur
simultaneously, and the assembled configuration approaches the desired
configuration. The benefits of this approach include high positioning precision,
simultaneous and selective assembly of diverse nanostructures, and a means of
avoiding layer-to-layer alignment steps.

The project has three primary goals. First is to characterize assembly yield and
defect density vs. assembly time, megasonic excitation strength, hydrophobicity,
and quality of particle/hole match using 1 mm-scale particles. Second is to
demonstrate repeatable self-assembly into lithographically-defined shape-matched
binding sites. Third is to relate the measured assembly yields to differences in
binding energy in order to identify limits on selectivity and component size.
Creating rapid, effective, widely-applicable nanomanufacturing technologies such
as the one described here is important. There is a vast amount of existing
research on nanocomponents, but more research on incorporating such
nanocomponents into larger systems will be needed to convert them into practical
systems and new products. Such systems could range from single electronics to
physical, chemical, and biological sensors.