* 0422514
* Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships for Southeast Idaho
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Kenneth Bosworth, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah E. Allen
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This project is a continuation of a currently successful CSEMS program at ISU.
The recipients of the Idaho State CSEMS project will be students majoring in
engineering, mathematics, computer software engineering technology, civil
engineering technology, and computer science. The project promotes increasing
the number of minority students including female students and increasing the
retention rate in the supported disciplines. This is accomplished by: a)
Improving the screening process by studying the correlation between the
student's eligibility for the program and their academic performance, b)
involving the Society of Woman Engineers (SWE) Student Club in the College of
Engineering to assist in recruiting more female students and by c) using current
recipients of CSEMS scholarships as role models in recruiting and retention
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategy of this CSEMS proposal is to
capitalize on existing resources to ensure its success. This allows the program
to maximize the effect the comparatively modest CSEMS funding available for
administration and student infrastructure. This CSEMS project makes use of many
of the student support programs already in place at ISU, but is given its own
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Scholarship holders have
internships or participate in workplace experiences, during the school year or
summer, with regional industry. These positions typically include wages, and are
another means of financial assistance, as well as furthering students' academic
careers. The project is significant in that it serves an area of student need,
in a state seeing growth in high-technology companies and demand for graduates
in CSEMS disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This CSEMS project
complements additional university support structures like Upward Bound and
Talent Search and serves as one of several tools used to prepare potential
scholars. These services are designed to help students adapt to the university
environment and succeed, whether the individual is from a culturally isolated
minority group, suffers from disabilities ranging from physical handicaps to
learning disorders such as dyslexia, or simply comes from an environment that
lacks resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;