* 0422782
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Development of Metal Oxide Silicon/ Porous Silicon MEMS Sensor and Signal Processing Unit for Atmospheric Monitoring in Underground Coalmines
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Prasanta Ghosh, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/2008
* USD 10,905.00

0422782&lt;br/&gt;Ghosh &lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the US-India
cooperative research entitled Development of Metal Oxide Silicon/Porus Silicon
MEMS Sensor and Signal Processing Unit for Atmospheric Monitoring in Underground
Coalmines. This is an exploratory study to address the limitations of existing
mine gas sensors that will be conducted through a series of exchange visits
between Professors Prasanta Ghosh, Syracuse University and Hiranmay Saha,
Japavpur University, Kolkata, India. The PIs will collaborate in developing
devices with the deposition of Zinc Oxide for sensing the desired toxic gases in
underground coalmines. Additionally, they will detect the level of the gas and
process the signal suitabity for onward transmission to the control room located
at the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The collaborators will employ the
complimentary strengths of Professor Ghosh in the area of thin film deposition
and development of OTA based circuits with that of Professor Saha in the field
of Porous Silicon and Silicon/Porous Silicon based MEMS Sensors. They expect
their research to have broad impact in that it will lead to the development of
relatively cheap and reliable atmospheric monitoring systems suitable for
underground coalmines. It will also enrich fundamental knowledge in the field of
MEMS and will lead to the development of Integrated Silicon Microsensors for gas
and pressure sensing. Graduate and undergraduate students at both institutions
will profit from presentations given by the researchers during exchange visits.
The results will be disseminated broadly in journals and at conferences where
they will present the research findings. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;