* 0422868
* U.S.-Morocco Cooperative Research : Optimal Groundwater Models for Sustainable Management of Coastal Aquifers
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Alexander Cheng, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2009
* USD 41,313.00

0422868 Cheng

Description: This project supports a cooperative project by the Dr. Alexander
Cheng, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Mississippi, University,
Mississippi and Dr. Abdelkader Larabi, Department of Civil Engineering, Ecole
Mohammadia d'Ingenieures, University Mohamed V, Rabat, Morocco. They propose to
conduct research to develop optimal models for sustainable water management in
coastal aquifers of Morocco and in other countries. The expected outcomes
include the optimal exploitation of groundwater under the constraint of seawater
intrusion, better management of monitoring programs and recharge assessment, and
water resources protection. A three-dimensional finite element method with a
robust solver will be used to analyze available data such as groundwater
piezometric head, pumping activities, and salinity concentrations. Geographical
Information Systems (GIS) and Graphic User Interface (GUI) will be employed for
pre- and post-processing, especially for mesh generation and visualization.
Problems involving saltwater intrusion, up coning near pumping wells, optimal
pumping rate, artificial recharge assessment, and their environmental and socio-
economic impacts, will be studied. A combination of groundwater numerical
simulation tools and optimization models will be used to accomplish these
objectives. The Souss Massa coastal field in Agadir, south of Morocco, is
selected as the demonstration site for this integrated model. The Souss Massa
aquifer is suffering serious saltwater intrusion from the Atlantic Ocean due to
overexploitation of groundwater and the lack of natural and artificial recharge.
Scenarios varying recharge locations, pumping regulation, and optimal pumping
rate distribution will be simulated to assess the best seawater intrusion
control strategies. Although three-dimensional density dependent saltwater
intrusion computer models became available during the last decade, their use so
far are limited to small scale aquifer studies. This project will apply these
models, combined with the optimization tools, and the GIS and GUI visualization
capabilities, to study a regional problem in Morocco, leading to a best
management program.

Scope and broader Impact: Sustainable use of coastal freshwater resources is an
important problem for the US, Morocco, as well as all coastal nations around the
world. The project will enhance the education opportunities and research
capacity for the students and faculty of the University of Mohamed V. The
outcome of the study will help to protect the water resources of a vital
economic region of Morocco. Water resources managers and decision makers can
utilize the developed tools to conduct their planning and decision making more
efficiently. The system developed can be applied to similar situations in
coastal regions around the world.