* 0422080
* SBIR Phase II:   Temperature-Adaptive Nano-Crystalline Combinatorial Self-Lubricating Coating
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Wenping Jiang, NANOMECH, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 08/31/2007
* USD 653,490.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II research project
develops a temperature-adaptive nanoparticles-based solid lubricant coating (ZnO
and MoS2 and their metastable forms) on textured cBN/TiN for hard turning and
dry machining applications. The uniquely coated tool inserts are able to
constantly release the lubricants out of reservoirs on the textured cBN/TiN
surface. Currently available solid lubricant coatings do not offer temperature-
adaptive properties and are NOT suitable for hard turning applications. Hard
turning can offer manufacturers large cost savings compared to grinding.
However, the achievable surface finish is critical. The preliminary results
indicate that the proposed solid lubricant coating will enhance hard turning
surface finish and provide greater consistency. In addition, both environmental
and competitive cost issues are causing manufacturers to migrate toward dry
machining. Solid lubricant coatings can both improve surface finish and extend
the tool life in dry machining applications by lowering the friction at the
interface between the tool and the workpiece. Commercially available solid
lubricants are primarily configured in layered structures. As wear progresses,
the lubrication layer wears away and leaves the hard layer behind. Thus, the
proposed novel configuration that provides temperature adaptability while also
offering continuous long lasting lubrication has great potential. The proposed
research is an excellent example of adding value to industrial products from the
investment in nano science and engineering. The project will provide improved
understanding of how the tribo-chemistry of nanoparticle coatings can offer
temperature adaptive properties and affect machining performance. Also, it will
provide insights regarding the micro tribology along the boundary of the
particles and binder(s). The primary application of the coating will be for
cutting tools in hard turning and dry machining. These are very important and
growing commercial markets. Additional markets could be for rotating machinery,
dies and molds, and other wear parts. The successful development of the proposed
coating will help reduce environmental waste and contaminants from the usage of
coolants. The disposal of both the used cutting fluid and the contaminated metal
chips that were removed during the cutting process is becoming harder and more
costly. The cost of the coolant has been widely estimated as contributing over
15% of a typical part.s machining costs. The project will help facilitate the
adoption of high speed machining techniques, which is considered a key factor
for the United States maintaining its manufacturing base in the face of strong
competition from low labor rate countries.