* 0422346
* MEET (Multi-department Engineering and Engineering Technology Transfer) Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Vincent Amuso, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Stephen C. Cooper
* 08/31/2008
* USD 396,000.00

This project focuses on students who transfer at the third year level from
2-year schools to Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT). With scholarship
support from NSF, the project is acting to recruit, retain and graduate
additional transfer scholars in the engineering and technology BS degree
programs. NSF funding supports 30 transfer scholars in the first year, and 15
additional scholars per year for the following three years. RIT is providing an
additional $90,000 to ensure that MEET scholars have continuing financial
support after the grant expires to help them graduate on time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MEET Scholars Program represents a collaborative
effort of five academic departments across two colleges, and the Enrollment
Management and Career Services Division at RIT. All of the programs in the five
participating departments are ABET-accredited. RIT has numerous student support
and intervention programs. Among these are programs for mentoring students and
an in-house mandatory cooperative education program. The mentoring and
cooperative education programs help students address their financial needs and
facilitate placement in the high technology workforce. In the mandatory
cooperative education programs, students acquire one year of industrial
experience before graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
assessed periodically using quantitative data such as grades, GPA and co-op
salaries as well as data from surveys of participating scholars, faculty and
administrators. Evaluation is in the form of an annual report based on
assessments, and includes recommendations for adding, deleting or modifying
specific program elements to enhance the program's success rate. The results are
disseminated via engineering and technology education conferences at both
regional and national levels. &lt;br/&gt;