* 0422381
* Improving Access &amp; Diversity in Math, Computer Science, and Computer &amp; Engineering Technology Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Cheryl Green, Dallas County Community College Dist Eastfield Col
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 396,000.00

The project is awarding thirty scholarships per year for four years to students
enrolled in a computer science, computer technology or mathematics Associates
Degree and/or transfer program. A primary goal is to increase opportunities and
provide access to higher education and employment for underrepresented
minorities and women. Recruitment efforts are targeting schools with high
concentrations of African-American and Hispanic students. Recruitment materials
are being prepared in Spanish and English. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The school is
creating learning communities; scheduling scholars in common classes; providing
them with supplemental instruction; and expanding an extensive array of support
services, which includes program specific orientation sessions, tutoring, and
mentoring. The project is strengthening partnerships with local and regional
industries. Industrial representatives are aiding the recruiting, retaining, and
mentoring processes by pairing scholars with an industry mentor, engaging
students in monthly seminars and apprising them of local internship and
cooperative work opportunities. Additional support in mathematics is being
provided to ensure that students have strong mathematics skills for both
industry and four-year transfer degrees. There is an emphasis on encouraging
students to major in mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assessment and
evaluation plan is using formative and summative assessments to determine the
effect that each of the elements of the program has on retaining the scholars
and is providing feedback for improving the process. The database to track CSEMS
scholars is being adapted from one that was developed by Portland Community
College in their CSEMS project. &lt;br/&gt;