* 0422089
* SBIR Phase II:  Diode-Pumped, High-Power, Cr:LiSAF-Based Ultrafast Laser and THz Source
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Evgueni Slobodtchikov, Q-PEAK, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 07/31/2007
* USD 499,954.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II will develop the
ultrafast laser system that could represent a significant advance in the
technology of directly diode-pumped, solid state, ultrafast sources. In the
initial Phase I effort, a record cw power level (> 2W) from diode-pumped Lasers
were demonstrated through the use of an innovative, side-pumped design. In Phase
II, this design will be further improved and utilized as the basis for a
regenerative amplifier to generate high peak powers. The output of a passively
mode-locked, diode-pumped laser should provide the seed pulses for the
regenerative amplifier. The overall ultrafast source should be simpler, smaller
and ultimately less expensive than present, power-equivalent, sapphire-based
ultrafast laser systems. As a demonstration of the utility of the proposed
technology, a time-domain terahertz (THz) spectrometer will be constructed,
based on an optical-rectification THz source and an electro-optical detector,
both driven by the laser system. The directly diode-pumped ultrafast laser
represents an enabling technology, allowing ultrafast and THz systems to emerge
from the laboratory and into the widespread scientific and industrial
applications

The proposed ultrafast laser and THz spectrometer both could have the potential
for significant scientific and commercial impact. With the lower cost (on the
order of 50%) made possible by the simplicity of design, a wider range of
research groups in academia and industry will be able to obtain ultrafast
sources and THz instrumentation. The lower cost, simplicity, higher reliability
and smaller size of the systems will also greatly expand and accelerate the use
of ultrafast lasers and THz radiation in biotechnology, medical imaging,
precision micro-machining, industrial process control and security systems.

