* 0422139
* A Second Look at Sulfide Toxicity: Intracellular Inclusions, Mitochondrial Damage and Cell Death in Sulfide-Adapted Annelids
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Alissa Arp, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2008
* USD 359,489.00

Hydrogen sulfide is a naturally occurring, highly reactive and highly toxic
molecule. The most well-known and best characterized mechanism of sulfide
toxicity is its reversible inhibition of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase
(COX) at very low (micromolar) sulfide concentrations. In addition, sulfide has
other potential mechanisms of toxicity, which include inhibition of almost 20
enzymes besides COX, damage to hemoglobin, inhibition of muscle contraction, and
interaction with neuronal signaling pathways - potentially even as a
neuromodulator itself. Given sulfide's potential toxicity, it is perhaps
surprising that a variety of marine invertebrates are endemic to habitats
worldwide where the sulfide concentration can be a thousand times higher than
the presumed toxic level. The experiments in this proposal will test the
hypothesis that such sulfide exposures in these invertebrates nonetheless cause
irreversible mitochondrial injury that leads to ingestion of the injured
mitochondria by autophagy, which is a general mechanism by which cells sequester
and degrade their own organelles and cytosol within specialized digestive
compartments. This process is proposed to minimize the widespread cell death
that would otherwise result from mitochondrial injury. The proposed experiments
will utilize coelomocytes ("red blood cells") from the marine polychaete Glycera
dibranchiata. Whole animals (from which the coelomocytes will subsequently be
purified) and isolated coelomocytes will be exposed to sulfide and other
mitochondrial toxins, both with and without inhibitors of autophagy. The
proposed work contains four specific aims: 1) Determine the time course for the
induction and disappearance of the presumed autophagy compartments following
sulfide exposure; 2) demonstrate that induced compartments do indeed contain
signatures of both autophagy and mitochondria; 3) demonstrate that sulfide
exposure causes mitochondrial injury, as represented by irreversible
mitochondrial depolarization both in vitro and in vivo; and 4) demonstrate that
sulfide exposure causes cell death, with lower sulfide concentrations causing
apoptosis, and higher concentrations causing necrosis both in vitro and in vivo.
The experiments in this proposal will form the foundation for two long-term
research projects: 1) the mechanism(s) of sulfide toxicity in animal cells and
the strategies used by sulfide-adapted animals to reduce this toxicity, and 2)
the effects of environmental stressors on mitochondrial autophagy and biogenesis
(i.e., the rate of "mitochondrial turnover"). If the hypothesis is validated,
then exposed tissues of sulfide-adapted annelids are likely undergoing greatly
increased mitochondrial injury, autophagy and biogenesis that have thus far gone
unnoticed and are worthy of further investigation. Furthermore, this may also be
true for other animals affected by extreme environmental conditions with the
potential to cause mitochondrial injury, such as high temperature, increased UV
radiation, pH extremes, hyperoxia and many toxic pollutants. Finally, this
project will provide education, training, research experience and financial
support to several undergraduate students and one graduate student in a
laboratory environment having a strong tradition of enhancing research access to
women and minorities.

