* 0422640
* Conference on Analysis, Modeling and Computation of PDE and Multiphase Flow; Stony Brook, NY
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Gretar Tryggvason, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

This award is in partial support to the Conference on Analysis, Modeling and
Computation of PDE and Multiphase Flow. It took approximately 250 years from
Euler's formulation of the partial differential equations governing the flow of
compressible fluids to the proof that such flows with arbitrarily prescribed
initial states actually exist. This scientific breakthrough opened a new field
in analysis and computation of the problem of multiphase fluid flow. The
demonstration that the solutions can exist in weak form which include
discontinuous structures poses a great challenge to mathematicians in designing
numerical algorithms for the computation of the multiphase flow. The scientific
progress in this field has always been an interplay between analysis and
computation, by hard work and by mere luck. This conference brings scientists
who have made important contribution to the field and those who are striving to
find new solutions in more complicated systems and higher dimensions. The
speakers will address the proof of existence and uniqueness of the partial
differential equations, numerical algorithms to solve such equations and
computational examples emerged from scientific and engineering problems which
are governed by such partial differential equations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference is to foster communication among theoreticians, numerical analysts
and computational scientists from universities and national laboratories and
between leaders and students in these fields. Theoreticians can predict the
qualitative aspects of the solutions while computational scientists will
demonstrate the details of the numerical solution which is unknown to the
analysts. The PDE and its application to the multiphase flow problem has a large
impact in national defense and industry. Such problems are brought from national
laboratories to the academic community to seek better mathematical understanding
and a better design for numerical algorithms. Many university participants of
this conference have connection with national laboratories and industry. Woman
scientists play an important role in this research and they are among several
plenary and invited speakers of the conference. Others include brilliant
graduate students and junior researchers from underrepresented minorities and
people with physical disability. The conference also holds a poster session for
the graduate students from several universities.&lt;br/&gt;