* 0422526
* NSF Future Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Milton Randle, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

The NSF Future Scholars Program is awarding thirty-six $2,500 academic year
scholarships for a four-year period from 2006-2009. This continues a successful
NSF Future Scholars program under the auspices of Maximizing Engineering
Potential (MEP), which ends Dec. 2005. The new NSF CSEMS project allows the
program to continue for another four-year period. The principal goals of the
program are: to increase the number of financially disadvantaged students,
including under represented minorities and women, who graduate in the fields of
Engineering, Engineering Technology, Computer Science and Mathematics; and to
enhance the educational achievement and professional development of
participating students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The scholarships are awarded to
two cohorts of students- 1) ten awards to freshman and sophomores, and 2)
twenty-six awards to upper-division students, majoring in engineering,
engineering technology, computer science, and mathematics. Awards for freshman
and sophomore students help students in their transitional period during the
crucial first two years of their college education, while awards to upper
division students provide financial assistance to facilitate the final years
toward a degree. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The university is a
large, urban, Hispanic-serving, polytechnic university with a diverse population
of largely first-generation college students. The pool of economically
disadvantaged, under-represented students in engineering, engineering
technology, computer science, and mathematics is large. Cal Poly Pomona has
strong, well-established retention programs in the Colleges of Engineering and
Science for historically under-represented students which work with the NSF
CSEMS students. These programs provide the advising, mentoring, tracking, and
professional development support necessary to retain, enhance achievement, and
shorten the time to graduation for the scholarship recipients. The active
collaboration among program staff and faculty in the two colleges provides a
comprehensive support system for the scholars. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Through this scholarship program, the recipients
have an incentive to become more efficient in their course scheduling, are given
timely advising to make wise choices in structuring their course work, and can
reduce the hours they work while in school. The active involvement of industry
in student professional development activities increases their job readiness,
and gives them priority consideration for summer job placement with industry
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;