* 0422583
* Disseration Research: Seeds of Doubt: An Ethnographic Investigation of Biosafety in Contemporary Egypt
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Susan Greenhalgh, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The proposed Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant
focuses on the scientific uncertainties of genetically modified organisms (GMOs)
to examine how questions of science, life, and danger are formulated in
contemporary Egypt amidst complex local and transnational negotiations.
Employing a multi-level ethnographic approach, this project starts by asking
three specific questions: (a) What kinds of risks do Egyptian scientists
perceive GMOs pose to the environment? (b) What scientific procedures do they
use to test these risks? and (c) What specific cultural beliefs and social
concerns do these risk perceptions and practices embody and rework? By
positioning the problem of biosafety in Egypt's cultural and historical matrix,
this study explores the problematic divides between natural and artificial,
science and pseudoscience, knowledge and belief. As Egypt increasingly finds
itself caught in the middle of trade battles between the United States and the
European Union over agricultural biotechnology, this research investigates how
broader social and cultural concerns and geopolitical circumstances influence
scientific decisions and practices. This project entails 15 months of fieldwork
and uses the following data-collection techniques: participant observation,
statistical surveys, semi-structured interviews, and archival research. Often
left black-boxed in the debates over biotechnology are the culturally potent
concepts of life, nature and danger. By examining how these concepts are
articulated by scientists in Egypt this project can present a unique formulation
of the debates over tampering with nature and provide an alternative to the
thesis of global environmental risks. As scientific knowledge and practices
become seeped with ethical questions, which in turn are informed by religious
factors, this research can enhance our understanding of how value-laden choices
influence the risk assessment process, and more specifically, how Islamic
traditions might affect the scientists. responses toward GMOs. In bridging
anthropological works on science and modernity and engagements with Islamic
science, this research can provide a unique lens through which to examine the
vexed relationship between science and religion, a relationship that has become
ever more prevalent in the contemporary international geopolitical environment.
At the heart of the heated debates among scientists, scholars, politicians and
activists about the costs and benefits of agricultural biotechnology lays the
problem of scientific uncertainty about the effects of GMOs. As the battle
between the United States and the European Union over GMOs is burgeoning and the
trade and foreign aid effects on other countries are becoming noticeable, it
becomes urgent to critically examine, understand and communicate how the science
of biosafety works. Also important is to explore the ways in which scientific
facts are inscribed with international and local culturally-specific meanings
and concerns. Through a locally-grounded research program, this project will
analyze the specific factors and practices shaping biosafety decisions in Egypt
and can provide guidelines for an improved communication between scientists and
the non-scientific community. Through sustained communication with scientists
working on biotechnology and publications in non-academic venues this research
can make a constructive contribution to understanding and managing the risks of
agricultural biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;