* 0422132
* STTR Phase II:  Integrated Software and Systems for Large-Scale Nonlinear Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Richard Waltz, Ziena Optimization Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2007
* USD 624,486.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Program Phase II research project will
address the design and creation of integrated nonlinear optimization software
that combines complementary approaches to nonlinear optimization to achieve
robust performance over a wide range of application requirements. The work will
concentrate on the area of smooth nonlinearly constrained optimization, which
arises directly in numerous applications and as a sub-problem in mixed-integer
nonlinear programming and global optimization. The work will employ both
mathematical convergence analyses and extensive testing on problems of practical
interest. Results of the research will take nonlinear optimization software to a
new level, based on an adaptive and versatile collection of algorithms in
contrast to the single-algorithm approaches employed by current optimization
packages. Nonlinear optimization models arise in diverse areas of science such
as medical imaging, oceanography, crystallography, and climate modeling, and in
almost all areas of engineering, chip feature placement for semiconductor
manufacturers to energy management for electric and gas utilities. Nonlinear
optimization is also rapidly becoming a key tool in decision analysis in such
areas as finance and revenue management. By enabling optimization packages to be
more fexible and more reliable, this research will lead to stronger support for
current nonlinear optimization applications while making new, more ambitious
applications possible.

