* 0422094
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra-fast Broadband Imaging Spectroscopy for Geosciences Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Qiushui Chen, Boston Applied Technologies, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2007
* USD 525,476.00

This Small Business Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed to capitalize on
our Phase I success of ultra-fast tunable optical filter technology for the
applications of hyperspectral imaging, environmental monitoring and optical
communication. During Phase I period, the feasibility of ultra-fast tunable
filters based on electro-optical effect have been demonstrated through
prototyping. State-of-the-art filter characteristics have been achieved,
including ultra-fast response (&lt; 500 ns), wide tuning range (&gt; 80nm at
1550nm), narrow line width (&lt; 0.1nm) and broad working spectral band (from
visible to middle infrared continuously). Based on the successful Phase I
execution, the major effort of Phase II will be developing an advanced tunable
filter platform. At which several commercial products are expected to emerge.
Such as ultra-fast hyperspectral imaging systems suitable for geosciences and
medical diagnostics, high frequency wavelength modulators for high sensitivity
spectroscopic detection of trace-gas and wide-range fast-tuning optical filters
for spectroscopy and wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) optical
communication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hyperspectral imagery has many existing and
potential applications in agriculture,&lt;br/&gt;forestry, emergency
response/disaster management, insurance, national security, oil and
gas&lt;br/&gt;exploration, medical imaging, and military surveillance. The
proposed components and system,&lt;br/&gt;featuring in lightweight, fast action,
broad wavelength band, and low cost, is needed for
airborne&lt;br/&gt;hyperspectral imagery. The tunable add/drop is promise to
reduce network complexity and cost by eliminating expensive optical-electrical-
optical conversion and reducing inventory of fixed-wavelength devices. A fast
wavelength modulation, combined with synchronized detection, can form a very
sensitive spectroscopic analytic instrument for trace-gas sensing. These gases
usually have characteristic absorption lines in infrared (IR) band, where no
other fast tunable filter existed. It has seen a growing demand from the largest
application areas, such as chemicals, petrochemicals, power generation, national
security and environmental monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;