* 0422234
* Metal-Halogen Biomaterials and Wear Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,04/30/2012
* Robert Schofield, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2012
* USD 472,233.00

Title: Metal-Halogen Biomaterials and Wear resistance &lt;br/&gt;PI: Robert
Schofield, University of Oregon Eugene&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The jaws, leg claws,
stings and other "tools" of a many arthropods and other invertebrates, contain
extraordinarily high amounts of heavy metals, such as zinc and manganese, and
halogens such as bromine and chlorine. Although the concentrations reach 25% of
dry mass, unlike calcified human teeth, invertebrate tissue is not filled with
the biomineral. Instead, metal-halogen biomaterials appear to be a distinctly
different system that is more widely employed among small organisms. Very little
is known about these metal-halogen biomaterials, though their main counterpart
in larger organisms, calcification, is thought to be of such importance that its
advent made possible the evolution of organisms such as mollusks and
vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;In their previous NSF-funded project, the PIs published
the first comprehensive picture of the development and microscopic structure of
Zn-enriched 'tools', showing that Zn was deposited very late in exoskeleton
development, and that Zn-rich tissue contained a unique network of canals,
through which Zn was deposited. The PIs test the hypothesis that metal-halogen
tissues represent a distinct class of biomaterials, differing substantially from
biomineralized tissues. Further they suggest that because of similarities in the
metal-halogen tissues of distantly related organisms, that this system is likely
to have evolved very early, before the evolution of insects and chelicerates.
The PIs have shown that the hardness of the mandibular teeth of leaf cutting
ants increases by three times as Zn is incorporated during early adult life and
suggested that this Zn-correlated hardness increase is responsible for the
differences in leaf-processing behavior between young and older adults. In the
present study, 4 hypotheses will be tested focusing on two areas; 1) the
chemical form and mechanism by which Zn alters mechanical properties, and, 2) a
comparison of the mechanical property in invertebrates with more familiar
biomineralized tissue. It is expected that, for small organisms, metal-halogen
biomaterials will impart a more advantageous balance of hardness and wear
resistance than will calcification. This research will improve our basic
understanding of inorganic biochemistry related to wear resistance, which may
have been important to the evolution, behavior and life span of invertebrates.
In addition, this research may lead to the development of new materials that
mimic those designed by nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;