* 0422018
* SBIR Phase II:   Next Generation Nano-Probes for Ultra-High Resolution Near Field Microscopy, Nanolithography, and High-Density Data Storage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Gregory Behrmann, EM PHOTONICS INC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 06/30/2006
* USD 498,094.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project focuses on the
development, demonstration, and commercialization of ultra-high resolution nano-
probes for applications in near field scanning optical microscopy/spectroscopy
(SNOM), nano-lithography and high-density optical data storage based on photonic
band gap technology. In this Phase II project the planar, photonic crystal-based
nano-probes analyzed and fabricated in Phase I will be optimized. In addition,
the process for realizing full three-dimensional photonic crystal nano-probes
will be developed. Tune-ability will be incorporated in the nano-probes by
either varying the physical dimensions of an embedded nanocavity, within our
probe, or by applying an external electric, or magnetic, field to modify the
optical properties of a nanocavity and hence modulate its resonant frequency, or
line width. By tuning the operational wavelength of the nano-probes, they can be
used to image rather complex spatial features at various spectral wavelengths.
The nano-probe will be combined with an integrated spectrometer for spectral
filtering of various detected wavelengths. Both the nano-probe and the
spectrometer are photonic crystal based and hence can be integrated on a single
device. Recently developed technology, which is referred to as combinational
lithography, will be used to realize a three-dimensional nano-probe. The
advantage here is that by having full lateral confinement one can realize a
nano-probe that can be scanned over a photoresist coated sample and used to
expose it. The advantage the technique has over conventional SNOM exposure is
that by using a photonic crystal nano-probe the lateral fields are localized to
a much smaller region, which results in a much higher resolution exposure. To
this end, the combinational lithography process is a technique for the
fabrication of defects, such as tapered waveguides and resonators, embedded in a
three-dimensional photonic crystal. The method is efficient, flexible and very
economical for fabricating large-scale photonic crystals. As such, it allows for
the arbitrary placement of defects within a high quality photonic crystal
lattice of arbitrary symmetry, and achieves this in a minimum number of process
steps.

Commercially the project will lead to multi-functional, high resolution
photonic crystal based nanoprobes that will dramatically impact both the
commercial and research fields of near-field optical microscopy, optical data
storage, and nanolithography. The innovation has near term potential integration
with current nano-photonic imaging and writing systems. In the future, these
devices show potential for various systems requiring high resolution such as
single molecule detection, which have generated significant interest in the
physical and biological sciences and the study of small numbers of quantum dots,
where probe requirements are far below that achievable by classical optics
(~100nm) as is due in part to the high density of quantum dots which necessitate
sub-micron optical resolution in order to isolate quantum dot structures.