* 0422565
* U.S.-Middle East Workshop:  Collaborative Research in Computers and Communications, Summer 2004, Alexandria, Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Hussein Abdel-Wahab, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 12,400.00

0422565 &lt;br/&gt;Abdel-Wahab&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a US-Egypt Workshop on Computers and Communications, to be held in
conjunction with the IEEE International Symposium on Computers and
Communications (ISCC) planned for Alexandria, Egypt. The U.S. organizer is Dr.
Hussein Abdel-Wahab, Department of Computer Science at Old Dominion University,
Norfolk, Virginia. The Egyptian co-organizer is Dr. Mohamed Ismail, Department
of Electrical Engineering, Alexandria University, Egypt. ISCC is a well-
established international conference. Scientists and students from the USA and
the Middle East will be participating. Topics to be covered will include: Agent
and Knowledge Base Technology; Data Mining; Real-Time Communications Services;
Mobil Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks; Multimedia Information management and
Exchange; Overlay and Programmable Networks, and Security and Cryptography. It
is expected that the two sides will discuss advances in these areas and
recommend areas for mutually beneficial collaborative
projects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: This joint workshop will result in new
insights into research issues and could potentially impact the global economy
through improvements in communications and computer utilization. Students from
the U.S. and from the Middle East region will be invited to participate. The
participating scientists and students will get an international perspective on
research issues. A small part of funding is for the travel of Middle East
students and researchers. The interaction is likely to lead to more
collaboration with M.E. researchers and students. Students, especially women
students, from the M.E. may get motivated to come to the U.S. country for
education. The workshop may provide support for technical development in the
host country and region. &lt;br/&gt;