* 0422665
* National Health Insurance and Child Health in Taiwan
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Michael Grossman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 330,720.00

There is enormous public interest in the impacts of Health Insurance (NHI) on
health outcomes, yet the available data has been inappropriate for economists to
study the link between the two. This research will estimate the impacts of the
introduction of NHI in Taiwan in March 1995 on the health of infants and
children. The experience of Taiwan provides a potential laboratory for
overcoming these limitations. Prior to NHI, government workers possessed health
insurance policies that covered prenatal medical care, newborn deliveries,
neonatal care, and medical care services received by their children beyond the
first month of life. Private sector industrial workers and farmers lacked this
coverage. All households received coverage for the services just mentioned as of
March 1995. Therefore, the introduction of NHI constitutes a natural experiment
with treatment and control groups that form the basis of the empirical design.
The former group consists of non-government employed households, while the
latter group consists of government-employed households. Increases in infant and
child health after the introduction of NHI in the treatment group should exceed
corresponding increases in the control group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infant
health outcomes and related behaviors considered in this research include
birthweight; the probabilities of low- and very low-weight births; birthweight
adjusted for gestational age; the birthweight-specific probabilities of neonatal
and post neonatal death; the number of prenatal care visits; maternal cigarette
smoking and alcohol use during pregnancy; the receipt of such prenatal
examinations as ultrasound and amniocentesis; and the likelihood of
breastfeeding. Child health outcomes include the probabilities of death between
the ages of one and five years from diseases and from accidents and
anthropometric measurements, blood chemistry and urological laboratory
determinations, and the receipt of vaccinations for children between the ages of
four and thirteen years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While appealing in theory,
government financed or subsidized health insurance competes with a variety of
other mechanisms to improve health including direct cash subsidies to families
or providers, publicly supplied care, and health education campaigns to
discourage such behaviors as cigarette smoking and inappropriate alcohol use.
Hence, estimates of the impacts of insurance on infant and child health are key
ingredients in the policy debate concerning the most efficient ways to improve
health. Taiwan's experience can serve as a guide to the potential impacts of
large changes in insurance coverage on infant and child health outcomes both for
developed and developing countries. Taiwan's experience may not be directly and
immediately applicable to the U.S. population. Yet it is valuable to build a
body of empirical regularities about a question. When enough studies have been
conducted in different settings, then we can better understand how to
extrapolate our knowledge to some future settings.&lt;br/&gt;