* 0422232
* Unraveling the Mechanism of Manganese (II) Oxidation by Pseudomonas Putida
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Bradley Tebo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 05/31/2006
* USD 354,368.00

The oxidation of soluble manganese(II) to insoluble Mn(III) and Mn(IV)
oxyhydroxides has a profound effect on the environment. The highly reactive Mn
oxide mineral phases scavenge numerous heavy metals, oxidize various toxic
organic and inorganic compounds, and serve as electron acceptors for growth of
anaerobic bacteria. In nature, most Mn oxides form through the activities of
microorganisms, primarily bacteria. Studies of three phylogenetically-diverse
Mn(II)-oxidizing bacteria show that a homologous gene encoding a multicopper
oxidase-like protein is required for Mn(II) oxidation. The direct link between
those genes and enzymatic oxidation of Mn(II), however, has yet to be
established. This project focuses on the mechanism, regulation and function of
Mn(II) oxidation in Pseudomonas putida strain GB-1. Spectroscopic evidence
indicates that Mn(II) oxidation proceeds via two sequential one-electron steps,
both of which are enzymatically catalyzed. The recent discovery of a second
multicopper oxidase gene required for Mn(II) oxidation in GB-1, in addition to
the previously described cumA, suggests that two multicopper (Mn) oxidases drive
this catalytic process. The new 5.9 Kb gene resembles the putative Mn oxidase
gene, mnxG, from Bacillus SG-1 in its highly conserved copper binding sites.
This project will determine whether each protein catalyzes one step of the two-
electron oxidation, or alternatively, whether they work in concert to catalyze
the overall reaction. Mutagenesis studies point to other factors that mediate
Mn(II) oxidation, including interactions with c-type cytochromes, protein
transport and location of the native enzymes. Physiological studies indicate
that substrate-ligand binding and induction/ inhibition of oxidation by other
metals, specifically Fe, play significant roles in Mn(II) oxidation. The results
of this research will provide new insights into the reasons why bacteria oxidize
manganese(II), broaden our understanding of biogeochemical cycles and the
natural attenuation of toxic metals and organic
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results from this project
may lead to improved technologies for environmental remediation. Additionally,
it will contribute to the education of undergraduate and highly-qualified high
school students through independent research projects and mentorships; and to a
training program for middle school teachers, highlighting the connections
between the chemistry, biology and geology of the oceans.