* 0422048
* Workshop on Faunal Evidence for Hominin Paleoecology in East Africa.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2004
* Anna Behrensmeyer, Smithsonian Institution
* Interagency Agreement
* Kaye E. Reed
* 11/30/2004
* USD 8,864.00

Fossil mammals associated with early human ancestors in East Africa are an
important source of evidence for the ancient ecosystems in which the modern
African fauna, and hominins themselves, adapted to global and regional climate
change. Such data can help us to answer questions such as: 1) Were hominins
adapted to specific habitats or a range of habitats at any given point in time?
2) What happened when our ancestors made the transition from living in forested
habitats to more open savanna, and when does this transition occur? 3) How did
hominins interact with other mammals and how did this change as hominins began
to include more meat in their diets? A large and widely dispersed body of data
has been amassed on East African fossil mammals over many decades of intensive
field and museum work. This Workshop is designed to promote synthesis of this
information and synergize the analysis of hominin paleoecology using this
paleontological data. Participants from Africa, Europe, and North America will
discuss ways to organize and share information about fossil mammals in order to
improve understanding of the past 7 million years of ecological change and human
evolution in East Africa. The participants range from researchers with decades
of experience in Africa to graduate students and young professionals who are
beginning careers dedicated to understanding the paleoenvironmental forces that
shaped human adaptations. The workshop builds upon a symposium organized for the
2003 meeting of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists, where many
of the same participants presented faunal data. Specific goals include: 1)
promoting exchange and discussion of information on a wide range of faunas from
East Africa, 2) establishing basic guidelines for data collection, reporting and
database accessibility, 3) creating an organized network of individuals and
institutions to facilitate future improved data quality and comparability. The
workshop is organized around central questions in hominin paleoecology, and how
best to utilize the huge body of faunal information to address such questions.
It begins with a day of short presentations on faunal analysis. During the
second and third days, three break-out groups will discuss the following topics:
A) major questions in hominin paleoecology, B) methodologies in paleofaunal
analysis, C) paleofaunal databases. The final afternoon, the entire group will
reconvene to summarize discussion on these topics and prepare recommendations
for future research and data exchange. The workshop should have broad impact on
the development of museum resources and scientific careers in East Africa
because it will bring together experts, students, and young scientists to
inspire increased exchange of data and ideas, promote greater standardization
and accessibility of faunal data. It will lay groundwork for future training,
collaborations and comparative research on faunal change in the context of
hominin evolution. It will also address the issue of data sharing and
intellectual property rights with regard to faunal databases developed by
individuals and institutions, which is particularly important to museums in
developing countries. Results of the workshop will be written up as a report for
a major paleoanthropological journal, and datasets that serve as a basis for
discussion will be posted on the internet.