* 0422965
* Facility Support: Northeast National Ion Microprobe Facility at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2006
* Graham Layne, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2006
* USD 249,921.00

0422965&lt;br/&gt;Peucker-Ehrenbrink&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project
provides operational support for the Northeast National Ion Microprobe Facility
(NENIMF) at WHOI for the years 2005 and 2006. The Cameca IMS 3f will be the sole
instrument available for analytical work in 2005, whereas the restored IMS 1270
may be available in the latter half of 2006. The IMS 3f is used by a broad and
diverse group of in-house and external users, and provides the geochemical
community with access to a small format ion microprobe. The scientific
priorities include (a) trace element analyses of minerals, glasses and
individual melt inclusions from a variety of geotectonic settings, (b) major and
trace element analyses in biogenic carbonate skeletons aimed at reconstructing
sea surface temperatures in the geologic past as well as (c) trace element
analyses in experimental charges aimed at calibrating melt-mineral and seawater-
mineral partition coefficients. Facility personnel will continue to introduce
students, post-docs and guest scientists to ion microprobe technology and assist
with their analytical work. Facility personnel will participate in the
dissemination of ion microprobe technology and new analytical developments
through publications, formal presentations at national and international
meetings, short courses for new users, and through less formal contacts with
other ion microprobe facilities.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;