* 0422892
* Self-Sensing Magnetic Bearings:  Development of Virtual Probes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Tetsuya Iwasaki, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2008
* USD 231,852.00

The objective of this research is to develop and demonstrate a commercially
viable technique for self-sensing in active magnetic bearings by realizing a
virtual position probe using measured amplifier voltage and current. Two
potential approaches will be pursued. The first treats the system comprised of
amplifier, magnetic actuator, and rotor journal as a linear plant parameterized
by rotor position: a parameter observer takes advantage of persistency of
excitation provided by switching amplifiers to determine this parameter (rotor
position). The second approach exploits a linear periodic model of the full
rotor in combination with the actuator and constructs a state observer for this
system. Virtual probes (observers) based on both approaches will be implemented
either in hardwired electronic form or, ideally, as a digital field programmable
gate array. In either case, the performance of the resulting estimation (virtual
probe) hardware will be examined using an existing magnetic bearing supported
rotor and compared to conventional eddy current type
proximitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal benefit of this research is to
reduce the complexity of hardware in active magnetic bearings. By removing
components from the harsh environment to which the bearings are exposed, the
cost and reliability of these devices can be improved substantially. This
greatly enhances the application of magnetic bearings to a number of important
technologies ranging from micro gas turbines for distributed electric power
generation to implantable artificial hearts for treatment of congestive heart
failure and other similar cardiac ailments. Hardware complexity and reliability
is a major obstacle to large-scale commercial use of magnetic bearings in these
and many other applications: self-sensing is a pivotal step in reducing these
problems. A tantalizing long term benefit and central goal of continuation of
this research is development of truly "off-the-shelf" magnetic bearings which
can be marketed in the same manner as conventional fluid film or rolling element
bearings. By eliminating the position sensor, a significant hurdle is removed in
approaching a critical "passivity" property which ensures that the bearing will
stably support any stable rotor. This would mean that active magnetic bearings
could be sold without tailoring them to each specific application, avoiding very
costly engineering effort and stimulating the economies of scale critical to
unlocking the nascent commercial potential of active magnetic bearing
technology.