* 0422924
* Expression and Judgement of Personality in Everyday Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Samuel Gosling, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 02/29/2008
* USD 197,239.00

Individuals are constantly making statements about themselves. A broad range of
media can be mobilized in the service of self-expression, ranging from the music
people listen and the clothes they wear, to the ways they decorate their
bedrooms and offices. For example, the pictures a person selects to hang on
walls, the books she chooses to read, and the way she arranges the items that
fill her living space all betray aspects of her personality and values. The
ubiquity of self-expression suggests that it serves an important function. But
what is that function? &lt;br/&gt;Previous research indicates that understanding
the causes and consequences of self-expression will shed light on processes
underlying successful social and psychological functioning. For example, self-
verification theory (Swann, 1997) suggests that people will be happy, healthy,
and enjoy satisfactory relationships when others view them as they view
themselves; individuals may use physical environments, clothing, and music to
make expressions about themselves in the service of getting others to see them
as they see themselves. In addition, some forms of self-expression can serve as
marks of group affiliation, allowing individuals to fit in with social groups
and convey information about themselves to others, ultimately promoting feelings
of connectedness and well-being. &lt;br/&gt;Using new and established
methodologies, three studies will extend our research paradigm from physical
(e.g., offices) and virtual (e.g., websites) environments to three new contexts
in which personality is expressed and perceived. The studies will examine the
information conveyed by individuals' music preferences (Study 1), elements of
appearance such as clothing and hairstyle (Study 2), and features of everyday
language (Study 3). To permit us to compare the findings across contexts, these
studies will adopt parallel procedures. In each of the studies, targets will
provide information about themselves (e.g., music preferences) that will serve
as the stimuli from which judges will form impressions about the targets. The
judges' impressions will be compared with measures of what the targets are
really like obtained from the targets themselves and informant ratings from the
targets' friends. Analyses of the stimuli will reveal which cues are used by
judges to form impressions and which cues are valid indicators of what the
targets are really like. &lt;br/&gt;Ultimately the studies proposed here will
serve as the foundation for a series of experimental studies in the laboratory
and field, examining the causes and consequences of self expression. For
example, what are the social and health consequences of living in institutions,
such as prisons and retirement homes, that suppress self-expression?&lt;br/&gt;