* 0422611
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Structural and Tectonic Evolution of El-Fayum Depression, North Western Desert, Egypt Based on Analysis of Landsat TM, SIR-C/X-SAR and SRTM data
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Timothy Kusky, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 29,560.00

0422611&lt;br/&gt;Kusky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support cooperative research between Dr. Timothy M. Kusky, Department of Earth
Sciences, Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, Missouri and Dr. Talaat M.
Ramadan, Department of Geology, National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space
Sciences (NARSS), Cairo, Egypt. Orbital remote sensing technology has progressed
to advanced levels of practical application, particularly with respect to
optical and radar imagery. Orbital optical imagery can be utilized to map
lithological details as well as for identifying mineral deposits. Imaging radar
is useful in mapping structures as well as estimating surface roughness, which
can be used to identify lithology. New orbital sensors are planned for the next
few years to obtain better spectral and spatial resolution and new data. In
addition, recent data from the Shuttle Radar Topographic Mission (SRTM) has
successfully imaged and mapped the topography of the Earth's surface between
60'N and 60'S using C-band (6 cm wavelength) radar. These data will be uniquely
powerful for characterizing active tectonic and geomorphological features, and
for monitoring geological hazards and environmental changes. In this study we
propose to link some methods of utilizing satellite imagery with new,
potentially more powerful remote sensing techniques and higher resolution active
sensor SAR images to delineate structures in order to understand the tectonic
evolution and hazards within the seismically active El-Fayum Depression. The
produced maps will allow study of areas being considered for development
projects and exploration of the yet unexplored tracts of the Western Desert. The
PI has experience in geologic studies on NE Africa, Arabia, Madagascar, China,
and other arid regions, and in using orbital remote sensing data to solve
geologic problems in arid regions. Dr. Kusky and Dr. Ramadan attended a US-Egypt
Workshop on Priorities of Desert Studies, held in Cairo from Feb. 22-28, 1998,
and have since published several papers together on utilizing remote sensing
techniques for geological applications, and have completed a reconnaissance
remote sensing study of El-Fayum area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broad
impact: Senior scientists from the US and Egypt will be working with Junior
Egyptian scientists and with US and Egyptian students, integrating existing
remote sensing and field techniques with the development of new techniques for
integrating different data types for geological and hazards assessments. In the
past, this team has derived new satellite image analysis techniques for mineral
resource and ground water exploration, and now they will focus their efforts on
geologic hazards assessment, land use, development, and tectonic evolution.
Understanding the geological hazards in this developing area will be of great
use to the local population, and the development of new techniques for hazards
monitoring and geologic studies will be of broader use to society. The project
involves US and Egyptian Universities, governments' organizations, and
scientists ranging from senior faculty to undergraduate lab assistants. This
project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides
grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these
cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;