* 0422028
* SBIR Phase II:   A Sensitive Integrated Multi-Speckle Laser Interferometer for Industrial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Bruno Pouet, BOSSA NOVA TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2006
* USD 499,934.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project describes an innovative
&lt;br/&gt;Approach for development of a high sensitivity laser ultrasonic
receiver for &lt;br/&gt;Application in industrial environment. A high
sensitivity classic reference beam interferometer with the ability to
efficiently overcome the limitation caused by the speckle light generated from
the reflection from rough surface will be developed. The interferometer should
be well suited for demanding industrial applications where low cost, sensitive
and rugged receiver is needed. Because the proposed interferometer takes
advantage of the high integration level of current state-of-the-art in
electronic packaging, the system can be made very compact and will be the key
element of an ultrasonic system. The robustness, high sensitivity and lower cost
of this ultrasonic receiver is hoped to enable laser based ultrasonic inspection
to become a cost effective and reliable solution. &lt;br/&gt;The commercial
market for this type of laser ultrasonic receiver is targeted at process control
and in-service inspection applications where high reliability and low inspection
cost is required. The steel industry has expressed strongly a desire to have a
system dedicated to the in-process wall-thickness measurement of seamless tube
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;