* 0422674
* Magnetic Resonance Studies of Strongly Correlated Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Douglas MacLaughlin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2009
* USD 425,000.00

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and muon spin rotation (muSR) techniques will
be used to study electronic structure, magnetism, and superconductivity in
highly correlated electron metals and alloys. The sensitivity of NMR and muSR to
atomic-scale magnetism makes these techniques ideal tools to probe local effects
of strong electron correlations. Our NMR and muSR studies of non-Fermi Liquid
(NFL) systems show that structural disorder is also deeply involved in the
mechanism for NFL behavior. Measurements of muSR linewidths and relaxation rates
will further elucidate relations between disorder and quantum criticality in NFL
systems. muSR studies of slow spin dynamics will be carried out in geometrically
frustrated antiferromagnets. Effects of time-reversal symmetry breaking will be
studied in the heavy-fermion superconductor PrOs(4)Sb(12) and related systems. A
thorough examination of superconductivity and magnetism will be carried out in
the newly-discovered class of Ce(n)TIn(3n+2) heavy-fermion materials, which
exhibit a wide variety of anomalous magnetic and superconducting behavior.
Graduate students in this program will be well prepared for research/teaching
careers in both basic and applied
areas.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding effects of correlations
between electrons on magnetism and conduction in solids remains an important
problem in condensed matter physics, with practical consequences for technology
in several areas of materials science. This research uses magnetic resonance
techniques as probes of correlated-electron behavior at the atomic level. In
magnetic resonance (the best-known application of which is medical MRI) the
magnetism of "spin probes" (e.g. nuclei, as in nuclear magnetic resonance) is
used to "spy" on the local magnetic environment of the probes. This work will
lead to better understanding of the behavior of the so-called heavy-electron
metals, in which electrons behave as if they were hundreds or even thousands of
times more massive than free electrons. It will be carried out in collaboration
with researchers at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and with research groups
abroad (Leiden University, TRIUMF, Vancouver, and the Paul Scherrer Institute,
Switzerland). Graduate students in this program will gain valuable insight into
research at the national and international level, and will be well prepared for
research/teaching careers in both basic and applied condensed-matter physics and
materials research.&lt;br/&gt;