* 0423403
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Optical Metrology of MEMS
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Levent Degertekin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/29/2008
* USD 27,800.00

0423403 &lt;br/&gt;Kurfess&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative project by Dr. Thomas Kurfess and Dr. Dr. F. Levent
Degertekin, School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Tech and Dr. Hakan Urey,
Department of Electrical &amp; Electronics Engineering, Koc University,
Istanbul, Turkey. The project will address several issues in parallel optical
metrology of dynamic MEMS (micro-electro-mechanical systems) devices using
phase-sensitive diffraction grating microinterferometer arrays. For accurate
measurement of MEMS device vibration profiles, the interferometer arrays need to
be calibrated and the electrostatically actuated deformable gratings need to be
characterized. In addition, an optical system approach is essential for uniform
illumination of the interferometer array and efficient light collection from the
MEMS devices under test. The Georgia Tech team will fabricate and provide a
model for various dynamic MEMS devices and deformable diffraction gratings for
microinterferometer arrays. These devices will be evaluated in terms of dynamic
response and optical performance by Koc University. Based on these results, a
more accurate model of the deformable gratings will be developed. A model for
the optical system to deliver uniform light from a single laser source to an
array of interferometers will be jointly developed and implemented. Furthermore,
the thermal response of the deformable diffraction grating structures will be
investigated with the help of a model to investigate the use of these structures
for uncooled IR imaging arrays. A graduate student from Koc University will
fabricate and evaluate several test structures for this purpose using the
facilities at Georgia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impacts: The
proposed research will help improve the manufacturing processes of the emerging
U.S. MEMS industry, which suffers from low yield and repeatability. The
collaboration involves U.S. and Turkish scientists with complementary expertise
and capabilities in optical MEMS design, fabrication, and characterization and
opens up possibilities for joint studies in imaging arrays and optical MEMS. A
graduate student from Koc University, a recently founded institution with
excellent promise of contributing to scientific collaboration between Turkey and
the United States, will participate in the project and will work with scientists
and fellow graduate students at Georgia Tech. This project is funded jointly by
OISE and the Division of Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;