* 0423900
* Regions, Industrial Dominance, and Business Success:  An Inquiry into the Geography of Economic Adjustment, Flexibility, and Competitiveness
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Harvey Goldstein, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2009
* USD 149,971.00

Regions, Industrial Dominance, and Business Success: An Inquiry into the
Geography of Economic Adjustment, Flexibility and Competitiveness

Edward Feser University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

This study will investigate the relationship between concentrated regional
corporate structure-the dominance of a given regional industry by one or a few
large firms-and regional business adaptability and performance. The research
will test the idea that firms in regions in specific industries dominated by few
very large businesses tend to be less productive than firms in the same
industries in regions characterized by less corporate dominance and greater
organizational diversity. The theory is that corporate dominance in a specific
location limits local firms' ability to deploy and adjust workforce, capital,
and other inputs to maximum advantage. In effect, corporate organizational
structure is a mechanism which can lock regions into a particular set of
industrial competencies. As markets evolve and technology changes, those
competencies-once key economic assets-may become liabilities. Detrimental "lock-
in" effects are minimized or avoided to the degree that adjustment via
improvements in efficiency, adoption of new technology, new business growth and
entrepreneurial activity are maximized. The project research design involves the
use of micro-level data from the U.S. Census' Longitudinal Research Database
(LRD) to construct an index of regional corporate dominance and to estimate
establishment-level production functions for selected U.S. manufacturing
industries. The research also includes case studies of selected industries and
regions.

While the study will make important contributions to the intellectual
understanding of economic change and its manifestation at the regional scale, it
also has practical significance. Knowledge of why certain cities and regions are
able to adapt more quickly than others to national and global economic forces is
critical for good urban planning as well as national policy formation. Urban
planners need such information to develop improved methods for predicting
economic change and its impacts on urban services and infrastructure while
federal officials need a better understanding of the likely implications of
policies that affect the competitiveness of specific sectors and regions. This
study is particularly timely in the face of the slow job growth following the
2001 recession. Many U.S. regions are facing major workforce dislocation as
labor-intensive industries migrate to Latin America, Asia and other low-cost
locations. The most affected U.S. regions, particularly the smaller ones, are
often "one company towns" that must remake themselves in a world of heightened
global competition. Policy makers require a better understanding of the factors
that limit or enhance regions' capacity to adjust and adapt to national and
global economic shifts.