* 0423662
* Long Term Ecological Research: The Landscape Continuum Model: A Biogeochemical Paradigm for High Elevation Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2011
* William Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 11/30/2011
* USD 5,666,546.00

The Niwot Ridge LTER (NWT) employs a program of long- and short-term
manipulative experiments and long-term monitoring to study biotic and ecosystem-
level responses and feedbacks to interannual variation in climatic and
atmospheric inputs for the alpine tundra. Long-term records show that there
directional climate change in this area is occurring, which inspired a written
synthesis article that refocused and refined the unifying ecological theme for
the site and is also appropriate for topographically rugged landscapes: the
Landscape Continuum Model (LCM). The LCM explicitly links terrestrial ecosystems
to each other and to aquatic ecosystems; the heart of the model is strong
linkages generated among the landscape components as a result of transport
processes caused by the extreme topography. These transport agents cause
biogeochemical amplification and attenuation of processes not observed in most
landscapes. The new paradigm provides the platform for a unifying theme,
synthesis and cross-site collaboration, activities stressed in this proposal.
Niwot Ridge is the only multidisciplinary, long-term study site for high-
elevation areas on the North American continent and thus is an essential
benchmark for regional, national and global networks that measure biological
changes and feedbacks and experimentally determine mechanisms for these
relationships. Accordingly, emphasis is placed upon documenting research and
archiving data for current and future scientists under the new paradigm of the
LCM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Many of the broader impacts of the
Niwot LTER derive from its status as the only multidisciplinary, long-term study
site for high elevation areas in the North American continent; it is both a
benchmark site and a leader of research for these areas. Outreach has included
the publication of a children's book based on NWT describing the ecology of the
area and the hydrologic cycle, a unique opportunity to reach a wider audience
and educate them on alpine water resources. The innovative and successful
Schoolyard LTER program focuses on local schools and on interactions with K-12
teachers; NWT provides computers to teachers wishing to facilitate web-based
learning via class access to the NWT datasets, real-time climate information,
and virtual field trips. USGS and NPS scientists have been included in the NWT
team, a commendable outreach feature facilitating excellent opportunities to
effectively transfer LTER science to the appropriate decision makers. NWT's
dedication to increasing diversity in science and at their LTER is apparent, and
the site provides training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. Remote, wireless technology is an important new NWT initiative
providing real-time, easily accessible climate data to a broad group of users.
The planned relational database will be a valuable product once online, and the
TundraCam and virtual field trip provide useful opportunities to "virtual
visitors."&lt;br/&gt;