* 0423070
* Using Machine Learning and Cognitive Modeling to Understand the fMRI-measured Brain Activation Underlying the Representations of Words and Sentences
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Marcel Just, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 224,575.00

Using machine learning and cognitive modeling to understand the fMRI-
measured&lt;br/&gt;brain activation underlying the representations of words and
sentences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tom M. Mitchell and Marcel A. Just
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of recent
fMRI studies have reported significant and repeatable differences in fMRI brain
activation when human subjects perceive pictures or words describing objects
from different semantic categories (e.g., pictures or words that describe tools,
buildings, or people). It is currently possible to determine with good accuracy
which of several semantic categories a person is thinking about, based on their
brain activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose new research that builds on
these recent discoveries, and seeks to understand (1) human brain activity
associated with different semantic categories of objects and actions (nouns and
verbs); (2) whether the brain activity associated with semantic categories can
be partitioned into more primitive semantic components (e.g., does the brain
activity associated with words about tools factor into one component
characterizing the tool's visual appearance and a second component
characterizing the motor actions involved in using the tool?); and (3) how brain
activity associated with individual words is combined into more complex patterns
when reading word pairs or simple phrases and
sentences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves:(1) applying machine
learning algorithms to discover cortex-wide brain activation patterns associated
with particular semantic domains, (2) developing a computational model of human
language processing that instantiates the representational principles discovered
and that makes specific, testable predictions, and (3) conducting new fMRI
studies to obtain novel data about human semantic category
representations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
research is multifaceted. If successful, our research will lead to new
scientific insights into how the brain organizes information about meanings of
words, objects, and actions. It will also lead to new methods for fMRI data
analysis, especially for discovering complex temporal-spatial patterns of fMRI
activation that accurately distinguish different mental states. The research
will also lead toward a new paradigm for developing computational cognitive
models and fitting them to empirical data obtained from fMRI and from behavioral
measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research will
be amplified by specific outreach activities to several communities. In addition
to publishing our scientific results in the cognitive and computational
neuroscience literature, we will also actively engage this community by
disseminating our new experimental fMRI data through the NSF-funded fMRI Data
Center, and by documenting and publishing our new data analysis algorithms on
the internet. We will proactively engage the statistical machine learning
community, which has much to contribute to development of new fMRI analysis
methods, and will develop and disseminate teaching materials for the
undergraduate and graduate educational community,including fMRI data sets.
Finally, our proposed research has potential impact on the medical research
community, especially regarding the study of neurological conditions such as
Alzheimer's disease, dyslexia and high-functioning autism - three areas
entailing a language disturbance in which we already have active research
collaborations, providing a direct conduit for transferring new scientific
insights that may arise from this research.&lt;br/&gt;