* 0423305
* Research Resources:  Integrative Instrumentation for Network Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Symeon Papavassiliou, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

This project, enhancing and facilitating the establishment and operation of a
network testbed, provides a wired and wireless network infrastructure to support
ongoing and future research. The institution will acquire integrative research
instrumentation consisting of a traffic generator/analyzer and wireless
equipment, for the completion of an experimental state-of-the-art testbed. The
high end traffic generator/ analyzer services the analysis and measurement of
results of applied methods in the network, under traffic conditions that highly
approximate the scenarios in actual realistic core networks, providing the
capability of enhancing models by comparing them against real-life experimental
data. The wireless access points and the mobile computers/devices supporting
different wireless access technologies will not only support research efforts in
the area of wireless networking, but enable the study of the user's end-to-end
performance in a realistic hybrid networking environment as well. The current
research projects place emphasis on the implementation of novel schemes for QoS
networks, switch architectures, and network processing units needed to cope with
current and future demands of the Internet evolution. The work addresses
feasibility and deployability issues of network protocols, schemes, and
applications in the next generation Internet, offering seamless integrated
services and emulating the future hybrid network environments where wireless
access and networking technologies take significant roles. Developed mechanisms
are then tested for inter-operation of wireline and wireless solutions. The
infrastructure supports the following research projects:&lt;br/&gt; Dynamic
Network Anomaly/Attack Detection and Management,&lt;br/&gt; Deployment and
Implementation of Explicit Endpoint Admission Control Schemes,&lt;br/&gt;
Scalable Internet Routers, and&lt;br/&gt; Wireless Access
Networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The infrastructure contributes to
provide education and training in next generation Internet
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;