* 0423387
* Translating Information Technology Into Classrooms:  Teacher-Student's Research on Lake Erie Ecosystem
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Robert Erlandson, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kusum Singh
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,199,921.00

The Translating Information Technology into Classrooms: Teacher-Students
Research on Lake Erie Ecosystem project proposes to study science, technology,
environmental and societal issues associated with the Lake Erie ecosystem using
Information Technology (IT) applications. The focus of this project will be
multi-disciplinary, to include science teachers and their students as well as
teachers and students from other related disciplines such as mathematics and
technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Forty five teachers and 225 students, each
receiving at least 120 contact hours, will study the issues surrounding Lake
Erie. The project aims to educate and train secondary school teachers to utilize
IT in their classrooms, by engaging them in specially designed summer institutes
and through study of the Lake Erie ecosystem with their students. The project
attempts to meet the educational needs for developing teacher awareness of the
potentialities and possibilities of IT for teaching and learning, developing
teacher competency in IT, developing student literacy (knowledge, skill,
application) in IT and associated career paths, identifying best practices and
transferable methods of IT and creating a community of learners among
participating teachers and their students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These goals are
achieved by having secondary school teachers collaboratively work with their
students in research projects that deal with issues within the context of Lake
Erie, helping teachers to link Information Technolgy with the Michigan
Curriculum Frameworks and Science Benchmarks and teach with IT in the content
areas in which they would normally teach, and having students conduct real
research and ecological-based life and physical science activities that would
contribute to the body of data available on the health of the Lake Erie
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;