* 0423465
* GOALI:    Modeling and Optimization of a Responsive Reverse Logistics Channel for Electronic Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Hong-Chao Zhang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry award provides funding
for a collaborative research that is targeted to modeling and optimizing the
reverse logistics channel of end-of-life electronic products to improve its
responsiveness to the market demands from both ends of the channel. The
objectives of this research are three fold: i) establish a long term university-
industry collaboration team in research of end-of-life management, ii) integrate
market demand and customer return service requirement into logistics and reverse
production scheduling to improve the responsiveness, and iii) investigate the
integration and coordination issues in the whole reverse logistics channel among
participants to optimize the performance at the system level. The following
methodologies will be developed in this university-industry collaborative
research to achieve the initial objectives: 1) Use random-sized batch arrival
priority queuing system to model the logistics channel in regard to dynamic
market demands and stochastic service requirements; and 2) Model the product
return process and stochastic reverse inventory to optimize the reverse
inventory policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The market of the reverse logistics is
estimated at 55,000 millions in US in 2004. The results of this research in this
regard will produce marked benefit to the industry through providing optimized
decisions support with improved efficiency of business operations. While the
findings of the research will bridge the gap between the current knowledge and
the new requirements of the reverse manufacturing industry through integration
of market demand into decision process and negotiation based coordination, the
methodology developed can also be applied to other scenarios where
responsiveness and coordination is required. The roadmap in this project will
also guarantee the maximization of the potential benefit to education and the
society.