* 0423672
* Experiences of Surveillance Technologies in Gated Communities and Public Housing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Torin Monahan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Priscilla Regan
* 08/31/2006
* USD 76,582.00

The use of modern surveillance technologies to monitor public activities
presents difficult challenges to policymakers and citizens, especially in a
post-9/11 world. Central to the debate over surveillance technologies are the
oftentimes conflicting goals of safeguarding democratic freedoms from criminal
or terrorist threats and from technological intrusion. Focusing specifically on
surveillance technologies in public and semi-public places of residence, this
project will make an empirical contribution to this ongoing debate by
documenting experiences of surveillance technologies. This project will explore
the use of modern surveillance technologies(specifically closed circuit
television (CCTV) systems) in two very different places of dwelling and social
interaction: gated communities and low-income public housing. Research sites
will include 3 gated communities and 3 public housing complexes in the Phoenix
metropolitan area. Throughout 12 months of field research, 90 interviews will be
conducted to identify differences in public experiences of video surveillance
across and within these settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding questions
are 1) what meanings do people attribute to surveillance technologies in places
of residence?, and 2) how do people come to understand others through the
presence of surveillance technologies? The emphasis of this study will be to
identify patterns in experiences of surveillance technologies. Secondary
attention will be given to the actual design and distribution of surveillance
systems in order to determine how they vary across spaces and whether or not
perceptions and behaviors vary according to the types of systems present. The
main intellectual contribution generated from this project will be a greater
understanding of the social and political effects of surveillance technologies
in places of residence. An academic book on surveillance technologies in public
life will be generated from this project, and it will situate the topic within
the political and economic context of globalization. The practical outcome of
this study will be a set of policy guidelines for crafting appropriate public
policy governing surveillance technologies in places of residence. Given the
myriad concerns facing policymakers about issues of security and surveillance,
the findings of this study should be both timely and valuable. &lt;br/&gt;