* 0423329
* Mechanisms of Friction and Wear Reduction in Embedded Solid Lubricant Coatings and Their Application to Machining Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* James Krzanowski, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2008
* USD 406,387.00

The objective of this research project is to investigate novel embedded solid
lubricant cutting tool coatings for applications in machining and manufacturing
processes. The research concept is to use lithographic patterning methods to
create two-component coatings. One component of the coating will be a hard
compound that is highly wear resistant, and the second component, embedded in
the hard compound, will be a solid lubricant material. This approach will
alleviate a common problem encountered in the use of solid lubricant coatings,
namely short wear life. This research project will investigate methods for
fabricating and patterning these coatings, the mechanical and thermal stability
of the coatings, and the operative tribological mechanisms that determine their
frictional behavior. In addition to laboratory analysis and tribological testing
of the coatings, a key component of the research will be to apply the coatings
to cutting tools and perform instrumented metal cutting
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to fabricate engineered metallic
components using cutting and forming processes is integral to a wide range of
manufacturing processes. The application of coatings to cutting tools and metal
forming dies can enhance tool life and reduce the energy expended in overcoming
frictional forces. The use of liquid lubricants also reduces friction, however,
environmental and health issues, as well as economic concern over the cost of
their treatment and disposal has made the use of solid lubricants more
attractive. This research program will promote the development of high wear-
resistance coatings incorporating solid lubricants. The use of these coatings
could lead to a reduction in environmental waste, as well as reducing the costs
of waste fluid treatment and disposal. The program also aims to improve
technical awareness about engineered coatings by developing portable educational
modules that can be used at the high-school level.