* 0423627
* The KBS LTER Project: Long-Term Ecological Research in Row-Crop Agriculture
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2004,12/31/2011
* Stuart Gage, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 12/31/2011
* USD 5,493,693.00

Initiated in 1987, the Kellogg Biological Station LTER (KBS) examines basic
ecological relationships in field crop ecosystems to better understand internal
processes controlling productivity independently of external subsidies (e.g.,
fertilizers, pesticides). The initial goal remains the same: effectively
substituting ecological knowledge and theory in the agronomic management of
cropping systems for a reliance on chemically based approaches. Research
involves synergistic activities of long-term observations of contrasting
cropping systems and successional vegetation, shorter-term field experiments,
and modeling. Hypothesis testing relates to patterns and processes underlying
ecosystem productivity and nutrient retention, including plant community
dynamics, soil microbial populations, insect consumer dynamics, watershed and
field-scale biogeochemistry, human interactions, and regional processes. KBS-4
is organized around the same initial hypothesis, albeit with a new conceptual
research model and the addition of a new focus on valuation of ecosystem
services. The model organizes ecological understanding of field crop ecosystems
into components focused on ecological structure (e.g., organisms and their
adaptations, population and community assemblages, and habitat structure) vis a
vis ecological functions (e.g., biogeochemical processes, energy capture and
flow, and hydrodynamics). Linkages between these components largely define the
mechanisms that underlie the production of ecosystem goods and services, those
products that provide the economic and social rationale for farming. Major
research topics include plant community change, microbial processes, controls of
arthropod communities, biogeochemical fluxes of solutes and trace gases, human
valuation of cropland ecosystem services, and regionalization (scaling up via
models).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. KBS is an established leader in
developing and using ecological approaches to improving our understanding of
agroecosystems. KBS research deals with food production, a topic of global
significance, and has ready practical applications to the ongoing development of
mid-western US agriculture, as well as the potential to make significant
contributions to the more general area of sustainable agriculture. Outreach and
educational activities are robust at KBS. Research findings are reaching the
media, local and regional agricultural communities, and other key citizen groups
influencing land management. KBS places a high priority on connections with
agricultural policymaking and global-change issues. Several KBS scientists have
testified to Congress on agricultural issues and strong international
connections have been forged. The site has a significant on-the-ground outreach
program offering a wide range of service and educational opportunities to the
broader community including agricultural extension services, informal education,
university coursework, research experience for undergraduate and graduate
students, and Schoolyard LTER activities for K-12 students and educators.
Contributions to the LTER network include the publication of a soils methods
synthesis book and participation in the diversity x NPP and LINX network-wide
studies. The site is close to full adoption of the Ecological Meta-Language
(EML2) format standard to ensure easy data exchange.&lt;br/&gt;