* 0423288
* U.S-Turkey Workshop on "Mechatronics, Control and Automation", Istanbul and Kusadasi, Turkey, June 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Sabri Tosunoglu, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 22,867.00

0423288&lt;br/&gt;Tosunoglu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a US-Turkey Workshop on Mechatronics, Control and Automation to be held
in conjunction with two international meetings: The IEEE International
Conference on Mechatronics (ICM'04) June 3-5, 2004, in Istanbul, Turkey, and the
12th Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED'04), June 6-9, 2004
in Kusadasi, Turkey. The Turkish organizer is Dr. Okyay Kaynak, Electrical
Engineering Department at Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey. Topics to be
covered in the first meeting include: design, modeling and simulation,
distributed systems, fault detection, vision and sensors, vibration and control,
computational intelligence, intelligent transportation systems and embedded
real-time systems. Topics to be covered in the second meeting include: adaptive
control, aerospace control, signal processing and algorithms, automotive
control, computing and communications, decentralized control, discrete event
systems, fuzzy systems, hybrid systems and neural networks. Special panels will
discuss collaboration between US and Turkish scientists. Special effort has been
made to include four Iraqi scientists in the meetings, and to discuss possible
U.S.-Iraqi and U.S.-Iraqi/Turkish collaboration in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The purpose of the conferences is to provide
an international forum for the dissemination of knowledge and experience on
research, education and training in the fields of mechatronics, control and
automation. The papers to be presented are expected to address the recent
advances and also the future perspectives as well as possible cooperation
between various individuals and institutions. The project will support the
participation of eight US scientists, including one junior scientist, and also
one US graduate student, in the workshop and in the conferences. It will also
allow for participation of four scientists from Iraq in these meetings. The
topics and development to be covered in the meetings are quite extensive and are
quite relevant in many fields of applications in industry, medicine, aviation as
well as commerce. Following the workshop, the organizers expect to provide a set
of recommendations for areas of potential cooperation among the three countries.