* 0423906
* Effects of Anthropogenic Disturbance (Trophy Hunting) on Large Carnivore Population and Community Ecology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Gary Koehler, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 08/31/2008
* USD 575,022.00

Trophy hunting of adult male cougars is widely believed to be beneficial. This
"surplus male" or "food competition" hypothesis predicts that mortality of older
males results in increased food for females, increased production and survival
of young, sustained female population growth, and decreased predation on prey -
because of reduced numbers of male predators. By contrast, the "sex competition"
hypothesis predicts that trophy hunting results in reduced food for females
because of avoidance of new immigrant males in prey-rich areas; fewer young
because of poor food or infanticide; decreased female population growth; and
increased predation - because of increased numbers of infanticidal, immigrant
males. Cougars will be captured, radio-collared, and monitored in 4 "crossover"
(hunted becomes unhunted & vice versa) study areas to test these predictions.

If the sex competition hypothesis is correct it could have important
implications for population regulation theory, wildlife management, and
conservation biology. For example: hunting of adult males could be causing 1)
increased attacks on declining mule deer, domestic animals and humans beings via
an increased number of immigrant males; and 2) a long-term decline in cougar
population viability via reduced female population growth. This project will
integrate scientific research, learning, and ecologically sustainable community
development through Project CAT - a joint research and K-12 education and
outreach program sponsored by the Cle-Elum Rosyln School District and the
Washington Dept. of Fish and Wildlife.