* 0423859
* NSF/CONACyT:  Environmental Catalytic Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Francisco Zaera, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 09/30/2007
* USD 150,462.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NSF-CONACyT
Collaborative Research on Environmental Catalysis &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0423859&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Francisco
Zaera&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of California,
Riverside&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project, involving the groups
of Professor Francisco Zaera at the Department of Chemistry of the University of
California, Riverside and of Professor Sergio Fuentes at the Centro de Ciencias
de la Materia Condensada of UNAM, Ensenada, aims to develop a better molecular-
level understanding of the nature of palladium-based catalysts for automobile
emission control, NOx reduction in particular. Urban air pollution is a severe
problem in modern societies, especially in large cities such as Los Angeles and
Mexico City, and cheaper alternatives to the current three-way catalysts are
desirable for the widespread use of catalytic cleaning of exhaust gases from
automobiles. The research effort will combine novel sol-gel catalyst preparation
methodologies developed in Ensenada with modern surface-science characterization
techniques available at Riverside to obtain structure-activity correlations on
newly designed catalytic materials. Catalysts based on palladium and supports
modified with rare-metal oxide promoters have been chosen for the initial
studies: palladium-only catalysts are already used for pollution removal in some
circumstances, but their widespread application has been hampered by problems
associated with the stability of the desirable active phases. To address this
issue, both the effect of the surface structure and oxidation state of the
palladium particles in defining catalytic activity and the role of modifiers in
stabilizing desirable active sites for NOx reduction in supported catalysts will
be studied by using model systems and a combined sol-gel synthesis/surface-
science approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main broader technological
contributions from this project will be the advancement of new experimental
approaches for the synthesis and characterization of new catalysts. Catalysis-
related experiments will also be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
level classes and laboratories. The project will strengthen the relation between
the catalytic and surface science laboratories of Riverside and Ensenada. Both
extensive exchanges of personnel and sharing of scientific equipment between the
two groups will occur. The incorporation of Mexican graduate students into the
research effort at UC Riverside will facilitate efforts in recruiting US
students from underrepresented groups, Hispanics in particular. &lt;br/&gt;