* 0423469
* Methodology for Monitoring Complex Systems Using Large Scale Sensor Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Yang Xiang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 02/28/2007
* USD 150,000.00

This grant provides funding to establish a unified framework for the management
of large-scale, embedded sensor networks for the health monitoring of
manufacturing enterprises and complex systems operating in stochastic
environments. The project will focus on fundamental research issues in the areas
of distributed inferencing and decision-making for adaptive sensing and sensor
communication. Specifically, it will address the following issues: 1)
development of a theoretical basis for managing large number of networked
sensors that collectively form an "intelligent" sensing grid, capable of making
distributed inferences with guarantees on consistency of data interpretation,
and 2) deployment of architectural configuration and parametric design of
networkable, miniaturized sensors to physically realize the proposed
"intelligent" sensing grid using a novel "agent-on-a-chip" (AOC)
firmware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
lead to improvements in two areas. First, the research will lead to a new theory
and quantitative guidelines for the architectural design and deployment of
networked sensors that are characterized by the ability to perform event-driven,
dynamic inferencing and distributed decision-making at the local sensor level.
Secondly, it will demonstrate, the feasibility of a new sensor network
architecture that will physically embody, bench test, and validate a large
number of sensors prototyped based on the state-of-the-art miniaturization
technologies. Such hardware and software will be applicable in a wide range of
application areas, including manufacturing, transportation, health care, medical
devices, environmental control, and homeland security. The broader impact of
this research will be in bridging the gap between fundamental research on
decision theory, Bayesian networks, and embedded sensing chip design in the
academia and real-world applications in a manufacturing environment. On the
educational front, the proposed activity will contribute to multidisciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students in the area of management of
large-scale sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;