* 0423123
* Collaborative Research:  A Novel Genetic Database for Testing Models of Human Origins
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Jeffrey Wall, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 03/31/2008
* USD 363,262.00

The human genome holds clues to the mystery of human origins. With the recent
completion of the first draft of the human genome sequence scientists are now in
a position to examine patterns of variation across the entire genome in multiple
human populations. Such an undertaking will facilitate an understanding of
events that took place tens of thousands of years ago, and the better design of
studies to map genes involved in human disease today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, scientists from different fields within genetics (both theoretical
and empirical population genetics) will gather new data and design novel
analytical methods to answer long-standing questions in human evolution. One
focus of this research is on the evolutionary relationships of "archaic" human
groups (such as the Neanderthals in Europe and Homo erectus in Asia) to modern
humans. Did archaic forms make any contribution to the contemporary human gene
pool, or were Neanderthals and H. erectus completely replaced (without
interbreeding) by modern humans as they expanded out of Africa within the last
100 thousand years? Did the ancestors of present day groups make the transition
to modern form in a small, isolated part of Africa, or over a broader geographic
range with genetic contributions from divergent populations. Another focus of
this research is on human population growth. Although our current population
size is more than 6 billion, the long-term average population size was probably
substantially less than 1 million. When did human populations begin to expand
dramatically in size? Was this growth associated with a particular event in
human history, such as the advent of language or the invention of
agriculture?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project seeks to address
these and related topics by building a public database of DNA sequences from
contemporary human populations, and by developing the computational tools
necessary for the analysis of the data. DNA sequences will be otabined from 90
regions of the genome in representatives of six geographically diverse
populations (e.g., three from sub-Saharan Africa and three from Eurasia), as
well as representatives of humans closest living relatives, the great apes.
Statistical and computational methods will be developed for rigorously testing
the predictions of alternative hypotheses. The results of this project will be
disseminated to a larger audience both through a public website and through an
interdisciplinary symposium on human origins that will be organized in the
fourth year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has several broader impacts.
First, it will encourage debate and interaction among researchers from genetics,
paleontology, archaeology, and historical linguistics. Second, the research will
integrate research, teaching, and community outreach. Undergraduate students,
graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows will be trained in a combination of
theoretical and experimental skills. Programs are in place at both the
University of Arizona and the University of Southern California for identifying
promising candidates from underrepresented minorities and these students will be
recruited to participate in the project. While training a new generation of
anthropological geneticists this project will facilitate novel discoveries in
human origins research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;