* 0423911
* Spin-Dependent Processes in Organic Semiconductor Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Markus Wohlgenannt, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 07/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

We propose a comprehensive experimental study of spin-dependent processes in
both organic spintronics and optoelectronic devices. The field of spintronics is
currently being developed as a new form of electronics focusing on the electron
spin with potential advantages such as nonvolatility, increased speed and
integration densities, and lower power
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Advanced spintronics
devices require the integration of spintronics and semiconductor technology.
Therefore the search for new semiconductor materials suitable for injecting and
transferring spin-polarized carriers is of paramount importance. Spin-injection
into organic semiconductors can be more efficient than into inorganic
semiconductors. In addition many organic compounds are known to have very long
spin-relaxation times for both negative and positive carriers with obvious
advantages for spintronics. One of our early goals is the demonstration of an
organic semiconductor spin-valve. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that
under operation of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) high densities of spin
singlet and triplet excitons, and spin-1/2 charge carriers are present that show
a wealth of spin-dependent recombination and quenching reactions between them.
These spin-dependent processes are not yet sufficiently understood. Spin-
dependent recombination processes determine the maximum efficiency in OLEDs,
whereas quenching processes determine the achievable brightness. We use
innovative device-spectroscopic methods to study spin-dependent recombination
and quenching processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: We propose
outreach activities designed to create interest in science amongst the youth and
minorities. The PI joins other faculty to set up a van that allows one to take
experiments "on the road".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is highly
interdisciplinary in nature and therefore ensures well-rounded training of
students for both research oriented and industry careers. An existing, modern
microfabrication facility, that is currently unused, will be revitalized and an
electron-beam lithography facility is in preparation as part of a proposed
effort.&lt;br/&gt;