* 0423637
* US-UAE Workshop: Recent Research and Education Activities in Power Electronics and Drives, Sharjah, UAE, March 2005
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Issa Batarseh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 25,500.00

0423637&lt;br/&gt;Batarseh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a US-
United Arab Emirates Workshop on Research and Education Activities in Power
Electronics and Drives, to be held at the American University of Sharjah (AUS),
in Sharjah, UAE, March 1-3, 2005. The foreign organizer is Dr. Rached Dhaouadi,
Electrical Engineering Department at A.U.S., Sharjah, UAE. The workshop will
provide an important forum to address today's need to offer effective classroom
and laboratory instructions in the power electronics and motor drive systems.
The workshop will address recent developments made in the power electronics
area, how these developments can be integrated into the electrical engineering
curriculum, detailed course offerings at both undergraduate and graduate levels,
and current industry needs for power electronics engineers. Participants will
also explore areas in which joint research projects in collaboration with
industry might be productive and complement the workshop findings. This forum
also will provide an opportunity to make use of the collective experiences of
many experts in the field and reach a consensus on global power electronics
curricula. Also addressed will be the laboratory hardware and computer
simulation support necessary for the course instruction, and the final
recommendations for laboratory course outlines, simulation tools and relevant
educational materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the recent technological
advances in the area of power electronics and concomitant increases in research
and teaching activities, many universities in the US and abroad are working hard
to develop a modern curriculum in power electronics. Several universities in
Europe and in Southeast Asia have developed new courses and laboratories in this
field, but a comprehensive global curriculum in power electronics has not been
developed. There is a clear need in the US, the UAE and other foreign countries
to have clearly-defined course contents, including laboratory work, in this
area. This workshop will help the UAE universities address this issue, and will
strengthen collaborations between US faculty and teachers and researchers in the
UAE and in the neighboring countries. It is expected that the workshop will give
the power electronics education issue the international exposure and the
attention it deserves. Two U.S. junior scientists and one graduate student will
participate in the workshop. &lt;br/&gt;