* 0423914
* NSF Center for Layered Polymeric Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2006,07/31/2018
* Anne Hiltner, Case Western Reserve University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2018
* USD 37,136,000.00

The Science and Technology Center for Layered Polymeric Systems (CliPS) aims to
create a broadly integrated program of research and education through the
vehicle of a unique microlayering and nanolayering processing technology
developed at Case Western Reserve University (Case). To create the integrated
Center, Case is partnering with the University of Texas at Austin, Fisk
University, the University of Southern Mississippi, and the Naval Research
Laboratory under the overall leadership of the Center Director, Professor Anne
Hiltner. She will be assisted by a Co-Director and a Deputy Director, an
Executive Director for Education, a Research Chair, and two Site Directors. An
external Advisory Board will be reviewing the strategic plans of the Center and
providing guidance on its integrated operations.

Intellectual Merit

The proposed Center will focus on three research platforms: 1. Unique processing
technology that enables fabrication of versatile hierarchical microlayered and
nanolayered polymer-based structures and systems. 2. Development of membrane and
barrier systems that exploit the layered hierarchy to achieve unique transport
properties. 3. Development of electro-optical devices with special properties
based on the advanced layered materials.

This work will result in radically new polymer-based systems with exceptional
capabilities to: (1) process polymers into layers no thicker than the radius of
gyration of individual polymer molecules by forced assembly; (2) combine these
polymers with organic dyes, inorganic and hybrid organic/inorganic particles,
and conductive/photoreactive materials that possess high levels of molecular
recognition; and (3) organize the aggregate materials into nanoscale multi-
layers to produce new functional devices by conventional technologies. As part
of the process of designing and producing such layered films, broad fundamental
knowledge will be generated in the areas of forced assembly of different
polymers, self-assembly of molecules possessing molecular recognition, and
properties of hybrid materials. The Center will interface with the industrial
sector through an Industrial Associates Program to translate Center technologies
into commercial applications.

Broader Impacts

The Center's approach strategically integrates polymer science and engineering
with research in nanotechnology, optics, laser physics, membranes, biomedical
engineering, device development and other scientific disciplines in a "polymers-
plus" concept. Accordingly, the multidisciplinary nature of the research program
flows naturally into graduate and undergraduate education. The partnership's
integrated educational approach mirrors the polymers-plus idea to introduce
coursework in emerging cross-disciplinary areas such as polymers-plus-
nanotechnology, polymers-plus-electro-optics, and polymers-plus-biomaterials.
The Center's research activities will be integrated into the undergraduate
curriculum through a new course concentration in "Nanoscience and Layered
Systems" at Case and the University of Texas at Austin.

A number of new initiatives designed to expand participation of women and
underrepresented minorities at all levels and to impact high-school science
education will build on foundations already in place at the participating
universities. A multi-level research and education collaboration will exploit
and further develop an existing strategic partnership between Case and Fisk
University. The "Polymer Envoys Program" will engage students from the Cleveland
Municipal School District in the exploration of polymer science and engineering
as academic pursuits and eventual careers; this program will serve as a model
for the other Partner institutions to form linkages with local public high
schools.

Recognizing that personal contacts are an important influence in the career
choice of college graduates, Case has established affiliations with 5 non PhD-
granting schools that offer strong undergraduate science and engineering
programs to stimulate enrollment of American students in the Center's graduate
programs. Three modular "foundation" courses in polymer science will be
developed in collaboration with the Partner institutions and the Affiliate
schools to introduce the basics to all students in the Center and prepare them
for participation in the research activities. Mentoring at all levels is another
important component of the Center. While students and their faculty mentors will
have unique opportunities to pursue research paths, more advanced students will
also have mentoring opportunities in their work with younger students.
Therefore, the Center will consist of interlocking mentor-student relationships
that are designed to achieve its long-term goal of nurturing creative scientists
and engineers. Implementation of the integrated educational initiatives will be
evaluated against an established timetable. The Center will be instrumental in
developing the concept of "polymers plus" at the crossroads of science and
engineering. It will foster linkages between academia and industry, and
accelerate the development of new product initiatives. In some instances, these
linkages will stimulate innovative entrepreneurial ventures and small
businesses. The Center endeavors to become the definitive contact point
internationally for research and education in layered polymeric systems.
Knowledge-transfer vehicles including an interactive website, streaming
technology and Internet Protocol television are designed to share information
among internal and external constituencies at the local, state and national
levels.