* 0423327
* Quickest Detection of the Poisson Disorder
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Savas Dayanik, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 07/31/2006
* USD 60,307.00

In the simplest version of the Poisson disorder problem, the rate of a Poisson
process changes at an unknown and unobservable time from one known constant to
another, and the question is how to design a procedure that quickly detects the
change-time. In this project, several new related problems, aligned more closely
with real-life applications, are proposed: (1) Poisson disorder problems with
intermediary inspections, (2) Poisson disorder problems with unknown post-
disorder rate, and (3) quickest detection of the Poisson disorder given a fixed
false-alarm rate. Other project goals are (4) to give a unified treatment of
standard Poisson disorder problems, and (5) to develop computationally efficient
and stable methods, still unavailable today, to calculate the parameters of
quickest detection procedures. Solvable versions of the Poisson disorder
problems typically reduce to an optimal stopping problem for a suitable jump
process. However, most of the existing literature attacks the latter problem by
using the general theory of optimal stopping for the processes with continuous
sample-paths. This research recognizes the necessity of the special optimization
methods for the jump processes. Particularly, sample-path techniques will be
employed to meet the aforementioned project goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Poisson disorder problems manifest themselves naturally, for example, in the
effective control and prevention of infectious diseases, quickest detection of
quality and reliability problems in industrial processes, and surveillance of
internet traffic to protect the network servers from "denial-of-service"
attacks. This work is expected to produce new online quickest detection
procedures that will enhance the efforts to maintain the welfare and the
security of the nation. After remained open for nearly thirty years, Poisson
disorder problems have recently started to receive satisfactory solutions.
Hopefully, the direct approach of this project will continue to bring better
insights into these problems, and in general, into the optimization problems for
jump processes, lower the barriers to entry to these research areas and add to
their momentums.