* 0423405
* Hormones, Status, and the Relationship between Social Behaviors and Intellectual Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert Josephs, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2007
* USD 98,713.00

Testosterone and cortisol are some of the most intensively studied biological
substances, yet our understanding of their behavioral effects in human beings is
surprisingly limited. In many species, variations in hormone levels are powerful
predictors of a wide variety of behaviors, and human beings should be no
exception. The proposed research is designed to test a critically important idea
underlying hormones and behavior -- that individuals high in testosterone
possess a need or desire to maintain high status. &lt;br/&gt;The core of this
proposal seeks to test the hypothesis that differential testosterone levels,
whether chronic or the result of transient changes, bear a functional
relationship to status-seeking behavior. The initial experimental proposition
put forth in this application is straightforward. After a competitive
interaction, individuals either lose status or gain status. Then, they are given
the option to attempt to regain their lost status or defend their high status.
The primary prediction associated with this experiment is that individual
differences in testosterone will predict a person's intention to pursue further
competition. Change in cortisol level, a reliable measure of the stress
response, is predicted to influence behavioral intention as well, but only among
individuals with high levels of testosterone, who presumably possess strong
status-seeking motives. An implicit measure of unconscious status seeking and
power, the Picture Story Exercise will also be administered as a means of
validating the hormonal measures. Further confirmation and validation of these
measures will be assessed through cognitive activation of status needs using a
modification of the Stroop color-naming procedure.&lt;br/&gt;This research also
has the potential to move experimental social psychology and the study of
biological basis of social behavior forward through the innovative synthesis of
these areas. Furthermore, this work will provide the theoretical foundation for
future research that addresses the chronic problem of representation, retention,
and achievement of talented individuals from underrepresented groups who may
have status concerns. This enhanced understanding could inform strategies to
increase the participation of women and minorities in science, engineering, and
math. &lt;br/&gt;