* 0423031
* CRCNS: Representation and Computation in Natural Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* David Sheinberg, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,479,280.00

Representation and Computation in Natural Vision

In natural environments, objects are viewed under a wide variety of lighting
conditions, poses, backgrounds, and juxtapositions with other objects.
Artificial vision systems that are sufficiently invariant to accommodate such
variations are never sufficiently selective. The rich structure of real images
offers a multitude of chance arrangements, many of which cause systems to
falsely detect an object that is not there. On the other hand, systems that are
highly selective are at the same time highly prone to missed detections in the
face of natural variability. The visual systems of humans and animals, in
contrast, are able to see accurately under a wide range of viewing conditions--
how is it that biological systems are both selective and invariant?

The pursuit of this question leads to an analogous question about complex cells
and other invariant cell types that are ubiquitous in the ventral visual
pathway. Their strength would appear to be their weakness: How is it possible
for the visual system to build selectivity out of invariance? Models of complex
cells suggest an explanation. Complex and other invariant cell types, by virtue
of their nonlinear response characteristics, necessarily possess a functional
connectivity whereby these cells become functionally connected to a generally
small subset of their inputs. This commitment is circumstantial, inasmuch as it
depends on the particular pattern in the receptive field. Functional
connectivity is a demonstrable mathematical property of virtually all of the
non-linear models put forward to date for complex-cell receptive-field
properties. What is more, these observations lead to the conclusion that pairs
of such cells that possess overlapping receptive fields will demonstrate a
functional common input. This too is circumstantial, and in fact functional
common input is high exactly when the patterns in the respective receptive
fields "fit together"---correspond to pieces of a larger whole.

These observations suggest a solution to the dilemma of invariance versus
selectivity: pieces that fit properly together generate a high degree of
functional common input, which manifests itself by a statistical dependence
between otherwise invariant representations, most likely in the form of partial
synchrony, thereby signaling a composition of parts to cells deeper in the
visual pathway.

In search of experimental confirmation of this proposed answer to the
selectivity/invariance dilemma, the investigators employ new statistical and
methodological techniques to study new questions about the receptive-field
properties of invariant cells, and to measure new variables in the joint
statistics of invariant cells with overlapping receptive fields.