* 0423947
* Resistance and Restoration: A History of Ecological Restoration in the US and Canada
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2007
* George Lubick, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 06/30/2007
* USD 80,000.00

Ignored for most of the past century, ecological restoration has developed
rapidly during the past two decades. It is now widely understood to have a
crucial role to play in the conservation of natural landscapes in settings
ranging from urban parks to large wilderness areas such as national forests and
parks. At the same time, it is gaining recognition as the basis for a new
environmental paradigm with profound implications for conservation and the
quality of life. At this point, however, there has been little research on the
history of restoration, and no systematic exploration of the development of
restoration during the period of its recent, and most dramatic development and
acceptance as a conservation strategy. The purpose of this study is to provide
an overview of the development of restoration, providing an account of these
recent developments and placing them in the context of earlier developments and
the history of restorative forms of land management generally. Since the topic
is a wide one, the study will concentrate on the development of restoration in
the narrow sense of an attempt to restore all the attributes of an historic
ecosystem or landscape, regardless of their interest or value to humans. This
form, or mode of restoration--what Jordan and Hall have termed holistic
restoration--is of particular intellectual merit because it provides a
conceptual core or reference point for the evaluation of other, restorative
forms of land management, and because emphasis on restoration in this form has
been the distinguishing feature of the restoration movement of the past few
decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is also intellectually significant
because a distinctive feature is its emphasis on the discovery of restoration as
a context for the creation of value, including its value for the environment and
its value as a research technique, of course, but also its value as a way of
creating and transmitting transcendent values such as community, meaning and
sense of place. An important aspect of the history of restoration was the
considerable interval--roughly a half- century--between its "invention" early in
the twentieth century and the discovery and self-conscious realization of its
value during the closing decades of the century. This study will explore the
ways in which the interacting and sometimes competing interests and perspectives
of four subcultures--researchers, practitioners, decision makers and advocates
for the environment--influenced the development and discovery of restoration.
Since it is clear that practitioners played an important role in this process,
and also that their contribution is seriously under-represented in peer-reviewed
literature, the study will rely heavily on interviews to document developments
of the past few decades. The study will help fill an increasingly obvious gap in
existing accounts and current understanding of environmental history, providing
the first systematic account of crucial recent development in this important
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impacts of this study are broad, for it will
provide an expansive historical perspective on restoration at a critical time in
its development as a discipline. It will help clarify thinking about the
identity and value of restoration and about its relationship with other forms of
land management. It will also provide a basis and historical context for closer
and more productive relationships among the interest groups involved in its
ongoing development. &lt;br/&gt;