* 0423891
* RR:MACNet: Mobile Ad-hoc Camera Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* R. Vijay Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2006
* USD 198,560.00

This project, developing an experimental testbed to work on different aspects of
control and sensing for mobile networks of cameras and microphones, envisions a
system of cameras, MACNet, moving in three dimensions enabling a Mobile Ad Hoc
Camera Network. The development of this testbed provides the experimental
infrastructure for the following interdisciplinary projects:&lt;br/&gt;
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Assessment for Geriatric Health Care,&lt;br/&gt;
Assistive Technology for People with Disabilities,&lt;br/&gt; Digital
Anthropology, and&lt;br/&gt; Visual Servoing for Coordinating Aerial and Ground
Robots.&lt;br/&gt;MACNet cameras will be used to track patients and salient
dynamic features for the 1st project. MACNet will simulate intelligent homes and
museums with active cameras providing feedback to smart wheelchairs and
providing information about target areas in the 2nd Project. MACNet will allow
datasets of video to be acquired and analyzed for three-dimensional
reconstruction and archiving in the 3rdProject; and for the last project, MACNet
will provide dynamic platforms with cameras which will simulate aerial vehicles
to track, localize, and coordinate with existing ground based autonomous
vehicles with applications to surveillance and monitoring for homeland security.
Finally, MACNet will be used as a testbed for research on distributed active
vision, a theme that will bring together all
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The results will be directly
applicable to a large class of problems in which communication, control, and
sensing are coupled, with applications in smart homes, communities for assistive
living, and surveillance and monitoring of homeland security. This cross-
fertilization will contribute to train students with broader perspectives and
potential new approaches to problem solving. The lab will be used by students
and the institutions will leverage existing outreach programs in which both
faculty and students participate, such as Robotics for Girls and
PRIME.&lt;br/&gt;