* 0423442
* LTER:  Alaska's Changing Boreal Forest: Resilience and Vulnerability
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Roger Ruess, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Russell
* 11/30/2007
* USD 1,748,366.00

The Bonanza Creek LTER (BNZ) focuses on improving our understanding of the long-
term consequences of changing climate and disturbance regimes in the Alaskan
boreal forest by examining the underlying mechanisms that drive ecosystem
resilience and vulnerability toward change. The overall objective is to document
the major controls over forest dynamics, biogeochemistry and disturbance and
their interactions in the face of a changing climate. Research seeks to identify
factors that buffer systems from radical changes in structure and functioning
(resilience) vs. factors that might precipitate changes to alternative states
(vulnerability), and is organized into three themes: forest dynamics,
biogeochemistry and landscape dynamics. In this funding cycle, BNZ research will
make a more direct connection to long-term monitoring data and the PIs have
added several new program elements. The research design combines long-term
observations and experiments with process studies to identify ecological changes
and document controls over ecosystem processes in two types of successional
sequences, floodplain primary succession and upland post-fire secondary
succession, over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. Hypotheses about
controls over ecosystem dynamics are tested by manipulating selected interactive
controls extended to larger spatial scales in a hierarchical research design,
using extensive measurements, remote sensing, and modeling over a broad spectrum
of temporal scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. BNZ research has
broad societal implications through the understanding of impacts of climate
change, disturbance, human activities and exotic species on boreal forest
ecosystem services such as climate regulation, recreation, aesthetics and forest
resource availability. BNZ outreach and educational components are generally
very strong and effective and have numerous connections to state and federal
resource management agencies. The BNZ Schoolyard LTER program has been very
successful and has partnered with two other science education programs to train
science teachers in 38 Alaskan towns. This has involved engaging largely under-
represented students who have initiated their own long-term ecological research
projects and developed their own web sites. A very creative phenology unit was
developed that involves K-12 students in ground validation measurements of
remotely sensed data, a first such opportunity for many children in rural
Alaskan communities. This activity has now been incorporated into the GLOBE
Teachers Guide and is used internationally. BNZ research provides training for
undergraduate and graduate students and is connected with an innovative and
exciting IGERT project. BNZ public outreach to the general public is via diverse
media publicity, with participants working closely with local and regional
groups concerned with sustainable forestry and Native Alaskans. The BNZ site and
associated researchers have an excellent track record of research and
publications with data made available and useful to a broader community through
information management emphasizing secure archival of collected data, promotion
of its use in synthesis, and development of web-based databases to facilitate
its use by the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;