* 0423612
* Dissertation Research:  Looking for a Few Good Males: Female Choice in Evolutionary Biology, 1900-1975
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Gregg Mitman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

This Science and Technology Studies Doctoral Improvement Grant investigates how
the choice of research organisms, experimental practices, and theoretical
approaches across disciplines of biology shaped the values and meanings ascribed
to female choice. The resulting narrative offers a window into the different but
overlapping material and theoretical cultures of evolutionary biology in the
twentieth century. The history of female choice in the published literature has
been restricted to field-based narratives of the history of sexual selection.
According to these narratives, sexual selection enjoyed a brief period of
popularity in the late nineteenth-century (mostly among the general public), and
then disappeared until the 1970s, when it was rediscovered. The cause of this
"eclipse" is laid at the feet of female choice; anthropomorphic notions of
choice inhibited the widespread acceptance of sexual selection until the late
1960s, commensurate with the rise of second-wave feminism and increasing
acceptance of the idea that a female could actively "choose." However, the
history of female choice in the decades preceding 1970 is far more complex than
the eclipse narrative implies. This history is not found in the field studies of
sexual difference emphasized by the standard narrative of sexual selection, but
in experimental laboratories investigating mate-choice behavior. The tendency of
historians and biologists to distinguish so strongly between the laboratory and
the field, combined with the focus on field-based investigations in the history
of sexual selection, has obscured the breadth of interest in female choice
across biological disciplines and the nodes of communication and contestation
among them. Despite differences in approach to female choice, a traffic of ideas
and practices did exist across the fields of population genetics, ethology, and
organismal-based sciences like ichthyology and ornithology. In the United
States, Theodosius Dobzhansky provided one focal point for these interactions,
and in Britain, Nikolaas Tinbergen provided another. Ichthyologists and
drosophilists were involved in separate international communities, both of which
included communication across disciplinary boundaries. Additionally,
disciplinary divisions in different countries between biologists interested in
animal behavior and population genetics varied considerably. By asking what
"female choice meant to different research programs, this dissertation will
bring these important points of communication and contestation into full view,
illuminating the unities and disunities of biology in the twentieth century
across organismal divides, disciplinary rifts, and vast oceans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;