* 0423419
* Dry Cutting - New Coating Concepts for 2010
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Laurence Marks, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 08/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

This grant provides funding for development of a concept to improve dry metal
cutting by utilizing naturally occurring oxides at the cutting tool-work piece
interface to reduce friction and heat due to the cutting process, thereby
reducing the need for coolant and lubricant fluids. The natural reaction product
of the cutting-tool/work-piece interaction is one or more metal oxide. It is
logical to work with, rather than against nature by designing a tool coating
that produces its own lubricious oxide when the tool tip reaches a certain
temperature. Coating compositions and structures have been proposed and these
will be explored by unbalanced magnetron reactive sputter deposition. Nano-layer
and dispersed-phase structures will be investigated with the idea of retaining
high temperature strength, while controlling the rate of lubricious oxide
formation. Compositions will be chosen that produce oxides at appropriate
temperatures and that provide the inherent strength required for the cutting
function. The structures and compositions will be fully characterized and
correlation with performance will be made using instrumented cutting tests that
provide information on cutting temperature, force, and work-piece surface
finish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If this project is successful, it will provide the
foundation for the development of a new strategy in the design of dry-cutting
tool coatings. It will provide insights to the development of successful
processing techniques for the creation of the desired coating structures and for
the incorporation of the desired oxide forming elements. It will provide
fundamental data about the control of oxide formation and the behavior of such
oxides as they impact cutting behavior. In practice, successful outcomes will
contribute to a reduction in the use of cooling and lubricant fluids, which will
favorably impact manufacturing costs and environmental quality in the work
place. &lt;br/&gt;