* 0423476
* LTER:  Human Settlements as Ecosystems: Metropolitan Baltimore from 1797 - 2100: PHASE II
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2005,10/31/2011
* Steward Pickett, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 10/31/2011
* USD 5,453,628.00

The Baltimore Ecosystem Study (BES) was initiated as an LTER project in 1997,
designed to understand the controls on urban system structure and function, and
how structure and function of the urban ecosystem affect one another. The
proposed research will expand the first phase BES work by addressing three
fundamental questions: 1) How do the spatial structures of socio-economic,
ecological and physical features of an urban area relate to one another and how
do they change through time? 2) What are the fluxes of energy, matter, capital
and population in the BES system, how do these fluxes relate to one another and
how do they change over the long term? 3) How can people develop and use an
understanding of the metropolis as an ecological system to improve the quality
of their environment and to reduce pollution to downstream air and watersheds?
Conceptual frameworks motivating these questions include ecological, hydrologic
and social patch dynamics, the human ecosystem framework and the role of exotics
in community organization, as well as theories in socio-spatial relationships,
resilience, biocomplexity and urban design. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Contributions. The proposed research builds on data sets ranging from
&lt;br/&gt;paleoecological, through historic time frames, to simulation of
future scenarios. Highlights of proposed new research include: 1) using a $1
billion Baltimore City program to improve sanitary sewer infrastructure as an
experimental manipulation, 2) an integrated physical, biological and social
analysis of an urban watershed restoration (Watershed 263) project funded by
over $1 million in U.S. Forest Service and other sources, 3) continued
development of the first urban micrometeorological flux tower for analysis of
carbon and water fluxes, and 4) continued development of ideas about the ecology
of prestige, where lifestyle groups rather than more traditional metrics such as
race, income and education are used to explain variation in urban ecosystem
structure and function. Integration of these efforts will be facilitated by
continued development and use of a new, high-resolution urban land cover
classification system (HERCULES), and by a series of models that operate at
different scales for different questions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. BES research will exploit new, management-relevant environmental
interventions, such as the Watershed 263 restoration initiative to explore the
role of urban reforestation on stormwater management. Evaluation of improvements
to Baltimore City's sewer infrastructure will yield results broadly useful to
managers and policy makers and to educators and community groups in the affected
water- and sewer-sheds. Modeling of ecosystem services will be a hallmark of the
new research, providing information useful and interesting to citizens and
decision leaders. New BES education and outreach initiatives will include
analyses of how formal and informal approaches to education facilitate the
ability of people to think about the city as an ecosystem and development of new
modules for the Urban Forest Effects (UFORE) model to evaluate the health of
urban forests and their effects on energy use and water and air pollution.
Education activities will build on successful curriculum development, teacher
workshops and interactions with K-12 students, with special attention on
reaching under-represented groups. Training outside the classroom will include
summer internships and after school programs at community centers and city
environmental centers, again including under-represented groups. Novel graduate
training will focus on a new collaboration in urban design. Multi-city
information transfer will be achieved through cross-site LTER site projects and
through an Urban Ecology Collaborative. &lt;br/&gt;