* 0423075
* Collaborative Research: Landscape, Image, and Language Among Some Indigenous People of the American Southwest and Northwest Australia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* David Mark, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2008
* USD 124,996.00

Scholars from a range of disciplines long have sought to understand
relationships between visual representations and linguistic categories of
landscape elements. One line of inquiry has sought to address the question: Do
speakers of different languages think in different concepts, or is thinking more
nearly universal and language more superficial? This collaborative research
project will investigate how people conceptualize the natural landscape and how
they relate to it. The project will investigate landscape terminology used by
some indigenous communities living in arid landscapes. Language will be a major
focus of the research. The project will study both the generic terms that the
people use to refer to elements of the landscape and also the ways that the
people describe the landscape in their traditional narratives. The research will
examine how members of three cultural and linguistic groups subdivide, classify,
and talk about their landscapes. The three groups are the Navajo (Dine) of
northern Arizona and New Mexico, the Hopi of northern Arizona, and the
Yindjibarndi of the northwestern part of Western Australia. Project researchers
will conduct in-depth interviews with expert consultants within the three
communities regarding the vocabulary for referring to landforms, water bodies,
and other geographic features. Researchers will express the definitions within a
formal ontology of the landscape and will confirm the definitions and term lists
by compiling pictorial dictionaries. The researchers and consultants also will
recruit young members of these indigenous communities to take photographs of
significant aspects of the landscape, discuss the content of these photographs
with elders, and report results. Photographs of these landscapes also will be
shown to English-speaking undergraduate subjects to provide baseline
interpretations for English language terminology.

The project will investigate the degree to which the apparent structure of the
landscape depends upon the raw facts of physical reality, how much of the
structure arises due to the nature of human perception and other aspects of
cognition, and how much of the structure is determined by culture, language, and
lifestyle. These are fundamental issues in the behavioral and cognitive sciences
for all knowledge domains, yet they hardly have been address with respect to the
landscape. The research seeks to understand the close yet different
interconnections among culture, history, spirituality, and landscape for each of
the cultural groups. One goal of the research is to characterize these peoples'
landscape categories and terminology with sufficient precision and rigor to
allow geographic information systems (GIS) to detect, manipulate, and reason
about the categories and the entities belonging to them. Some of the tribes,
including the Navajo and Hopi, currently are using commercial GIS to manage
tribal lands, but it appears that the software cannot readily incorporate
traditional knowledge and integrate such knowledge with technoscience data from
government sources. Lessons learned in this project will guide future work on
cross-cultural interoperability of geographic information systems and will
contribute to the design of databases and GISs that can be used by speakers of
different natural languages both within their communities and for joint
management of lands and landscapes. Pictorial dictionaries of landscape
terminology also will provide the tribes and cultures in question with material
that may contribute to cultural preservation through use in the schools and
other outlets.