* 0423400
* Examining Representations of Nanoscale Science and Technology in Written Public Media
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Brenton Faber, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 12/31/2006
* USD 33,021.00

This proposal requests support for 4 undergraduate research assistantships over
a 2 year period to study the representations of nanoscale science and technology
in 22 North American newspapers and 7 news magazines between 1886 and 2006. As
nanoscience gains legitimacy and prominence in academic research, and as
nanotechnology emerges in various commercial applications, the field has gained
considerable public attention. However, little effort has been made to report
back to natural scientists, social scientists, advocacy groups, and the science
reporting community the specific ways nanoscience has been constructed in
leading print media. With such data in hand, social scientists and natural
scientists can better contribute to agenda setting, policy making, and normative
and ethical judgments about the social impacts of nanoscale science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chosen time frame will capture the early
emergence of nanoscience in public texts and will record and assess the
formation of the field in written public media. Working from Systemic Functional
Linguistic theory, the study will construct narratives of written documents by
using the variables of theme, topic, text-frame and representation. Educational
tasks include mentoring 4 under-represented, at-risk undergraduate students,
science writing modules for high school English and university-level writing
courses, and an on-line database created to disseminate study
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study's findings will contribute to our growing
understanding of nanoscience as a field and its emerging place in American
society. Products from this study will include publications in academic and
popular contexts, conference papers at local and national scientific meetings,
and an on-line, freely accessible database. Research findings will be key for
scientists, funding agencies, and interest/advocacy groups who currently have to
way to fully understand how nanoscale work is being represented in written
media. &lt;br/&gt;