* 0423984
* Late Paleozoic Stratigraphy and Intraplate Tectonics of the Greater Ancestral Rocky Mountains
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Gerilyn Soreghan, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2006
* USD 35,550.00

Late Paleozoic Stratigraphy and Intraplate Tectonics of the Greater Ancestral
Rocky Mountains

Charles Kluth and Gerilyn Soreghan EAR-0423984

ABSTRACT

The late Paleozoic record of the Greater Ancestral Rocky Mountains (GARM) is an
unparalleled natural laboratory for undertaking an integrated, holistic study of
various components of the Earth System-including the lithosphere (tectonics),
atmosphere (climate), hydrosphere (eustasy) and biosphere, and links among these
systems. Unlike most regions of the world, the GARM is easily accessible, and
fully endowed with a rich and well-constrained geological dataset; accordingly
the fundamentals of its geology are well known in the form of a large database
that includes a detailed published literature and maps, and huge volumes of
industry (well and seismic) data. Furthermore, its geological history is a
complex meld of an enigmatic tectonic event that occurred during the last pre-
Quaternary icehouse; consequently, the stratigraphic record here preserves key
information on the character of (1) intraplate tectonics, including the possible
role of structural inheritance as well as the legacy of later Laramide events;
(2) climate transitions of both high- and low-frequencies (e.g. greenhouse-
icehouse-greenhouse, glacial-interglacial, zonal-monsoonal); (3) eustatic
variations in an icehouse world; (4) the interactions between tectonics and
climate (e.g. through topography), tectonics and eustasy, eustasy and climate,
and impacts/links to the biosphere (e.g. evolution-extinction events, etc). The
research initiative that will be discussed at this workshop will involve and
impact numerous professionals and students. The expected result from this
workshop is a position paper for support of integrated, multidisciplinary
studies of various "geosystems" aspects of this natural laboratory known as the
Greater Ancestral Rocky Mountains.

