* 0423259
* Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) at Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest (HBR-LTER)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2011
* Timothy Fahey, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 12/31/2011
* USD 5,373,858.00

With its half-century history of ecological research, the Hubbard Brook (HBR)
site has evolved into a model LTER gathering unique and extremely valuable
records of long-term biogeochemical cycling in forested watershed ecosystems.
The overarching goal of HBR is to increase understanding of the ecological
patterns and processes that characterize forested landscapes in the northeastern
USA, particularly in response to disturbances. Three types of disturbances are
examined: 1) air pollution, 2) catastrophic events (e.g., clear-cutting) and 3)
non-catastrophic events (e.g., soil freezing events, ice storms and insect
outbreaks). Biogeochemical studies build on a 40-year record of element fluxes
and vegetation dynamics in experimental watersheds, focused on construction of
quantitative nutrient cycles. Long-term measurements, experiments and process
studies are conducted at a variety of scales, ranging from small plots to entire
watersheds and forests. Long-term experiments include a whole-watershed calcium
fertilization study designed to offset soil Ca losses due to acidic deposition
and to track calcium fluxes and cycling throughout the watershed, with
particular emphasis on effects on currently declining sugar maple populations.
Such experiments and ongoing process studies are to be coupled with new
initiatives examining the effects of compounded disturbances on ecosystem
structure and function, elemental stoichiometry and hystereses, all in the
context of landscape-level variation in ecological state factors. New studies
include 1) plot-level fertilization of young and mature forest with nitrogen,
phosphorus and calcium, 2) intensive and extensive study of beech bark disease
across multiple trophic levels, and 3) detailed study of nitrogen and carbon
dynamics in relation to sugar maple decline, forest nutrition and productivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. HBR research is crucially linked with the
important societal issues of air pollution and the effects of atmospheric
deposition on ecosystem processes. Key HBR scientists are active in regional and
national outreach regarding air pollution, acid deposition and their ecological
consequences. This outreach is expanded with HBR's generation of newsworthy
scientific findings and the production of popularly accessible products. HBR is
among the most productive LTER sites in terms of publications in high impact
journals, influential synthesis products and theses/dissertations. The new
conceptual framework is intended to guide HBR in the future and is likely to
influence other LTER research as well. Research at this site has trained more
than two generations of prominent ecosystem scientists and will continue this
with the training of a high number of new undergraduates, graduate students and
postdocs. HBR is actively increasing diversity and the participation of women in
science, from the student level to the faculty level. Additional outreach
includes the Schoolyard LTER program, public ecological tours and the innovative
Science Links feature.&lt;br/&gt;