* 0423877
* Unsteady  Wave-Driven Circulation Cells Relevant to Rip Tides and Coastal Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Andrew Kennedy, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 04/30/2009
* USD 195,619.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0423877&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: ANDREW B.
KENNEDY&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: UNIVERSITY OF
FLORIDA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNSTEADY WAVE-DRIVEN CIRCULATION CELLS RELEVANT TO
RIP TIDES AND COASTAL ENGINEERING &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to study
wave forcing and fluctuations in irrotational and rotational wave-driven near-
shore flows. The approach is primarily theoretical and numerical, but will make
use of existing laboratory and field results. Field and laboratory observations
have recorded significant unsteadiness in wave-driven near-shore flows with time
scales much larger than a typical wave period, such a those occurring with rip
tides. These fluctuations are known to be driven by some combination of
unsteadiness in incident wave forcing and free instabilities of the mean flow
but the relative importance of free and forced motions remains unknown. Even the
relative importance of forced rotational versus irrotational fluctuations is
wholly unknown. Three major tasks are stated for the study: Analytical study of
wave-forced forced irrotational and rotational fluctuations; Numerical study of
free and forced hydrodynamic unsteadiness in the near-shore; and Analytical
study of circulation cell stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the
technical proposal include understanding of near shore phenomena that lead to
rip currents, which kill people every year. Besides drowning due to rip
currents, understanding how flows near beaches/the shore work is important in a
variety of contexts, namely beach erosion (a large sub-field of coastal
engineering), transport of larval organisms (many implications for recreational
and commercial fishing), and wave-driven circulation over coral reefs. Strictly
focusing on beaches, there is the issue of transport of contaminants like fecal
indicator bacteria that can lead to beach closures costing hundreds of millions
of dollars or more every year in the US. The societal broader impacts of the
proposal include wide dissemination of the results to the community and
educational components, which include training of graduate students and
integration of the research results into courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant co-funded by the Office of Naval
Research, Coastal Geosciences Program, Code 321CG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;