* 0423985
* Towards an Evaluative Framework: International Cooperation Between Innovative Doctoral Programs in Germany and the United States (Graduiertenkollegs and IGERT Programs)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Maresi Nerad, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 138,605.00

A general assumption exists among funding agencies, faculty, and universities
that international exchanges or collaborations are valuable and should be
encouraged. However, at the doctoral level, nowhere are the reasons for
international collaboration made explicit. The educational and pedagogical goals
and the anticipated outcomes are not identified in detail. Moreover,
international collaboration is costly in terms of time and money. Is it worth
the effort? This proposed research seeks to answer that
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years innovative doctoral programs such
as the NSF's Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT)
program and the German Research Foundation (DFG) Graduiertenkolleg (Research
Training Groups, hereafter abbreviated as GK) program have sought to generate a
new breed of scientists. However, there are no clearly defined criteria for
success of international collaboration in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields at the graduate level. A means of evaluation is needed
by organizations such as NSF and DFG. The purpose of this study is two fold: (1)
to develop an evaluation design that identifies, analyzes, and assesses the
international component of innovative doctoral education programs in the US and
Germany; and (2) to undertake a formative evaluation of the past and upcoming
year of two pairs of doctoral programs that are presently collaborating with
each other in these countries. This study is unique because it emphasizes the
international collaboration component of novel doctoral programs, rather
interdisciplinarity itself. However, its findings will be valuable to the
ongoing research on interdisciplinarity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study
seeks funding for the first phase of a five-year research project that involves
two US IGERT and two German GK programs. The outcomes of the proposed study
(Phase 1) will be: &lt;br/&gt;Evaluation model for assessing international
component of innovative doctoral programs&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation tools (i.e.,
survey instrument, interview protocols, focus group protocols, etc.) to be used
and tested during phases 2 and 3&lt;br/&gt;Assessment of international
collaboration activities (i.e., joint international workshops, international
research visits, and lectures) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;Funding organizations, administrators, faculty, and students need a
means to evaluate the success of international collaborations at the doctoral
level. In order to establish valid criteria for success we need to collect data
on explicit expectations for these collaborations as well as on the successful
collaborative activities and processes. From the collected data and information
criteria for success will be extracted in a deductive manner. The intellectual
merit of this proposal is the development and testing of these criteria. In
addition, this study provides an ongoing evaluation that will enable direct
feedback both to doctoral students as they enter scientific work in a world
where global thinking and global contacts are increasingly important, and to
faculty as they try to develop dynamic international collaborations that aides
their research and their teaching.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The need
to move doctoral education in the direction of greater international
collaboration is generated by increasing globalization. Globalization will
continue to have significant impacts on doctoral education as students continue
to cross national borders to gain research skills and establish international
research agendas for their careers. More and more doctoral programs (beyond the
NSF IGERT and German GK programs) will need to evaluate their international
programs to determine whether they measure up to the new challenges that come
with globalization. They will need a means to measure success.