* 0423475
* Probing Mechanisms of Cell Motility in Electric Fields
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Jeannette Bulinski, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 07/31/2007
* USD 481,553.00

This project will probe mechanisms by which cells move in electric fields.
Epithelial cells are known to generate electric fields, and cells such as
fibroblasts, have been shown to respond to electric fields by moving towards the
cathode. This project investigates how electric fields cause cells to migrate in
a specific direction. Experiments will use the fibroblast as a model system to
test the membrane electrophoresis hypothesis that cell proteins move within
their surface membrane to polarize on one side, inducing cells to move towards
the cathode. To test this hypothesis, fibroblasts will be manipulated with
enzymes and very mild chemical reactions to change the charge of proteins on
their surface. If the hypothesis is correct, altering the charge of surface
proteins will alter the speed, directionality, and appearance of migrating
cells. To test further whether redistribution of surface charge is necessary
and/or sufficient to induce cell migration in an electric field, candidate
molecules that might be expected to polarize towards the cathode and enhance
motility will be assayed, and the quantity of plus or minus surface charge,
known as zeta potential, will be measured. Electric field-migration will be used
as a system to find features common to all types of cell migration. The
investigators will focus on the role of microtubules and focal adhesions. These
experiments will utilize microscopic imaging of living, migrating cells that
contain fluorescent microtubules or adhesion components. Various perturbations
to the stability or chemical composition of the microtubules and adhesions will
be used to test the focal adhesion turnover hypothesis, which posits that
unstable (dynamic) microtubules contact focal adhesions, become stabilized
there, and then act as specialized transport tracks for factors that make the
adhesions less stable, as needed for the next step in cell crawling. Building
upon the multidisciplinary expertise of a cell biologist and a biomedical
engineer, this project will further the goals of improving biological
understanding of cell migration, a fundamental cellular process. This project
will provide research training for post-doctoral associates, graduate students,
and undergraduates.