* 0423794
* Collaborative Research:  Contacting and Solidification in Casting-by-Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Brian Thomas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 09/30/2007
* USD 142,000.00

The objective of this collaborative research is a scientific understanding
sufficient to enable casting of metallic sheets, ribbon or foil, of commercially
acceptable quality, directly from the molten metal state. The idea is to
solidify raw material directly into final product, without downstream processing
steps. The casting method forces molten metal into contact with a spinning cold
wheel where the metal freezes and is spun off. The approach is to favorably
influence the product quality by printing patterns on the wheel just before and
removing them just after the region where contact and solidification occur. This
is the 'Casting-by-Design' innovation. The scientific approach uses the tools of
experimental testing and computational and mathematical modeling to achieve the
desired understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As compared to current practice in
the United States, there would be direct energy savings for single-step casting.
Indirect benefits include the reduction of greenhouse gases, particularly,
carbon dioxide. In addition, capital costs for manufacturing would be reduced
and productivity would be increased. As China and India further industrialize
and the demand for flat aluminum and steel products grows, these benefits to
society will multiply. A further benefit to society will be through education.
Undergraduates and graduates will be involved in this research as a problem-
solving team, with outreach to local school systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative effort is co-sponsored by the Materials Processing and
Manufacturing Program within the Division of Design, Manufacture and Industrial
Innovation and the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program within the
Division of the Chemical and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;