* 0423546
* RR:Collaborative Research Resources:  Learning from Human Hands to Control Dexterous Robot Hands
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Nancy Pollard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 206,249.00

This project, investigating human grasping and manipulation strategies to gain
insight into synergies employed by human subjects in grasping and manipulation
tasks, aims to explore how best to use these findings to create better control
algorithms for robot hands. Of particular importance are techniques to make
autonomous robot behavior robust to uncertainties and to make algorithms with a
human in the loop, such as teleoperation and control of prosthetic devices, more
intuitive and effective for fine manipulation tasks. Although a high degree of
freedom (DOF) device may be required to manipulate a wide variety of objects and
perform a wide variety of tasks, in any given task situation, only a small
number of independently controlled DOF may be necessary. To make significant
progress towards dexterous grasping and manipulation, we must: &lt;br/&gt; Make
the best possible use of available sensing technology (specially for force
sensing), and&lt;br/&gt; Understand how to analyze, plan, and control hand
motion in a reduced degree of freedom space (take advantage of task-based
coordination rules and synergies that may make real time grasp optimization and
planning tractable).&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure should contribute in answering
the following questions:&lt;br/&gt; What is an optimal grasp, and how does it
depend on the kinematic and dynamic properties of the device doing the
grasping?&lt;br/&gt; What is the relationship between critical signals, muscle
activation levels, hand shape, and force production during task
performance?&lt;br/&gt; Does analysis of data collected along the pipeline from
cortical signals to force production allow easy organization into grasp
primitives or result in "control handles" that a human operator of a robot hand
would find intuitive?&lt;br/&gt; How can human demonstrations of grasping and
manipulation tasks be employed as the wonderful resource they seem to be, i.e.,
how can individual examples be converted into control algorithms that will
function on a robot and be robust to variations and
uncertainties?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The results will improve the
understanding of human hand motion and force production, the use of force
information in teleoperation and control of prosthetic devices, and the ability
to coach robot behavior through task demonstration. Teams of undergraduate
students will use the facility and data collected will be made available on the
web.&lt;br/&gt;