* 0423262
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Analysis of Accident Risks in Narrow Waterways: The Case of Istanbul Channel
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Tayfur Altiok, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 37,965.00

0423262 &lt;br/&gt;Altiok&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a collaborative research between Dr. Tayfur Altiok, Department of
Industrial and System Engineering, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey
and Dr. Ilhan Or, Industrial Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey.
The PIs are to develop a Bayesian risk assessment model for analyzing maritime
accident scenarios. While the use of the model will be demonstrated using the
Bosporus as an example, its framework will be applicable to accident probability
assessment in other waterways and potentially also cross into other
transportation modes as well. The incorporation of autocorrelations within
vessel classes and arrival patterns advances the state of the art in MTS
simulations and it would be of great interest to see the effect of these
dependencies on the assessment of maritime accident risk. The framework would be
extended to multiple objectives and would include economic and security
objectives as part of the framework. The PIs plan to consider the amount of
accident data available for this region by examining the hundreds of accidents a
year in this region, using a simulation to give the frequency of situations and
using the data to estimate the probabilities of accidents in these situations.
This will help define relationships among the many parameters considered. The
team is very well qualified to conduct this project and the Turkish PI has
already done work in this region and has a simulation model already developed.
The PIs will consider the applicability of the results to the Mississippi and
the Houston Ship Channel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What are the broader impacts of
the proposed activity? &lt;br/&gt;The Bosporus is a unique waterway. It is
international, yet fully passing within Turkey. It passes through an area of
high population density and yet is itself a lifeline to several countries that
need to use it for their foreign commerce. It has been increasingly used for
transport of oil shipping and for other hazard materials cargo. This research
should be very valuable groundwork for the shipping industry and the port
industry by providing basic methodology that can be used with unique data for
individual waterways to minimize risk. The technology can also be translated
into homeland security issues as well. It is likely to be a rich learning
environment. The simulation of the Bosporus would be very appealing to many
instructors and students.&lt;br/&gt;