* 0423289
* Harnessing and Challenging Hegemony During Three Wars: The U.S. Peace Movement, 1990-2004
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Patrick Coy, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2007
* USD 110,460.00



Our project examines ways that the peace movement in the United States has
responded discursively to both obstacles to and opportunities for mobilizing
mass dissent. What are the main rhetorical strategies used by peace movement
organizations (PMOs) in attempting to persuade the public and policy makers to
oppose war and support peaceful alternatives? Do these strategies vary across
organizations or over time? If so, what explains the variations? Building on
Gramsci's concept of hegemony, we investigate the ways that cultural, political,
technological and organizational factors affect the development of oppositional
knowledge. We will analyze, qualitatively and quantitatively, official public
statements issued by PMOs and posted to organizational websites or available
through organizational archives. The data includes statements from 15 groups
representing a diverse array of constituencies as well as spanning three
separate conflict periods (the Gulf War, the 9/11 period, and the Iraq War),
allowing for both comparative and longitudinal analysis. Our research will
highlight cultural obstacles to generating mass dissent as well as the strategic
choices and dilemmas facing activists in responding to these obstacles. Our
research will also assist in conceptualizing the links between symbolic and
structural processes impacting social movements. The innovative research design
offers a useful template for subsequent analysis of framing by other social
movements. The broader impacts of this project include the following: Our
project will involve student assistants and will be available to student and
faculty researchers who can utilize the data set to better understand empirical
approaches to theoretical inquiry, computer-assisted data analysis, and the
broader study of social movements, conflict, and social change. We will make
available our findings through written work and presentations aimed at community
groups with memberships traditionally under-serviced by our discipline, thus
enriching the understanding of scholars, students and the larger public.