* 0423039
* Optimal computation of flow field variables from natural visual signals
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Rob de Ruyter van Steveninck, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 419,745.00

Optimal computation of flow field variables from natural visual
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R.R. de Ruyter van Steveninck, W.
Bialek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many animals use visual information to
navigate their environment, and in this context it is important for them to
estimate how they move through space. Visual input, gathered by the eye,
contains information that is related to self motion, but the connection between
what we see and how we are moving is indirect and sometimes ambiguous. Moreover,
light is carried by photons, and because these arrive at random the visual input
forms a noisy representation of the surroundings. To make optimal estimates of
self motion from visual input, the brain must therefore use an algorithm that
takes into account the statistics of the visual input signals and the
probabilistic relation between visual input and self motion.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study motion estimation in the natural world as a statistical
estimation problem, and compare the predictions of statistically optimal
processing to measurements in a biological system. There are fundamental as well
as practical reasons for studying the problem, but there is an additional
motivation. That is to investigate if, and to what extent, neural computations
in biological systems can be understood as being optimized for their specific
tasks in the natural environment. This is a hard issue to solve in general,
since the answer depends on poorly known statistical properties of natural
sensory signals. The present case provides an example where one can measure and
quantify both the signals that need to be estimated (rotations) and the data on
which this estimate is based (raw visual input). Moreover, a level of
statistical sampling can be achieved that allows a direct application of
statistical inference to data that are representative for natural sensory
signals. &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will construct a precise high speed
camera, with spatial sampling characteristics representative for the fly visual
system, and with associated gyrosensors to measure camera rotation along three
axes (yaw, pitch and roll). With this camera they will make precise simultaneous
measurements of rotational camera motion and visual input in a natural
environment. This simultaneous sampling makes it possible to effectively measure
the probability distributions that describe the relation between motion and
visual input. From this distribution, the characteristics of the optimal
statistical motion estimator can be derived. These predictions for the
computational structure of the optimal estimator will be compared to the
behavior of motion sensitive neurons recorded from the visual brain of the
blowfly. That comparison will allow quantitative assessement of the extent to
which biological motion processing in the blowfly approaches optimal
performance. Preliminary experiments have shown that both the blowfly and the
optimal estimator show specific biases in their output, depending on the
statistics of the input signals. There are strong indications that other
animals, including humans, share similar biases, suggesting that these biases
are an inevitable and universal consequence of the optimal processing of natural
sensory signals. &lt;br/&gt;