* 0423829
* International Workshop on Nitride Semiconductors (IWN'04); Pittsburgh, PA; July 19-23, 2004
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Robert Pachavis, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

An international conference on Nitride Semiconductors will be held July 19-23,
2004 in Pittsburgh, PA. The conference is organized to include discussion of
Epitaxial Growth (MOVPE, MBE, CBE, VPE, alternative precursors, regrowth, new
alloys); Substrates (lateral epitaxial growth, bulk crystals, SiC, thick GaN
layers, oxides, new materials); Defects and Doping (defect structures and their
characterisation, new dopants); Interface Physics (electronic surface and
interface states, interface polarization charges, adsorption and surface
reaction); Optical Characterization (exciton physics, optical surface
spectroscopy (ellipsometry, RAS, PL, CL)); Electrical Characterization (carrier
transport, magneto-transport, photo-conductivity, CV techniques); Quantum
structures (fabrication of low dimensional structures and their optical and/or
electrical Properties); Processing (etching (dry, wet), cleaving, high
reflection coatings, passivation, ohmic and Schottky Contacts); and device
ramifications. The format includes oral and poster sessions. The conference is
expected to stimulate collaboration and discussion between researchers,
especially between young professionals and established experts and to identify
critical scientific issues.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An evaluation of the
progress and status of fundamental phenomena involved in the growth and
processing of gallium nitride is an important and timely topic, and will be of
great value to progress in the electronics/photonics field. Along with the
opportunity to assess the field and future directions, it is expected that new
ties will be established among universities, research institutions, and
industry. The requested NSF funds will be used to facilitate participation in
the meeting by students. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;