* 0423358
* Multi-Componenet Nanopillar Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Daniel Gall, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 330,000.00

The focus of this combined experimental and theoretical research effort is to
explore, demonstrate, and quantitatively model a new approach for creating
coatings consisting of nanopillars that are built of multiple diverse materials
combinations. Our proposed approach builds on a previously developed glancing
angle deposition (GLAD) technique, which is based on local atomic shadowing
effects from self-organized surface mound structures during line-of-sight vapor
phase deposition. The key novelty of this project is to expand GLAD to
simultaneous deposition from multiple sources from opposite sides (SO-GLAD). The
resulting layers will contain nanopillars and/or nanosprings that consist of
multiple materials, stacked both vertically and horizontally, with unique new
electro-mechanical, optical, and catalytic functionalities. The program will
synergistically employ both experimental layer growth and atomistic computer
simulations in order to assess and quantify the convoluted effects of surface
diffusion, surface morphological evolution, and atomic shadowing mechanisms. In
addition to the fundamental growth studies, we will explore applications for the
SO-GLAD technique by creating (a) in-plane nanolayered hard-coatings based on
TiN/CrN two-component nanocolumns. (b) smart coatings with nanopillars that
simultaneously act as sensors and actuators. (c) multi-component nanospring
sensor arrays with unique damping and high-sensitivity.

This project will develop a new method to create coatings that have the
potential to dramatically enhance the performance of a wide range of
technological parts. These new coatings are assembled using beams of various
atoms. Potential applications include hard wear-resistant coatings for dry high-
speed cutting and fuel-efficient jet-engines, smart coatings for self-regulatory
chemical nanoreactors in future drug discovery or medical analysis apparatus,
and nanospring sensor arrays with unique damping and high-sensitivity pressure
response for robotic applications. Two graduate students and six undergraduates
will work in this interdisciplinary collaborative research program, which will
link to young principle investigators with complementary experimental (Gall) and
theoretical (Huang) expertise. The program will provide a mind-broadening
experience for undergraduate and graduate students in both research groups. An
integral part of the proposed effort is the development of a classroom thin film
growth simulator which will illustrate the atomistic processes that govern layer
deposition and will be integrated in a core-engineering course, impacting over
300 students per year.