* 0423002
* US-Pakistan Cooperative Research:  Study of Charmed Baryon Production and Decays Using the BABAR Experiment at SLAC, Stanford University
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mohammad Alam, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 42,000.00

0423002 &lt;br/&gt;Alam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a cooperative project by the Dr. Mohammad Alam, Department of Physics, State
University of New York at Albany, Albany, New York and Drs. Fazal Aleem and
Maqsood Ahmed, Physics Department, Center for High Energy Physics at Lahore,
University of Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan. They propose to establish the
infrastructure necessary for the CHEPL to participate in research in
experimental particle physics. They plan to establish a joint Ph.D. program so
that students from CHEPL can spend the first three years at their home
institution and two years at Albany for two years to complete their theses. One
of the faculty members from the center, Maqsood Ahmed has already spent a year
training to build Beowulf Class supercomputers needed for data analysis and
Monte Carlo simulation. Another graduate student spent more than a year working
on his Ph.D. thesis research, and has returned to his home institution to
complete his thesis. They also plan to start a program of particle detector
construction and testing. The PIs plan to foster a training program, whereby
researchers from AHEPL can train personnel at CHEPL so that they could become
members of the BaBar Collaboration, of which the AHEPL is already a part. The
PIs plan to hold a seminar and workshop in 2005 to educate a group of CHEPL
students about the BaBar experiment, BaBar Physics and Analysis, and to offer
the opportunity to American graduates and undergraduates to spend summers in
Pakistan. Dr. Alam is the Director of the Albany High Energy Physics Group where
fourteen students have received Ph.D. in Experimental Particle Physics under his
supervision, and six more are currently under his supervision. As a member of
the MARK II collaboration at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) and
CLEO collaboration at the Cornell Electron Storage Ring (CESR), he has played a
leading role in the first observation of several sub-atomic particles charmed
baryons and mesons. Prof. Akhtar Mahmood completed his Ph.D. from University at
Albany under the supervision of Prof. Alam and has played an important role in
the analysis of data leading up to the above discoveries and has an appointment
as Adjunct Professor at University at Albany. The Pakistani collaborator Dr.
Aleem is also a full professor and has been the Director of the Center for High
Energy Physics at Punjab University at Lahore. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and
broader Impacts: The proposal will have a major impact on the Albany High Energy
Physics group, bringing in top selected students from CHEPL for research at
Albany. American students in the group will have the opportunity to pursue
research in Pakistan and experience a completely different academic and cultural
environment. The program of physics with BaBar involving the study of charmed
baryon production is rich in discovery potential. The proposal will have a major
impact on the infrastructure, education and training of students and scientists
at CHEPL. The program's broader impact is significant from an international
perspective. The late Pakistani physicist Prof. Abdus Salam (1979 Nobel Prize
Laureate) obtained his undergraduate degree from Punjab University. The PIs plan
to seek funding from the Ministry of Science and Technology in Pakistan and to
approach other South Asian and Middle-Eastern funding agencies for assisting in
the cost of the particle detector construction and testing.&lt;br/&gt;