* 0423410
* Collaborative Research:     Mathematical Modeling of Dynamic Breast Cancer Screening
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Lisa Maillart, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Realff
* 08/31/2006
* USD 38,683.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a mathematical model to
examine whether different mammogram screening intervals should be used pre-
menopause and post-menopause. Analysis of this model will provide insight into
the following questions: how worthwhile is it, in terms of mortality risk, to
use different mammogram intervals in the pre- and post-menopausal phases? Should
screening be more frequent pre- or post-menopause? How does screening start-
age/stop-age affect mortality risk? These questions are particularly interesting
given the dynamic nature of breast cancer incidence, breast cancer aggression,
and mammogram-efficacy between the pre- and post-menopausal phases. Using a
partially observed Markov decision process model, different screening policies
will be evaluated, and informative tradeoff curves that plot some measure of
"policy effort" versus mortality risk will be constructed. Attention will be
restricted to two types of policies: "routine" policies that prescribe the same
screening interval over the life of the patient, and "two-phase" policies that
prescribe one interval pre-menopause and a different interval post-menopause.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will potentially benefit
society through patient-empowerment and improved public policy. The tradeoff
curves will allow women to tailor their own mammogram screening choices based on
individual risk preference, economic status, insurance coverage, incidence
propensity, etc... The tradeoff curves will present the quantitative
relationship between screening policy and mortality risk in a format that is
both understandable and useful for "non-scientists." If successful, the outcomes
of the proposed research may also impact American Cancer Society policy
recommendations for breast cancer screening. &lt;br/&gt;