* 0423253
* CISE-RR Equipment Proposal for Medical Robotics and Human-Machine Interfacing Research at the Case Western Reserve University
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Wyatt Newman, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 08/31/2009
* USD 211,945.00

This project, investigating medical robotics and human-machine interfaces, aims
to acquire infrastructure to support the following research projects:
Development of intelligent robotic tools to perform off-pump (beating heart)
coronary artery bypass graft surgery, Identification of human strategies in
constrained manipulation, especially mechanical assembly, and Investigation of
command interface alternatives for rehabilitation robotics. The 1st project
replaces conventional surgical tools with robotics instruments that are under
direct control of the surgeon through teleoperation. The intelligent telerobotic
tools proposed in this project will actively track and cancel the relative
motion between the surgical instruments and the heart by Active Relative Motion
Canceling (ARMC) algorithms, allowing the surgeries to be performed on a beating
heart with technical perfection equal to traditional on-pump procedures. This
research focuses on: development of control algorithms for model based ARMC,
developing of sensing systems, and modeling of heart behavior. The 2nd more
controversial project, modeling human limb control, assumes the existence of a
virtual trajectory as a mental representation of intention. The work instruments
human manipulation tasks, analyzing the data to infer consistent virtual
trajectories. The analysis is then extended to direct transfer of human skills
to robots through demonstration. The 3rd project constructs alternative
interfaces for robot control from some sources to objectively measure efficacy
of competing approaches in a timed robotic target acquisition task. Paralyzed
individuals often benefit from being able to command computers, robots, and even
their own stimulated limbs using eye, face, and head motions.

Broader Impact: If successful, the three projects should have a significant
impact on society. The technology developed in the first will facilitate
improvement in surgical treatment of coronary artery disease by reducing the
rate of complications, risk, and operational cost, saving direct healthcare
costs. The second project could impact manufacturing (force-responsive
assembly). The third commands interfaces for tetraplegics.