* 0423304
* Description of Strengthening through Internal Stress Development in Rolled Structured Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Armand Beaudoin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 12/31/2007
* USD 303,002.00

The objective of this research is to study the internal stress and relaxation
mechanisms in the plasticity of polycrystalline metals. The research approach is
to complement traditional formulations of polycrystal plasticity with a recently
developed model of field dislocation mechanics that accounts for the internal
stress and evolution of the observable polar dislocation density (at the desired
scale of resolution) in a mechanically rigorous manner. The theory is applied to
the technologically important problem of understanding yield upon load path
change to enable predictive modeling of springback and in-service stress
relaxation in rolled metal products. This project provides a new step in
providing a low-cost means of predicting yield and reverse yield for any choice
of loading and unloading path direction, respectively. The result will give a
simulation capability embracing bulk crystallographic slip in processing,
inelasticity in unloading, and prediction of strength in the final product.
Light weighting of automobiles through use of aluminum alloys remains a cost-
effective and timely means of reducing greenhouse gas emissions as well as
improving fuel efficiency. Both issues have significant national and
international economic and environmental ramifications. Understanding of the
springback and stress relaxation in stamped aluminum sheet is essential to
design of tooling for production of autobody panels leading to light weighting.
The research enhances the scientific workforce through the education of graduate
students and enriches education materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) grant provides an
opportunity for a joint research effort between Carnegie Mellon University and
an industrial partner, ABAQUS, Inc (Rhode Island). The project leverages
expertise from ABAQUS, Inc. in the form of graduate student advising and
integration between our research result and the commercial FEM software package,
ABAQUS. &lt;br/&gt;