* 0423336
* RR:  Wireless Sensor Network Laboratory Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Divyakant Agrawal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2008
* USD 110,000.00

This project, conducting research in the areas of sensor networks and
distributed and cluster computing, experiments with precision-based query
processing over sensor networks and wireless networking. Since sensor devices
are powered by ordinary batteries, power constitutes a limiting resource in
sensor networks. To address this limitation, power-aware query techniques are
proposed for aggregation queries. Instead of providing users with exact answers,
precision is introduced, giving full control to the users of the tradeoff
between precision and energy usage. Another project studies the design and
implementation of a self-organizing storage cluster built upon commodity
components, investigating performance and availability of large-scale storage
clusters as well as load balancing and data replication support, suitable for
data intensive applications. Off loading techniques that effectively partition
computation across devices are also under study, since these techniques can
significantly extend the life of hand-held devices. Still another project
investigates techniques to effectively partition computation across devices
conserving the "virtual battery life" of the system. improving the efficacy of
future partitioning decisions. Considering feedback from the system, the
techniques should be able to "adapt" to changing conditions in the system. The
off-loading techniques for heterogeneous systems include three categories of
devices: sensors, mobile devices, and power workstations. The research seeks
lightweight service discovery solutions that can determine the resources
provided by nodes in the heterogeneous network. The infrastructure enables
research in the following areas:&lt;br/&gt; Sensor Information
Processing,&lt;br/&gt; Sensor Data Collection,&lt;br/&gt; Cluster-Based Data
Storage,&lt;br/&gt; Power Management of Sensor-Based System Components,
and&lt;br/&gt; Wireless and Service and Resource Discovery in Sensor
Networks.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed infrastructure will be used to experiment with
precision-based query processing over sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The lab infrastrucure provides
means to integrate a variety of sensing devices with different characteristics.
Academic, as well as commercial research will benefit. Software artifacts and
experience into novel curricular directions impact the training of
students.&lt;br/&gt;