* 0423905
* Semidefinite Programming for Weight Design in Fast Converging Distributed Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Stephen Boyd, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2007
* USD 175,090.00

&lt;br/&gt;As integrated circuits and sensors, wireless communications, and
other technologies continue&lt;br/&gt;to scale, more and more computational and
communication intelligence can be built into embed-&lt;br/&gt;ded processors,
sensors and actuators to perform coordinated tasks in a networked
environment.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal concerns a new method for analyzing and
designing certain iterative, distributed&lt;br/&gt;algorithms in such networks.
The method blends ideas from control system analysis and
design,&lt;br/&gt;optimization, and graph theory, and is based on using new
optimization methods to tune distributed&lt;br/&gt;algorithms for speed and
robustness. Preliminary results hint that the method (or extensions
to&lt;br/&gt;be developed) could have large impact on several application areas,
including distributed sensor&lt;br/&gt;fusion, distributed optimization and
resource allocation, Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation,&lt;br/&gt;and
distributed solution of linear equations.&lt;br/&gt;Distributed algorithm design
and analysis is a well researched subject, with a literature go-&lt;br/&gt;ing
back into the 1970s (and earlier), which we will draw from. Since the 1970s (amd
earlier)&lt;br/&gt;algorithms have been proposed for distributed consensus
averaging, optimization and resource al-&lt;br/&gt;location, routing and
congestion control in networks, control (typically of a fleet of vehicles),
and&lt;br/&gt;sensing and estimation. While the details of the algorithms
differ, they are all local (with respect to&lt;br/&gt;an underlying graph), and
typically update some variables (or prices, in some cases)
proportional&lt;br/&gt;to some function of its neighbors' values. Typical
classical results for such algorithms state that&lt;br/&gt;the algorithm
converges provided the underlying communication graph is connected, and
certain&lt;br/&gt;updating weights or gains are small enough and positive. The
eigenvalues of the Laplacian of the&lt;br/&gt;underlying graph often play a role
in the convergence analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The PI poses the
general question of finding weights that yield the fastest&lt;br/&gt;possible
convergence (and possibly other specifications, such as robustness, or monotone
conver-&lt;br/&gt;gence), given the particular problem class and the underlying
graph. Preliminary results show that&lt;br/&gt;the analysis, and optimal weight
synthesis, can be framed in terms of linear matrix inequalities
and&lt;br/&gt;semidefinite programming and therefore readily computed (also in a
distributed fashion), and that&lt;br/&gt;the optimal weights can give far faster
converging algorithms than the classical (unweighted) ones.&lt;br/&gt;These
preliminary results have just touched the surface of this topic; there is an
enormous amount&lt;br/&gt;still to do. What (further) distributed methods can be
improved by adjusting weights? What&lt;br/&gt;types of specifications can be
handled? Can the method extend to asynchronous methods? Can&lt;br/&gt;the method
be extended to general Lyapunov functions for convergence analysis? What
robust-&lt;br/&gt;ness can be built into these algorithms? How can optimal
weights be computed efficiently? Can&lt;br/&gt;optimal weights be computed in a
distributed fashion? The PI will consider these questions and&lt;br/&gt;others
in the proposed research program, drawing on techniques from control system
analysis and&lt;br/&gt;design (linear matrix inequalities, Lyapunov analysis),
optimization (semidefinite programming,&lt;br/&gt;dual decomposition), and
distributed algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact. If successful, this research
effort would lead to a new approach, blending ideas&lt;br/&gt;from control
systems and optimization, to the design and optimization of distributed
algorithms,&lt;br/&gt;with applications including sensor networks, decentralized
coordinated control, and distributed&lt;br/&gt;computation. The material will be
fully integrated into the PI's courses on control and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;1