* 0423949
* NSF Symposium:  Innovations in the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Cindy Burkhardt, Radford University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2009
* USD 20,572.00

Chemistry (12) Three Symposia entitled "NSF Catalyzed Innovations in the
Undergraduate Curriculum," are being organized and convened at the Fall National
Meetings of the American Chemical Society to be held in the years 2005, 2006,
and 2007 in Washington, DC, San Francisco, CA, and Boston, MA, respectively.
This project continues a tradition begun in 1987 in which Symposia featuring
projects supported by the Division of Undergraduate Education at the NSF have
been a part of the Division of Chemical Education Program at the Fall National
Meetings of the American Chemical Society.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The new Symposia highlight projects supported by the Course,
Curriculum, and Laboratory Improvement-Adaptation and Implementation
(CCLI-A&amp;I) Program, and, as such, include presentations that feature
instrumentation that is relatively new to the undergraduate laboratory,
development of innovative laboratory exercises and practices, development of
innovative curricular materials, incorporation of new technologies into the
curriculum and/or the laboratory, projects that have been responsible for major
curricular changes in the chemistry program, and projects that have been
responsible for major curricular changes in an entire science
program.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;These Symposia provide a means of
dissemination for successful CCLI-A&amp;I projects to a broad audience. Faculty
attending National Meetings often attend sessions dealing with their research
areas at the expense of those dealing with science education issues. The
Symposia provide a forum in which valuable information can be presented in a
relatively compact timeframe and at one location. Personal contacts made at the
Symposia can be pursued at a later time. A new website being established as a
part of this project allows the collection at one site of appropriate projects,
NSF programs, and department and individual results concerning a wide variety of
innovations in the undergraduate curriculum. New assessment efforts are being
undertaken in order to ascertain the effectiveness of the Symposia in promoting
curricular change.&lt;br/&gt;