* 0423882
* NSF/CONACyT:  Electrochemical Pattern-recognition Smart Sensors for Assessing and Predicting External Corrosion and Biological-corrosion in Underground Gas and Oil Pipeline Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Mirna Urquidi-Macdonald, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 12/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

0423882 Urquidi-Macdonald The oil and gas industry, as well as environmental and
transportation industries, rely heavily on the integrity of their pipeline
systems and underground storage containers. These systems are largely threatened
by localized corrosion, which could lead to contamination of the neighboring
environment and, possibly, a threat to national security if the pipelines were
located and accessible to terrorists. This research will be used to develop new
techniques based on low impedance spectroscopy to detect external corrosion
activity in underground pipelines. The techniques to monitor internal corrosion
in underground pipeline systems and storage tanks will be developed jointly with
a Mexican team of researchers, and the results will lead to building a smart
monitoring system in the near future. The activity will include graduate
students and a summer US-Mexico exchange program of senior research personnel
through short courses and field activities with oil industry operators.
&lt;br/&gt;A US-Mexican Team of experts on gas and oil industry transmission
problems will be developed by means of researching the following areas jointly:
&lt;br/&gt; (a) Reviewing and establishing the change of corrosion mechanisms in
environments simulating conditions of the condensate phase of crude oil
containing CO2 (.sweet.), H2S (.sour.), NaCl and dissociation products
transported in pipeline systems: &lt;br/&gt; (b) In situ (in the field)
electrochemistry measurements (DC and AC impedance) to associate the field
experiments to the laboratory experiments in order to extrapolate laboratory
results in real condition experiments; &lt;br/&gt; (c) Developing a prototype
that will evaluate and characterize different electrochemical processes
occurring in pipelines affected by internal and external corrosion; and
&lt;br/&gt; (d) Mapping the data collected by a pattern recognition data mining
model to the steps that the pipeline operator will follow to maintain the
integrity of the system. &lt;br/&gt;The requirements for imbedding the data
acquisition and model in a simple sensor-prototype will be one of the products
of this research. &lt;br/&gt;The long-term objective is to develop a tool that
will be economical, accurate, and easy to use. This tool will instruct pipeline
operators in the steps to follow to maintain the integrity and health of the
systems. It is anticipated that the cooperation between the two countries will
continue and will benefit not only the graduate and undergraduate students
teaming in this research effort, but the environment and safety of the operators
in the gas and oil industry. This research effort will also strengthen the
scientific and community relations between the two countries by developing a
better and safer work place. &lt;br/&gt;