* 0423048
* GOALI: Principles of White Collar Workforce Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Brian Uzzi, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2008
* USD 350,000.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) grant provides
funding for modeling and empirical analysis of white collar work functions, such
as sales, engineering and management. The modeling research will focus on
developing analogs to the successful queueing-based representations of workflows
in (blue collar) manufacturing systems that have been used to understand and
refine practices such as lean manufacturing and agile manufacturing. However,
because white collar systems exhibit important differences from blue collar
systems (e.g., outputs are complex and sometimes subjective, knowledge transfer
plays a pivotal role), very different types of models are required. This
research will focus on (1) modeling networks of flows in which the task
completion times are subjective, and hence represent a quality vs. time
tradeoff, (2) developing a class of models that couple information with work
flow, and (3) extending the basic principles underlying workforce management by
characterizing capacity, benefits of cross-training and the role of information
sharing in the context of white collar work. Finally, to ensure that analytical
results are well-connected to practice, the research team will collect empirical
data about practices in specific white collar work systems within General Motors
to validate modeling assumptions and investigate managerial
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the American economy is shifting away
from manufacturing labor toward service and professional work this research, if
successful, could have enormous practical benefits. By providing a rigorous
basis for answering questions such as "what is the system bottleneck?" and "what
constitutes a healthy informal communication network in an organization?" for
white collar work environments, this work will help managers make more informed
decisions concerning their workforce and achieve higher levels of productivity.
Since productivity in the service sector has increased more slowly than in the
manufacturing sector, implementation of this emerging "Science of White Collar
Work" could have a significant impact on long-term economic growth.