* 0423621
* SGER: Nanoparticle Shape Formation Mechanisms in Gas Phase Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Yangchuan Xing, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 03/31/2006
* USD 40,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0423621&lt;br/&gt;Y. Xing, U of Missouri-
Rolla&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles have become an important
class of materials in nanotechnology research and development. The well-known,
size-dependent properties of nanoparticles make it possible to control their
electronic, optical, chemical, and mechanical properties. Indeed, over the past
two decades there has been enormous research activity in the synthesis of size-
controlled nanoparticles. While the size is an important factor in controlling
nanoparticle properties, the recent success in the synthesis of shape-controlled
nanoparticles has demonstrated yet another interesting aspect in nanoparticles,
i.e., shape-controlled properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to explore the shape formation mechanisms of iron
oxide&lt;br/&gt;nanoparticles synthesized in a gas-phase process. By conducting
experiments using a specially designed counterflow diffusion flame reactor,
together with theoretical approaches to nanoparticle deposition in thermal
boundary layers, we aim to obtain a fundamental understanding of gas-phase
nanoparticle shape formation and to learn if the shape formation is due to
nanoparticle crystallization during the deposition process, and if so, how it is
affected by the thermal boundary layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis of shape-controlled nanoparticles had been
achieved only in liquid phase before. Our recent results in the gas-phase
synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles demonstrated a more favorable way of
producing shaped-controlled nanoparticles. This exploratory research will be the
first attempt to gain a fundamental understanding of nanoparticle shape
formation in gasphase processes. Such research is necessary to increase our
ability to control and optimize the gas-phase synthesis technique for shape-
controlled nanoparticles. Through the proposed study, new knowledge will be
created in nanoparticle synthesis, as well as in nanoparticle dynamics and
transport in thermal boundary layers. The proposed research, if successful, will
establish the foundation for a future, multi-year project in the gas-phase
synthesis of shape-controlled nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is fast becoming one of the key enabling
technologies for economic growth. A fundamental study as proposed in this
project will enable the development of more efficient and less costly processes
for nanomaterials production. Therefore, the proposed project would have
significant societal and economic impacts. The project will involve integrated
research and education for both graduate and undergraduate students.
Undergraduate students will be actively involved in the project through their
independent research class. Graduate students will obtain their training through
thesis research in the proposed area. A high school student also will be
involved through a summer program at the University of Missouri-Rolla. In order
to broadly disseminate new knowledge and experience, results from this work will
be presented at professional meetings, published in peer-examined journals, and
made available on the World Wide Web. &lt;br/&gt;