* 0423733
* RR:Instrumentation for Experimental Research in Intelligent Information Access, Environmental Monitoring, and Large-Scale Pedestrian Simulation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Michael Quinn, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 07/31/2006
* USD 80,026.00

This project, purchasing networking equipment, a database server, file servers,
and digital video editing, supports the following research projects: Intelligent
desktop interfaces, Large-scale pedestrian evacuation simulation, and Insect
recognition and population counting for environmental monitoring. In order to
provide computer users with a more timely and useful application context, the
1st project, Task Tracer, develops machine learning algorithms for understanding
task context and a new paradigm for desktop interface design. The 2nd project
produces large volumes of motion data of people with varying abilities (able-
bodied, wheel chair mobile, etc.) for distribution to the pedestrian simulation
community via the web. New and accurate models for 2- and 3-dimensional
representations of human motion for heterogeneous crowds are expected from this
work. Image processing and computer vision techniques for segmenting and
identifying various insects are employed in the last project; whereas machine
learning techniques are utilized for processing this data to classify the insect
into the proper genus species. This project should result in new devices for
imaging insect specimens.

Broader Impact: This research should improve the effectiveness of computers for:
Understanding and streamlining human productivity with computer systems, Helping
emergency personnel to better understand and respond to emergency egress
situations, and Automating the recognition and counting of insect populations
for important environmental monitoring activities.