* 0423067
* Career: Differential Equations: Building a Theory of Student Reasoning and Understanding
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Chris Rasmussen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* akelly
* 06/30/2006
* USD 40,081.00

Advances in technology and the calculus reform movement have resulted in several
recent curricular reform efforts in differential equations. These reform efforts
have decreased the traditional emphasis on analytic techniques for finding exact
solutions to well-posed problems and increased the use of computing technology
to incorporate qualitative and numerical methods for understanding the behavior
of solutions to differential equations. Research on student learning of
differential equations, however, has lagged behind these curricula efforts.

This project will enlarge our understanding of how emerging analyses of student
thinking, technology, context problems, and symbol use can be profitably
coordinated to promote student learning of advanced, undergraduate mathematics,
using differential equations as a specific case. The proposed research project
will illustrate how theory-driven work at the elementary and secondary level can
inform, guide, and sustain the learning and teaching of university mathematics
in technology-rich classrooms. Long-range research plans include analyses that
focus on effective means by which university mathematics instructors proactively
support students' mathematical development in technology-rich classrooms.

In broad terms, the research methodology employed in this project falls under
the heading of "developmental research" and highlights the relationship between
research and practice, centering on the learning-teaching process with
particular attention to the mental activities of students. Three, semester-long
classroom teaching experiments and individual student interviews will be
conducted over a period of five years. Data sources will include videorecordings
of all classroom sessions, videorecordings of student interviews, copies of
student work, and records of project meetings. Data analysis will follow the
constant comparative method adapted for longitudinal classroom videorecordings
and multiple data sources.

