* 0423894
* Structural and Functional Analysis of the Initiation of DNA Replication in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2006
* David Jeruzalmi, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 10/31/2006
* USD 299,998.00

The long-term goal of this research is a detailed understanding of the structure
and mechanism of action of the macromolecular complexes, which operate at the
bacterial origin of DNA replication. Cells initiate replication of chromosomal
DNA by assembling large protein complexes at specialized sites termed origins of
DNA replication. The complexes at the origin undergo remodeling through the
recruitment and dissociation of factors and eventually mature into a pair of
fully formed replication forks. In bacteria, the first to protein to bind to the
origin is the DnaA protein, five monomers of which interact at distinct sites
and form a large nucleo-protein complex. The architecture of this complex is
poorly understood. With ATP, this complex promotes the unwinding of regions of
the DNA duplex at the origin, which enables loading of the DnaB replicative
helicase (assisted by the DnaC protein). Parallels between the assemblies that
operate at the origins of DNA replication in bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes
are indicated by common mechanistic details and by amino acid sequence
similarities in the constituent proteins. These parallels strongly suggest that
common structural principles will emerge from studies with the less complicated
replication systems offered by bacteria. The PI will perform biochemical,
biophysical and structural studies to understand the role of the DnaA protein in
the initiation of DNA replication in bacteria. Although the current state of
understanding is advanced, several intriguing questions remain unanswered about
the architecture and mechanism of action of the DnaA assembly at the origin of
DNA replication. This research will be integrated into the scientific and
educational activities being performed by the PI within the Department of
Molecular and Cellular Biology at Harvard University. These include the
education of graduate and undergraduate students and the training of post-
doctoral fellows in the fields of experimental biochemistry and structural
biology.