* 0423971
* Collaborative Research:  Silicate Reactions Kinetics in a Major Groundwater Aquifer
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,08/31/2005
* Chen Zhu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2005
* USD 106,918.00

0003816 &lt;br/&gt;Zhu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weathering rates for silicate
minerals exert important controls on groundwater and surface water quality,
nutrient availability, and the global carbon cycling and its impact on global
climatic changes over geological time. Yet, weathering rates derived from
watersheds and soil profiles are several others of magnitude slower than
laboratory measurements. Understanding this large discrepancy remains a
fundamental problem in modern geochemistry, hampering our ability to understand
and predict surficial processes and environmental changes
quantitatively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide insights into discrepancy, we
propose to study the in situ silicate dissolution and precipitation rates in
large aquifer system with relatively simple and well-constrained chemistry and
hydrology. The chosen field site is a sandstone aquifer, located in northern
Arizona and mostly composed of the Navajo sandstone. Groundwater in this aquifer
has an optimal residence time up to approximately 35,000 years. The kinetic rate
constants derived from this aquifer first will be much better constrained than
in watersheds and soil profiles because of the saturated hydrologic environment
and unusually abundant data. A new transmission electron microscope at John
Hopkins, with capabilities 0.12nm imaging and 1 nm compositional mapping
resolution, will provide atomic scale information of microstructure and fine-
scale chemical variations at weather feldspar.&lt;br/&gt;