* 0423522
* U.S.-Tunisia Cooperative Research:  Positive Operators
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Gerard Buskes, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 27,196.00

0423522 Buskes

Description: This project supports a cooperative project by the Dr. Gerard
Buskes, Department of Mathematics, University of Mississippi, University,
Mississippi and Dr. Karim Boulabiar, Department of Mathematics, Institute
Preparatoire aux Etudes Scientifique et Technique, University of Carthage,
Carthage, Tunis, Tunisia. They propose to conduct mathematical studies in the
broad area of functional analysis with particular emphasis in the area of
positive operators. They also plan to organize a three-day workshop in Tunisia
in the summer of 2005 on the subject of Positivity, Positive Operators and its
Applications.

Scope: The subject of positive operators has been found to be very useful not
only for its own sake but also for its many applications, in particular in the
area of optimization. The proposed problems are difficult and in the main stream
of modern operator theory. The PIs are experts in the area of positive
operators. The PIs started this collaboration on positive operators in 2002
under a grant from NATO. The project will support the attendance in the workshop
of approximately 5 US researchers and 5 graduate students. While still at an
early stage, the research seems to have already been productive in a fairly
short amount of time. The proposed research would continue the PIs investigation
of disjointness preserving operators and explore connections with differential
equations and extensions to more abstract domains.