* 0423908
* Novel Granular High Permeability Materials and Integrated Inductors for Power Delivery and Wireless Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Shan Wang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

0423908&lt;br/&gt;Wang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research are
as follows: 1) Investigate novel granular high permeability (high-m) materials,
namely Co-Fe-Hf-O with a saturation magnetization of m0Ms &gt; 1.0 Tesla and a
high resistivity of &gt;1000 mWcm, which will enable suppression of eddy current
losses and efficient inductor designs. 2) Investigate fundamental mechanisms
controlling the magnetic anisotropy in granular high-m materials, which is
largely neglected but critical to inductor performance. 3) Design and fabricate
integrated inductor structures which will truly unleash the power of high-m
materials at a frequency of &gt; 200 MHz. 4) Educate graduate students and
undergraduates about integrated inductor technology via doctoral thesis
research, research experience for under graduate (REU), and classroom teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity
include: 1) The discovery made in this research would enable miniaturization of
power delivery and wireless communication devices, and many other
microelectronics applications. 2) The PI has established close collaborations
with Intel and HGST to allow a speedy technology transfer to the commercial
sector. 3) He has collaborations with researchers in Japan and the Netherlands
to make an international impact. 4) The proposed research thrust at Stanford has
hosted three undergraduate researchers (one female) in the past two years and
can be expected to outreach to more undergraduate students in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;