* 0423013
* A General Theory for the Effect of Large-Scale Freestream Turbulence on Surface Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Pavlos Vlachos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 09/30/2009
* USD 270,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A new approach is proposed for studying the
effect of fluid motion on heat transfer. Special attention is given to the
details of the time-dependent structure of large-scale turbulence and the
associated interactions with surfaces. The results will be important in many
industrial engineering situations, for example, combustors, electronic cooling
devices, gas turbine engines, building structures, and heat exchangers. The
innovative approach combines time-resolved visualization of the fluid flow with
simultaneous measurements of the surface heat flux. A new type of microscale
sensor array will be developed for the heat flux measurements using thin-film
fabrication processes. &lt;br/&gt;The experiments will be used to validate a
simple physical model based on the coherent structure of the flow and its
interaction with the surface. So far, the model has successfully predicted the
overall increase in the heat transfer due to large-scale freestream turbulence
in several different geometries for both low and high speed flows. Although the
approach is novel and risky, if proven successful, the impact of the results
will be far reaching and will broadly extend our understanding of the effects of
turbulence on heat transfer. &lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of the proposed
research include the diverse group of the graduate students who will be trained
in state-of-the-art experimental techniques, the education of a large number of
undergraduate mechanical engineering students (over 200 per year will be
impacted), and the interactions with other engineers and scientists. The
microscale sensor arrays developed will be shared with industry and labs around
the world. If successful, the leap in understanding of turbulent heat transfer
will be shared with researchers and practitioners of heat transfer in many
fields of engineering from the mega scales of atmospheric turbulence to the
micro scales of electronic cooling. The benefits to society will be derived from
the improved utilization and control of energy in many products and
processes.&lt;br/&gt; This award has been funded by the Thermal Transport and
Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;