* 0423704
* Central Arizona-Phoenix LTER: Phase 2
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2011
* Nancy Grimm, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 11/30/2011
* USD 5,461,835.00

CAP-2 proposes to extend long-term study of central Arizona and metropolitan
Phoenix, a desert region supporting agricultural and urban/suburban land uses
while undergoing rapid urbanization and population growth. CAP studies human
drivers and feedbacks of ecological change. Previous work concentrated on the
central themes of urbanization patterns and processes altering the city's
ecological conditions and surrounding environment, and ecological feedback-
social system interactions. CAP-2 reorganizes the program into five new
Integrative Project Areas (IPAs) to aid in the explicit inclusion of
socioeconomic drivers and feedbacks: 1) land-use and land-cover change, 2)
climate and ecosystem dynamics, 3) water policy, use and supply, 4) material
flux and socio-ecosystem response, and 5) human control of biodiversity. The
modus operandi for long-term monitoring, experiments, information management,
site management, network participation and education/outreach was established
during CAP-1 pilot projects. Projects continued into CAP-2 include: long-term
monitoring at 200 sites across CAP; historical analyses of land use;
classification of land cover; documentation of change in land cover and use;
river monitoring above and below the city; and establishment of intensive sites
for in-depth climatic, ecological, and social surveys and experiments. Three
long-term experiments will be continued and a fourth initiated (a long-term
factorial N+P fertilization along a deposition gradient). The recently
established North Desert Village "experimental suburb" will be the first
experimental study of its kind, with manipulations of vegetation types and
irrigation methods alongside examination of people-ecological environment
interactions at the neighborhood scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
The broader impacts of the proposed CAP project include: 1) raising the profile
and awareness of urban ecology in both science and society, 2) contributing to
education and outreach at all levels, 3) producing and maintaining a
comprehensive, long-term database of ecological and social variables for a
rapidly changing socio-ecosystem, and 4) promoting knowledge exchange with
community and governmental decision makers. Ecology Explorers, CAP LTER's K-12
education-outreach program, will see continued growth while maintaining its
existing diversity of programs and working toward district-wide adoption of the
Ecology Explorers curriculum. Two new programs are introduced to promote
undergraduate involvement, including the Communities of Research Scholars and
Interns. CAP LTER participants developed the ASU IGERT program in urban ecology
and will continue to support graduate participation in research, introducing
summer support for independent research in CAP-2. Information management will
continue to develop innovative new techniques to preserve the long-term
integrity and accessibility of the CAP LTER database. Finally, for knowledge
exchange, CAP LTER will continue to partner with several related projects and
initiatives in science-policy outreach relating to the urban
environment.&lt;br/&gt;