* 0423993
* Conference on Polyelectrolyte, Colloidal, and Nanoparticle Assemblies in Ultrathin Films, Anaheim, CA, March 28 - April 1, 2004.
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Rigoberto Advincula, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2005
* USD 3,000.00

The focus on polyelectrolyte and colloidal nanoparticle materials is timely,
given the interest in nanoscale science and technology. This conference to be
held in conjunction with the 227th National American Chemical Society meeting,
March 2004, will cover a range of materials topics which are fundamental or
technological in nature. The major aims of this conference is to bring together
academic and industrial scientists, students, researchers to report on the
emerging field of colloidal and polyelectrolyte assemblies as applied to
ultrathin film materials. These topics include: polyelectrolyte assemblies,
nanoparticle . polymer systems, colloidal particles and assemblies,
supramolecular structures, functional ultrathin films, patterning and devices.
Primarily the unique role of interfaces and self-assembly mechanisms will be
emphasized. The conference will also highlight new characterization methods of
these materials as well as synthesis. Already, some of the new interesting
topics that have been reported recently includes: 1) .sensors based on patterned
polyelectrolyte layer-by-layer assemblies of quantum dot nanoparticles, 2)
.nanoparticles on colloidal particles prepared using layer-by-layer assemblies
for biomarkers:, 3) .in-situ nanoparticle growth on polyelectrolyte block
copolymer amphiphiles.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Polyelectrolytes are capable of directing highly ordered assemblies and
supramolecular structures based primarily on polymer chain dynamics,
electrostatic interactions, and solution conditions. Introducing metal and
inorganic nanoparticles with their inherent quantum size effects in both
colloids and ultrathin films with polyelectrolytes results in hybrid organic-
inorganic materials with unique order and function. The conference will also
cover recent applications in electronic displays and bio-applications. The
resulting cross-fertilization and varying perspectives will provide a
stimulating atmosphere for critical insight and new research initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The unique feature of this symposium is
that it brings together scientists working in the areas of polymer materials,
interfacial phenomena, and nanoscience. This means that scientists from diverse
fields can contribute different view points and discussions on the current
challenges and opportunities of these hybrid polymer materials and their future
growth. The focus on inviting young scientists, students, and international
researchers from abroad will offer a unique opportunity for US scientists in
having a broad perspective of this type of materials research and learn about
emerging fields and research leads. This will lead to increasing
internationalism in materials research and mutually benefit researchers
worldwide. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;