* 0423506
* The Development of Polymer Molding Science for Micro- and NanoScale Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* John Coulter, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 230,000.00

The current research project focuses on the development of the science-base
necessary for advancement of ultra-precision micro- and nanoscale molding
technology. Polymer based components with extremely small critical features are
increasingly being considered for bioengineering, medical, microelectronics, and
optical applications. For the high-volume production of such components,
precision micro/nanoscale injection molding holds great promise. The present
project includes closely coupled process modeling and experimental efforts
needed for the science-base development that would enable such manufacturing.
The primary objective of the project is the comprehensive development and
validation of the three-dimensional process modeling science applicable to micro
and nanoscale injection molding. Most external research to-date has been based
on two-dimensional flow analysis concepts, wall boundary conditions, and
material rheology assumptions that are only applicable to conventional larger
scale injection molding. The current model development effort is removing these
limitations through the customized application of fundamental theoretical
principles with micro/nanoscale molding specific assumptions. The process of
theoretical development is being conducted in a sequential fashion to isolate
the complexities involved. Throughout the study the theoretical development is
being enhanced and sequentially verified through closely coupled micromolding
flow process visualization experiments. In addition to serving as a means for
the fine-tuning of proposed new boundary conditions and material property
models, the experimentation is also enabling an exploration of the capabilities
of product manufacture via micro/nanoscale molding.

Focused initiatives of paramount importance are being included to assure the
broad scientific and educational impact of the program. At the professional
level technology transfer is being fostered through close collaboration with a
project industrial advisory board. On the national research front, optimal and
collaborative U.S. science-base development is being promoted through a newly
created micro/nanoscale molding research focus group that meets annually to
share ideas and collaboration opportunities. Lastly, at the local societal
level, a special feature of the program is targeting enhanced engineering
workforce diversity in the future by exposing 40 motivated and mostly minority
middle and high school students each year to the enjoyment of hands-on
engineering at the boundaries of knowledge through micro/nanomolding based team
product development projects with Lehigh engineering students.