* 0423786
* Passive Flow Control in Microchannels using Diblock Copolymer Brushes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2008
* William Brittain, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2008
* USD 310,000.00

Tailoring materials to spontaneously undergo changes in surface properties is a
developing area of research. These stimuli-responsive films can undergo surface
changes that include wettability, adhesion, interaction with cells or proteins
and membrane permeability. There has been extensive study on stimuli-responsive
films based on diblock copolymer brushes. These diblock brushes can undergo
compositional changes at the surface in response to solvent, temperature, pH and
ionic strength. These reversible changes in surface composition have
considerable potential in the field of separation technology. Passive flow
control of diblock copolymer brushes in microchannels will be studied. The
literature contains several reports where the responsive behavior of grafted
polyacrylamides has been used to control flow in microfluidic devices. The
reversible rearrangement of diblock copolymer brushes should offer an
alternative responsive system where, depending on the composition of the fluid
stream, the surface can change its affinity for different solutes, alter flow
rate or adjust flow between competing microchannels. The focus of this proposal
is on the application of polymer brush synthesis and characterization to
microchannels. Several simple testing platforms are described to assess the
effectiveness of diblock brush rearrangement on passive flow control.
Specifically, silane-based initiators for atom transfer radical polymerization
will be used to prepare diblock copolymer brushes on the interior of glass
capillaries or on the surface of flat glass substrates. The testing platforms
all rely on pressure-driven flow using commercially available micropumps. Flow
will be determined using liquid mass flow meters, which have nL/min flow
sensitivity. Preliminary flow studies will be conducted with polyelectrolyte
homopolymers. Three specific testing platforms are proposed. Initial screening
of the polyelectrolyte homopolymers and diblock rearrangement will be conducted
using a single glass capillary with one pump and one flow meter. In the second
testing platform, a simple T-pattern will be created in PDMS using soft
lithography. The PDMS mold will be combined with a glass substrate that has
patterned brush chemistry so that the two channels possess different diblock
brush compositions on the glass portion of the microchannel. Relative flow
output will be monitored by liquid mass flow meters. The third testing platform
is a simple split capillary system where competitive flow will again be
monitored. Because most microfluidic analyses use aqueous streams, we will
concentrate on hydrophobic/hydrophilic diblock brush systems where the
hydrophilic block is a cationic or anionic polyelectrolyte. A wide variety of
additional block compositions can be envisioned based on results from our prior
support. Variables in the flow streams that will be examined include: pH, ionic
strength, concentration of solutes, and polarity of the
medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research is
that this is first study to explore the application of diblock brush
rearrangement as a flow control element in microchannels. To date, the use of
surface-immobilized polymers in microchannels has focused on relatively
primitive polymer systems. This study will employ state-of-the-art techniques in
polymer synthesis to create stimuli-responsive coatings on the interior of
microchannels. Successful control of flow in microchannels that is induced by
compositional changes in the analyte stream will have a potentially large impact
on the field of microfluidics and separation technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed research is a
multidisciplinary project that will train graduate students, including one
woman, in organic, polymer and physical chemistry. Undergraduate students may
also participate through an REU summer supplement, with mentoring by graduate
students. Participants will present their results at ACS and Gordon Research
conferences. Students will learn how to use dry box techniques, NMR, GPC, FTIR,
TGA, ellipsometry and tensiometry during the course of their research. This work
will contribute to general field of microfluidics by testing and assessing the
hypothesis that diblock brush rearrangement can be used for passive flow control
in microchannels. &lt;br/&gt;