* 0423355
* RUI:  A  Coherency-based Simple Dynamic Equivalent for On-line Transient Stability Assessment
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Abdul Miah, South Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

A simple dynamic equivalent for a power system external area containing a group
of coherent generators is proposed for on-line transient stability assessment.
The proposed method is based on decomposition and aggregation of generators. The
idea of decomposing generators is a completely new idea. The resulting
equivalent is simple as required for on-line application. With the knowledge of
only the passive network model of the external area and the total inertia of the
generators in this area, the parameters of this equivalent are determinable from
a set of measurement data taken solely at the boundary buses. The method does
not require any measurement data at the original generators. This important
feature makes the proposed equivalent attractive and suitable for on-line
applications. In this project, a thorough investigation will be made to evaluate
the performance of the proposed equivalent. Further, the proposed method will be
compared with one of the state-of-the art methods of forming dynamic
equivalents. Dissemination of results will be through conference presentations
and publications. This research will provide a powerful tool that can play a
very important role in the secured operation of power systems. The proposed
research involves one faculty member and two undergraduate students from the
Electrical Engineering Technology (EET) Program Unit of South Carolina State
University. Besides these students, other EET students (senior) will be involved
in this project in different ways to integrate research and education. This
project will allow PI to have an infrastructure in place to conduct research.