* 0423080
* Overseas Investment and Labor Market Outcomes Using BEA Micro Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Ann Harrison, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2008
* USD 153,350.00

The effect of outsourcing on labor market outcomes in the US has become an
important national concern. Evidence based on the operations of U.S.
multinationals in the manufacturing sector suggests that increased capital
mobility may be associated with negative labor market outcomes. Over the period
1977 to 1999 multinational manufacturing firms have shed close to 2 million jobs
in the United States. Preliminary results show that labor's share of income has
fallen dramatically and real wages have remained flat. Coincidentally, the loss
of jobs in the U.S. has been almost entirely offset by an increase in jobs
overseas. Even overseas, as the number of jobs has increased, real wages and
labor's share of income have declined (by 14 percent in developed country
affiliates and by 21 percent in developing country affiliates). These labor
market outcomes have been accompanied by a substantial shift in the operations
of US multinationals abroad. Between 1977 and 1999, the share of employment
accounted for by overseas affiliates increased from 15 to 26 percent. Thus, even
with an increase in capital-intensive technologies, it is not unreasonable to
think that some of the downward pressure on labor market outcomes might be
associated with the increased mobility of capital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research measures the impact of increased mobility of US investment capital on
labor market outcomes in the US and abroad. Instead of focusing on inequality,
the research examines how wages, labor's share in value-added, and employment
are affected by increases in outsourcing activity. Although there is a lot of
anecdotal evidence suggesting that US firms are using the threat of relocation
to keep wages down in the US, there has been very little academic research
focusing on this issue. Our theoretical framework leads to a set of estimating
equations where we look at the determinants of labor compensation as a function
of several variables. These variables include determinants of the relative
bargaining strengths of labor and capital such as labor's alternative return,
capital's alternative return, the fixed costs to plants of relocating abroad,
and the number of other plants relocating in the same sector (the "threat"
effect). The research will use confidential, previously unexploited, micro data
collected by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) in Washington, D.C. to test
this model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;