* 0423975
* Collaborative Research:  Physical mechanisms of (inter) Decadal Variability of the North Atlantic Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2009
* USD 565,299.00

0423975&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This study will contribute to
and extend a systematic framework that has been developed over the last decade
to understand the nonlinear dynamics and different regimes of the ocean
circulation, by including a detailed view on how the wind and thermohaline
components of the ocean circulation interact. It is unknown how a more accurate
modeling of the wind- and buoyancy-driven circulation, including details in
downwelling and boundary currents, influences the internal decadal-to-
interdecadal variability of the model solutions. Without this knowledge the
theory of the ocean circulation will be incomplete. This study of the physics of
decadal-to-interdecadal variability in the North Atlantic ocean circulation will
focus on the interaction of the wind- and buoyancy-driven circulations in the
low-viscosity limit. Recent numerical and theoretical studies indicate that
decreasing the viscosity results in fundamentally different mean circulations,
modes of heat transport, and regions of deep convection and downwelling at high
latitudes compared to those in low-resolution models typically used for climate
studies. It is anticipated that these changes will influence in a fundamental
way how the role of the North Atlantic Ocean circulation in decadal-to-
interdecadal climate variability is viewed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
hypothesis is that the decrease in viscosity in ocean models and the concomitant
changes in the boundary currents, sea surface temperature, regions of deep
mixing, surface currents, mechanisms of heat transport, and the surface heat
flux within the subpolar gyre, will provide a more accurate representation of
oceanic processes involved in decadal-to-interdecadal variability of the North
Atlantic climate. Therefore, the study of the low-viscosity limit will reveal
new mechanisms of internal oceanic decadal-to-interdecadal variability. The
tools will consist of numerical bifurcation methods applied to stratified ocean
models at relatively high resolution and direct numerical simulations of the
ocean circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The study is aimed at
gaining a better understanding of the ocean variability on time scales relevant
to the societally significant question of global climate predictability. The
results will be of interest for both climate change predictability and ocean
state monitoring. The results will be disseminated by publications in leading
oceanographic journals, and through presentations in a variety of settings. Both
PIs maintain web pages on which this research project will be described and
results will be made available. Both PIs are on staff at educational
institutions within which they are (and will continue to be) active in advising,
supervising, and teaching graduate students and summer student fellows
(undergraduates). Two graduate students will be trained under this project in
modern numerical methods and climate dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;