* 0423036
* Coordination Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Turvey, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent R. Brown
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

The proposal is directed at the fundamental human ability to synchronize
rhythmic limb movements, for example, a bimanual coordination in which the two
hands move together cyclically in phase or out of phase. In particular, the
proposal is directed at how the stability and variability of this basic rhythmic
synergy is affected by unrelated cognitive activity (e.g., conversing, problem
solving, and mental arithmetic) that occurs in parallel with the synergy.
Experiments of several types are planned involving bimanual pendulum-like
oscillations. In the bimanual tasks the phasing of components, the frequency at
which they oscillate together, and the frequency at which they oscillate alone
will be manipulated. The difficulty, variety, and randomness of ongoing
cognitive activity will also be manipulated. Three-space motion analyzers will
be used to collect the movement data and methods of nonlinear dynamics will be
used to address them.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed experiments should advance
understanding of how behavior adapts to conditions of shared attention. In
particular they will contribute to a theory of behavioral re-organization to be
developed within the framework of the mathematics and physics of self-organizing
systems.&lt;br/&gt; Specific applications of the expected results include
disorders of movement and volitional action. Comprehending how cognitive
activity affects movement stability is relevant to the development of movement
rehabilitation regimens. Enhanced understanding of cognitive sources of rhythmic
variance is relevant to the study of Parkinson's, Huntington's, and related
disorders involving sequencing and timing. The nonlinear analysis techniques to
be developed in the proposal (yielding diagnostic quantitative and graphical
measures) will gain in importance to clinicians as the technology for analyzing
complicated movement patterns becomes more
commonplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;