* 0423576
* CyberTech Computer Science Program to Prepare Underrepresented Students for Careers in the Sciences
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* C. Bennett Setzer, Kennesaw State University
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,030,714.00

"CyberTech" is a three-year innovative, highly integrated computer science
program targeting 600 students, 60 teachers and 10 high schools, beginning in
the student's sophomore year and continuing through the senior year. The U.S.
Department of Labor employment projections for 2000-2010 predict an increase of
75% in IT jobs requiring a bachelor's degree or higher. Non-white students in
America's public schools are rapidly increasing and represent the majority of
students in many localities. They, along with women, are underrepresented in the
IT workforce. The intellectual merit of this rigorous program is based upon the
highly qualified faculty; plans to provide AP certification of high school
teachers incorporating research-based strategies promoting inclusiveness,
empowerment, cooperative learning, student investigation and inquiry, the
critical SCANS workplace competencies and skills, and student success in an
exciting and challenging 130 hour computer science curriculum for high school
students. The program is based upon: CyberTech I, a 75-hour principles of
computer science course for sophomores; CyberTech II, an on-campus, 60-hour,
Java programming course for CyberTech I graduates; a junior year Saturday
Academy designed to maintain and enhance students' programming skills including
video game development and animation; and a senior year AP computer science
course available to CyberTech participants and other qualified students. The
broader impact of this highly-regarded program is to significantly increase the
participation of African-Americans, Hispanics, women and first-generation
college-bound high school students in science careers and to enhance the
preparation of their IT teachers.