* 0423963
* The Functional Organization and Evolution of a Novel Insect Visual System.
* NONE,NONE
* 11/25/2003,08/31/2007
* Elke Buschbeck, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 08/31/2007
* USD 259,280.00

Lay Abstract Hoy (0211770) The functional organization and evolution of a novel
insect visual system.

The eyes of insects, which are called compound eyes, are generally constructed
from thousands of tiny lenses, each of which captures a single image point in
space. Compound eyes are organized following a blueprint that is evolutionarily
conserved throughout insects and even most crustaceans (shrimp, crabs etc.).
Surprisingly, the twisted-wing insect (Strepsiptera), does not follow this
blueprint but instead has an eye that represents an intermediate form between an
image forming lens eye, such as found in vertebrates, and the typical insect
eye. In this highly specialized, parasitic group of insects, several large
lenses each capture a small image or "chunk" of the visual environment. These
lens-based building blocks together form a small eye that samples a wide visual
field. This project focuses on the functional organization of this unique eye.
This intermediate organization escapes some of the classical limitations of both
the compound eye and the single lens eye. A deeper understanding of the
strepsipteran eye type could contribute to the growing field of biomimicry,
where it could lead to new technologies for small sensors that sample wide
visual fields.

Much of this project will be devoted to investigating the neural substrate that
integrates the partial images supplied by individual lenses. In Strepsiptera the
visual information from neighboring eyelets has to be integrated into one large
coherent image. Understanding the design that performs such integration may
reveal novel neural mechanisms in vision research. Because this eye is so
different from that of all other insects, we will also investigate specific
aspects of its development and use a comparative approach to investigate its
evolutionary origin.

There are two major aspects in which this project will have a broader impact on
our society: (1) it will reveal the organization, development and evolution of
unique neural and optical structures which are interesting as adaptations to a
specific life style, and may have the potential to become the basis for future
technologies, and (2) it will provide considerable educational benefits, both in
terms of training students and in terms of educating the greater public. Several
undergraduate students will be involved at any given time throughout the
project. These students will have the opportunity to become members of an active
research laboratory where they will be exposed to many different techniques
andcross-disciplinary training. Also, various forms of outreach and public
education, ranging from a web-page in lay language to the design of a museum
exhibit will be pursued. Interest of the public already has been expressed after
initial publication on those eyes in Science, which lead to articles in National
Geographic, Time Magazine, New York Times, Scientific American, Discovery, and
others.

