* 0423315
* Ultra Precision 3D Micromachining
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Thomas Dow, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 07/31/2007
* USD 306,000.00

This project will demonstrate the effectiveness of a new micromachining process
that can be used to create three-dimensional micro-mechanical, micro-optical and
micro-fluidic devices in a wide variety of materials. Current micromilling
techniques using high-speed spindles are plagued by spindle and tool runout that
limit the feature size and tolerance. The concept is to replace the high-speed
spindle with a piezoelectric driven tool holder that can move the diamond tool
tip in a planar motion at frequencies up to 5000 Hz - the equivalent of 300,000
rpm. The two linear actuators are driven out of phase to create a tool path that
can be changed from linear to elliptical to circular by varying the amplitude,
frequency and phase of the excitation voltages. The goal is to significantly
improve the capability of the mechanical machining by pushing the minimum
feature size from 25 um to 1 um and the feature tolerance from 2 um to less than
200 nm while producing optical quality surface finish in a variety of materials.

Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) offer designers the ability to create
miniature mechanical oscillators, optical network components and biological labs
on a chip, but the high cost and long lead time needed to create such devices
using commercial semiconductor fabrication facilities has been an impediment to
their widespread acceptance. Semiconductor techniques are designed for high-
volume circuits using standard CMOS processing while many MEMS devices are
needed in lower volumes, have more complex structures (such as moving three-
dimensional micromirrors arrays) and require materials other than silicon. Past
MEMS machining research has emphasized high-speed spindles while the effort
introduces a new technique that avoids the runout issues inherent with a
rotating spindle allowing smaller, more accurate features to be created. The
resulting chip geometry leads to reduced machining forces and reduced
tool/workpiece contact time creating longer tool life and extending the range of
workpiece materials (plastics, metals and ceramics) when compared to normal
diamond turning. The experiments are designed to study the material flow at
small depths of cut, to define the limits of the process and to identify the
optimum cutting conditions for different workpiece materials. Fabrication of
prototype devices will demonstrate the integration of mechanical, optical and
fluidic structures in 3D.