* 0423695
* A Fundamental Investigation of the Laser Engineered Net Shaping Process for the Fabrication of Nanostructured Cermets
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Enrique Lavernia, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2010
* USD 361,859.00

The research objective of this grant is to investigate the suitability of the
Laser Engineered Net Shaping system for the direct net-shape fabrication of
nanostructured tungsten-carbide-cobalt cermets and to develop a fundamental
understanding of the thermal aspects of the process. This will be accomplished
by making nanostructured tungsten-carbide-cobalt cermets in both simple and
complex shapes. Physical and mechanical properties of these samples, such as
microhardness, yield strength, tensile strength, and modulus of elasticity, will
be evaluated. In-situ temperature characterization of the area of the sample
affected by the laser beam will be conducted using a two-wavelength imaging
pyrometer system, which provides information on the thermal history and the
resulting thermal stresses during deposition. X-ray diffraction, in combination
with optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron
microscopy and image analysis, will be used to characterize the size
distribution, volume fraction and phase decomposition of nanosized tungsten
carbide particles in the cobalt matrix, and to establish the relationship
between processing variables and particle size, shape and distribution.
Different deposition parameters will be used in order to assess the thermal
stability of the nanosized tungsten carbide particles and its interaction with
the cobalt matrix. Finally, the economic and environmental benefits will be
quantitatively assessed, with the use of technical cost modeling and life cycle
assessment techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this
work will include the ability to fabricate complex shapes with better mechanical
properties for products such as tools, dies and nozzles. By using the Laser
Engineered Net Shaping system, the need for machining will be minimized,
resulting in reduced manufacturing costs, minimized material waste through scrap
generation, improved material properties, increased process efficiency, reduced
product design time, and reduced environmental contamination. The results of
this work will also further the scientific understanding of nanostructured
materials and net-shape forming techniques. Furthermore, collaborative
activities with industry and national laboratories will be strengthened, and
educational programs, including those for underrepresented minorities, will be
enhanced.