* 0423415
* Novel Approaches to Mixed-Discrete and Nonconvex Programs:  Polyhedral and Algebraic Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Warren Adams, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 12/31/2008
* USD 194,999.00

This research is to develop new methods, both theoretical and computational, for
efficiently solving discrete-optimization problems. Though arising frequently in
practice, such problems are extremely challenging due to their combinatorial
nature; the solution space grows exponentially in terms of the number of
decision variables. Effective procedures require cutting-edge theory coupled
with high-speed computing. The approach used in this effort is to recast
difficult problems into higher-variable spaces so as to partially avoid being
encumbered by the exponential growth. A "reformulation-linearization-technique"
(RLT) for programs wherein the discrete variables take binary "yes-no" values
was earlier designed with this objective in mind. Computational successes have
been realized for various classes of problems, and the idea of lifting lower-
dimensional spaces into higher-dimensional counterparts has since drawn
considerable attention. This research will blend contributions from the fields
of Algebra and Operations Research to extend and enhance the entire RLT process
in a novel manner. Preliminary studies show that the RLT generalizes to mixed-
discrete problems, and that the arguments can be made more simple and elegant
when viewed as special products of highly-structured matrices. This perspective
provides valuable insights into reformulation methods, and opens up exciting new
avenues for research. These avenues will be explored in depth.

The research is expected to contribute to the solving of complex problems for
which optimal solutions cannot currently be obtained and/or verified. Discrete
problems are evident in many contexts, including electric power distribution,
facility layout, resource allocation, and scheduling. The study should also
contribute to the general understanding of the mathematical structure of special
decision programs, and lead to improved methods for combinatorial problems in
general.