* 0423200
* Collaborative Research:    Master-Slave Clock Networks:   Modeling, Analysis and Neurobiology
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Mary Harrington, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2005
* USD 49,000.00

A combination of computational and neurobiological methods will be used to
explore the mechanisms which generate endogenous daily (circadian) rhythms in a
mammal. The master circadian pacemaker, which resides within the suprachiasmatic
nucleus of the hypothalamus (SCN), is comprised of thousands of cell-autonomous
oscillators. One objective of this work is to establish a brain slice
preparation in which a luciferase reporter allows us to track oscillations in
the expression of critical clock genes in real time. The researchers will focus
on identified transcriptional-translational feedback loops of genes whose
expression is critical to circadian rhythmicity. Molecular methods will be used
to selectively neutralize the expression of specific genes, and to examine the
effects of such manipulations on the pacemaker and subordinate oscillators. In
particular, the relationship between the master oscillator and its damping
slaves in the subparaventricular zone will be investigated; the later comprises
the major output of the SCN through which the central clock regulates much of
the physiology and behavior of the rest of the
organism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work is centered
upon coordination of the computational modeling with neurobiological and
molecular approaches. It will extend to interactions among distributed
oscillators. The broader impact of this work includes its application to
understanding the health-related conditions arising from jet lag and shift work.
Furthermore, this research will be carried out both at the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst and at Smith College, the nation's largest liberal arts
college for women. Undergraduate and graduate students will have opportunities
to conduct hands-on experiments using state-of-the art equipment, working with
mentors who are active researchers. This collaborative efforts will offer
opportunities for women and under-represented minorities to gain training at the
cutting edge of mathematics, science and engineering. The instructional efforts
will be integrated with the newly formed Picker Engineering Program at Smith
College. Regular meetings will be held, at which students and faculty review the
current literature on biological clocks. The collaborative and interdisciplinary
nature of this research draws together students and faculty from diverse
backgrounds including Neuroscience, Biology, Computer Science, and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;