* 0423611
* Towards Boundless Display:  Developing a Reconfigurable Research Testbed for Large-scale, High-resolution Visual Displays
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Doug Bowman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2009
* USD 242,067.00

This project, establishing a unique, university based, very large, high-
resolution visual display, aims at &lt;br/&gt;building a reconfigurable testbed.
The work studies the relationship between various human-computer interface (HCI)
scenarios and the effectiveness in areas such as bioinformatics and
construction. To enable empirical research, the design of the testbed will be
scalable and rapidly reconfigurable. Comparative evaluations of the many
variables offered by the testbed will be performed, including the presence or
absence of bezels between display tiles, display resolution, display form
factor, display size and shape, input devices and interaction techniques,
information layout, user location relative to the display, user roles, number of
users, and degree of collaboration among users. Domain experts on applied
research will serve to validate and extend the general principles obtained from
the basic research addressing the following application areas. &lt;br/&gt;
Classroom-based education, &lt;br/&gt; Architecture and building construction,
&lt;br/&gt; Scientific data visualization, &lt;br/&gt; Command-and-control
rooms, and &lt;br/&gt; The arts.&lt;br/&gt;Expected benefits include the
&lt;br/&gt; Architecture of the reconfigurable display itself, &lt;br/&gt;
Experiences with the design, &lt;br/&gt; Development and evaluation of high-
resolution display methods and collaborative multi-user interaction
techniques,&lt;br/&gt; Scientific results on the effects of a large number of
display and interaction designs, and&lt;br/&gt; Applied research results in many
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Creates a unique resource for CS
education that benefits many different disciplines&lt;br/&gt;