* 0423398
* Meeting the Performance Challenge of Low Wage Workers Who Need to Perform at a High Wage Standard; Engineering Aggressive Learning Interventions into Work
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Lia DiBello, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2007
* USD 220,000.00

This research focuses on organizational change involving low wage, front-line
workers in poorly performing organizations. The project examines the effect of
learning interventions, such as simulations and feedback, to change the work
effectiveness of low wage workers, even when the nature of the work itself does
not change. In this field study, the workers are animal care technicians
supporting biotech and medical research. Here, the regulatory environment has
become more rigorous, while research on animals has become more complex.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretically, the proposal focuses on how workers think
about and understand change and how this affects organizational performance. The
research is based on theories of adult cognition and learning and change in
organizations. The key hypothesis is that workers will use simulation and
feedback data to improve individual and team performance. A second hypothesis is
that different workers will use different forms of feedback to understand and
improve performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact is greater job
security and satisfaction for workers who can contribute to high performance and
understand their role in their organization's success. The study's results will
also inform theories of organizational change on the respective roles of
educational interventions and work environment changes, showing how they can be
coordinated for maximum benefit.