* 0423607
* Achieving Quality and Coherent Configuration and Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2009
* USD 335,000.00

This grant provides funding for the configuration and operation of complex
systems using intelligent and secure buildings (e.g., offices, factories, malls,
hospitals, schools, and apartments) as the background. The problem is important
but difficult, and has profound societal impact such as in saving lives,
preserving property, generating economic value, and reducing costs. With
building traffic (elevators and stairs) as the problem context, our goal is to
establish methodologies that are coherent across models, solutions, and phases
for various combinations along the mode (normal and emergency) and resolution
(coarse and detailed) axes while considering the interactions of building
traffic with HVAC. The key idea is to synergistically integrate computer science
and optimization. First, formal semantics that is sufficiently expressive and
amenable to formal treatment will be developed to analyze and validate composite
optimization models for buildings. Distributed models will then be created with
coherency guarantees among models, solutions, and phases. To solve the problem,
a decomposition and coordination approach will be established. It will
synergistically integrate a novel price-based coordination scheme based on
surrogate optimization with constraint programming techniques to fuse selected
solver fragments. Formal semantics will then be used to combine models, methods,
and phases for a seamless and coherent approach across resolutions and modes.
The results will be validated on a virtual test bed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the results of this research will provide a systematic framework and
a valuable set of methods for building designers, operators, and first
responders for the coherent and optimized configuration and operation of
buildings. They will also be used to support the investigation of next
generation policies, standards, and procedures. The results can also be extended
for the configuration and operation of other complex systems such as security
monitoring, vehicles, and aircraft. From a different perspective, the research
will open up a new direction for the synergistic integration of computer science
and optimization to address the fundamental issues of multi-resolution and
multi-mode modeling and optimization. The overall goal is to establish a
framework toward coherent configuration and operation of complex systems while
attracting and educating students in general, and to achieve economically
sustainable intelligent and secure buildings in particular. &lt;br/&gt;