* 0423719
* A Workshop on The Nature and Evolution of Disks around Hot Stars, to be held at Eastern Tennessee State University July 7-9, 2004
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Joseph Cassinelli, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 03/31/2005
* USD 16,420.00

AST-0423719&lt;br/&gt;Ignace, Richard&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop on The
Nature and Evolution of Disks around Hot Stars is scheduled for three days, in
July 2004, and will be hosted by East Tennessee State University (Johnson City,
TN). Attendance is limited to about 60-75 participants. This is the first
meeting that has focussed entirely on the disks of hot stars as a class. Recent
improvements in observational data and new theoretical developments make the
time right for just such a meeting. Each day there are three sessions, falling
under the themes Properties of Disks, The Star-Disk Connection, and Magnetic
Fields in Hot Stars. Some talks that deal more generally with disk physics and
disks of cooler stars, are included to promote cross-fertilization in the
discipline. A panel format session orchestrates group discussion on these topics
in the early afternoons. A unique component of the meeting is the inclusion of
"Focus Sessions" in the late afternoons that are tutorial in nature, lending a
kind of "summer-school flavor" to the meeting. The focus topics include
Diagnostics, Modeling Issues, and Optical/IR Interferometry. The Focus Sessions
are designed to interest graduate students and junior scientists, as well as
providing information for non-specialists in these particular areas. Proceedings
for the workshop will be published with the ASP Conference Series, and abstracts
for the review talks and poster contributions will be made available through the
internet. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;