* 0423641
* CSBE: A Place for Evolutionary Synthesis in North Carolina's Research Triangle
* BIO,EF
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2011
* Allen Rodrigo, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Saran Twombly
* 11/30/2011
* USD 14,969,968.00

Despite over 200 years of scientific inquiry, fundamental questions in
biological evolution remain unanswered. How does speciation happen? How do
genomic and environmental factors shape the input of new mutational variation
into the evolutionary process? To answer these and other major questions
requires synthesizing knowledge about genomic sequences, gene expression,
ecology, evolutionary history, and population-genetic processes of
phylogenetically diverse organisms. This knowledge base is so broad that
achieving synthesis requires the combined efforts of scientists from a wide
array of disciplines equipped with cutting-edge information management and
analysis tools. The primary mission of the Center for Synthesis in Biological
Evolution (CSBE) is to facilitate synthesis in biological evolution by bringing
together researchers and educators, extant data and information technology
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals, CSBE will develop new
tools and cross-disciplinary standards for management of biological information
and meta-information, support data analysis capabilities with broad utility, and
host and curate databases. CSBE will also support education and outreach
activities to enhance public understanding of the science of biological
evolution; foster interactions between evolutionary biologists, industry and
non-governmental organizations; and enhance the participation of members of
underrepresented groups in the study of evolution. The Center for Synthesis in
Biological Evolution (CSBE) will thus serve as a national focus for research,
education and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;