* 0423277
* U.S.-Jordan Cooperative Research: Integrated Design of Channel Codes and Bandwidth Management Schemes for Optical Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Marwan Krunz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 19,400.00

0423277 &lt;br/&gt;Krunz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a cooperative project by Dr. Marwan Krunz, Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering at the University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona and Dr. Mohammad
Banat, Department of Electrical Engineering, Jordan University of Science and
Technology, Irbid, Jordan. They plan to include an international collaboration
component in the scope of the NSF funded project: ITR- Forward Error Correction
Codes and Protocols for Next-Generation Optical Networks (NSF Grant
ANI-0325979). The goal of this project is to develop a framework for joint error
control/bandwidth management in optical networks. This framework is aimed at
dense wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM) fiber-optic systems, which have
become the predominant transport technology for local, metropolitan, and wide
area networks. In DWDM the quality of the optical signal is impacted by various
channel nonlinearities and spontaneous emission noise that require tailored
forward error correction (FEC) techniques. The problem is further exacerbated by
the heterogeneity of the network in the form of variable transmission speeds for
different wavelength channels and varying switching capabilities at different
nodes within the same network. The approach is based on integrating innovative
FEC schemes into the design of adaptive network strategies. Professor Banat
brings to the project his expertise on FEC and modulation techniques for optical
channels. He has previously worked on phase-noise characterization in optical
channels and on designing appropriate FEC codes for mitigating the impact of
such noise. He has also conducted research on optical beat interference (OBI)
reduction techniques in SCM/WDMA networks using pseudorandom optical frequency
hopping. This expertise will be useful in characterizing other forms of
nonlinearities (e.g., group velocity dispersion, polarization mode dispersion,
etc.) and designing BIBD codes for the optical channel. Furthermore, Professor
Banat expertise on spread spectrum schemes for optical channels (e.g., optical
frequency hopping) will be beneficial in the current research when investigating
appropriate switching techniques in a network with heterogeneous nodes. The
research on networking management techniques will be conducted by Krunz, whose
main expertise lies in the area of networking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and
broader impacts: The proposed project will serve as a vehicle for the training
of graduate students at the University of Arizona (UA) and JUST through
participation in research with the visiting scientists. The PI has previously
recruited several outstanding M.S. graduates from JUST, who are currently
pursuing their Ph.D. work at UA under his supervision. Software developed under
the support of this project will be made available to the research community at
large. The topics covered in the project will be integrated into the curricula
of graduate courses at UA and JUST. &lt;br/&gt;