* 0423697
* Collaborative Research:  Development Of Nano-Electrical Discharge Machining (NANO-EDM) For Advanced Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Kamlakar Rajurkar, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2008
* USD 176,548.00

This grant provides funding to develop electrical discharge machining (EDM)
process for nanometer scale cutting, "top-down" nanoscale machining. Initial
experiments have successfully demonstrated feasibility of this technical
approach to machine 40 nm (diameter) by 30 nm (deep) circular vias in atomically
flat gold deposited on mica. Proposed nano-EDM process offers a unique and
cogent opportunity to write precise nano structures, such as vias, at low cost
(0.25 cent/hole according to current projection for a batch of 10x10 holes) and
ultra high speed (currently the speed is 2 holes/minute for 25 nm dia x 15 nm
deep hole), unlike the established processes such as focused ion-beam (FIB) and
electron beam lithography (EBL). The investigators will explore theoretically
and experimentally the role of process conditions and study effect of discharge
energy density, voltage pulse duration, and discharge gap between the tool tip
and the workpiece electrodes in various media. The unique collaboration between
the U of A and UNL will bring interdisciplinary expertise and laboratory
resources in related fields of nano mechanical machining, nano scale
measurements, surface science and macro- and micro-EDM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
success of nano-EDM will practically allow the industry to work on gamut of
electrically conducting as well as semiconducting materials in a non-vacuum
environment. Nano-EDM will be instrumental for a wide range of emerging
applications viz. nano vias for interconnects, single DNA detection device
fabrication, etc. Further in the broader impact to the society, the PIs plan to
introduce a course in the area of "Nano Mechanical Machining for Manufacturing".
In the proposed research, the special emphasis will be to train underrepresented
minorities. PIs will build partnerships with area schools and community
colleges. Training is inevitable today, to the manufacturing community
particularly in the Midwest, to create and retain new high paid
nanomanufacturing related jobs in US. &lt;br/&gt;