* 0423233
* An Integrated Femtosecond and Nanosecond Dual Beam Laser System for Microfabrications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Hai-Lung Tsai, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2008
* USD 279,000.00

The objective of this grant is to seek a new method to simultaneously achieve
high throughput, high precision, and high versatility for laser micromachining
of wide band-gap dielectrics and semiconductors. The objective can be achieved
with an integrated femtosecond and nanosecond dual-beam laser system by
combining and enhancing the advantages of each individual laser. The innovative
idea is to use the femtosecond laser to generate free electrons so that the
photon absorption characteristics of the material can be fundamentally changed
for the subsequent nanosecond ablation. A multiscale model, consisting of a
molecular dynamics model, a plasma model with quantum treatments, and an
improved two-temperature model, will be developed to understand the governing
physics during the dual-beam laser ablation process. An improved Taguchi method
will be employed to systematically design the experimental matrix to validate
the modeling predictions and to identify key process parameters.

If successful, this research will result in an improved understanding of laser-
material interactions, with applications to broad industries, including MEMS,
micro-optics, biotechnology, information technology, materials science, medicine
industry, and others. The project will support and train two minority graduate
students and the results to be discovered will be incorporated into several new
and existing courses.