* 0423565
* Plum Island Ecosystems LTER
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2011
* Charles Hopkinson, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2011
* USD 5,738,544.00

The Plum Island Ecosystems (PIE) LTER is an integrated research, education and
outreach program whose goal is to develop a predictive understanding of the
long-term response of watershed and estuarine ecosystems at the land-sea
interface to changes in climate, land use and sea level. The principal study
site is the Plum Island Sound estuary, its coupled Parker, Rowley and Ipswich
River watersheds and the adjacent coastal ocean, the Gulf of Maine. Humans are
altering the ecosystems of the world at rates not previously experienced.
Understanding and predicting how multiple stresses affect the sustainability of
ecosystems is one of the most crucial challenges in environmental biology. The
PIE LTER focuses on how several aspects of global change influence organic
matter and inorganic nutrient biogeochemistry and estuarine food-webs. The
inputs of organic matter and nutrients from land, ocean and marshes interact
with the external drivers (climate, land use, river discharge, sea level) to
dictate the extent and degree of nutrient and organic matter processing and
determine the spatial patterns of estuarine productivity and trophic structure.
The overarching question is: How will trophic structure and primary and
secondary productivity in estuaries be affected by changes in organic matter and
nutrient loading and hydrodynamics caused by changing land use, climate and sea
level? &lt;br/&gt;The project uses a combination of approaches to address
research questions and hypotheses: 1) short- and long-term core measurements; 2)
short and long-term experiments; 3) comparative ecosystem studies; and 4)
modeling. The research integrates estuarine biogeochemistry with studies of food
webs and population biology of all trophic levels. &lt;br/&gt;The PIE LTER data
and information system provides a centralized network of information and data
related to the Plum Island Sound Estuarine Ecosystem and its watersheds. This
network provides researchers associated with PIE-LTER access to common
information and data in addition to centralized long-term storage. Data and
information are easily accessible to PIE-LTER scientists, local, regional, state
partners and the broader scientific community. Researchers associated with PIE-
LTER are committed to the integrity of the information and databases resulting
from the research. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: PIE-LTER has developed links with
local teachers and students, citizens, conservation organizations, and local,
state and federal agencies. What started out as a minimalist program has grown
to be a broad, well-rounded suite of activities. The education/outreach program
is expected to further expand during this next awqard period, as additional
support is obtained from other federal agencies, the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and private foundations. The long-term goal is to establish a
Coastal Outreach office at the PIE-LTER study site that will serve to integrate
and promote interactions with interested parties throughout New England. During
this grant period, the PIE-LTER will expand its schoolyard program to provide
on-going professional development for teachers; support the expansion of this
project into nearby urban areas including Salem, Boston, and Revere; and
facilitate the transfer of this program to New Hampshire and Maine via the Gulf
of Maine Institute. There will be greater involvement with undergraduate and
graduate education with the addition of PIs Mather and Pontius from UMass and
Clark University, respectively. PIE-LTER has a very active outreach program in
which the goal is to communicate research findings to individuals,