* 0423728
* CISE RR:     Infrastructure to Support Heterogeneous and Dynamic Sensor Networking Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Wu-chi Feng, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 04/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

This project, addressing heterogeneous and dynamic sensor technologies,
facilitates experimental research, demonstrating and distributing scalable
middleware services that support hybrid sensor technologies, including
traditional scalar sensors such as the Berkeley motes, as well as newer sensors
such as the OGI panoptes video-based sensors. The work focuses on the following
tasks:&lt;br/&gt; Adaptive Network Protocols,&lt;br/&gt; Global Power
Management, and&lt;br/&gt; Programmable Architectures.&lt;br/&gt;Dynamically
inferring and exploiting the heterogeneity of network components, the 1st task
investigates mechanisms to support a range of sensor networking technologies by
designing adaptive protocols for network resource management and data recovery.
The 2nd investigates techniques to help designers understand global power
management in heterogeneous sensor networking applications. The 3rd task
investigates middleware to support the programmability of hybrid signaling
within video-based sensor networks. To validate and demonstrate the approach,
three sample applications will be built. &lt;br/&gt; Time-Elapsed Imaging for
Coastal Monitoring (used to sense light),&lt;br/&gt; Security Monitoring (used
to sense movement in a room), and&lt;br/&gt; Health-Care Monitoring (used to
validate video and vice versa with scalars).&lt;br/&gt;The difference between a
custom-built application and a middleware version for various parameters will be
measured in each case, as well as how much energy can be saved by having hybrid
sensors working cooperatively (rather than autonomously) to manage power. This
project explores the fundamental challenges in enabling such applications.
Addressing the diversity in sensors should be critical in addressing the sensor
networking applications of the future. These systems comprise the integration
and interaction of diverse classes of sensor nodes, motivating approaches that
require greater synergy among nodes than those previously explored in the
traditional sensor networks. Augmenting the infrastructure through separate
funds with a variety of additional sensing devices, will enable the creation of
an extensive and flexible testbed to study scalable middleware services that
support hybrid technologies. Hybrid sensor technologies can enrich the potential
of sensor applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The artifacts of
this research will be useful to the broader community; the experiences with real
applications can inform further research. Moreover, the experimental research
will further enable scientists in the Environmental Science and Biomedical
Engineering Departments. This work enhances the curriculum enabling students to
partake in experimental sensor networks research for their course
work.&lt;br/&gt;