* 0423386
* CISE-RR:    Wireless Sensor Networks:  Middleware and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Wenjun Zeng, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2008
* USD 298,184.00

This project, developing middleware for building highly heterogeneous wireless
sensor networks (WSNs), proposes creation of mechanisms to help formulate,
communicate, and coordinate complex tasks in WSN. Constructed with both
resource-lean and resource-rich sensors/actuators, the facility enables the
following applications:&lt;br/&gt; Environmental Monitoring for Countering Agro-
Terrorism,&lt;br/&gt; Surveillance for Homeland Security, and&lt;br/&gt; Patient
Monitoring for Improved Healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;Since WSNs are highly
heterogeneous in nature, the middleware will be developed in an integrated
fashion, supporting the development, maintenance, and deployment, and execution
of sensing-based applications. The work includes mechanisms for formulating
complex sensing tasks, communicating tasks to individual sensor nodes, merging
and processing low-level sensor readings from the individual sensors nodes to
obtain desired high-level results, reporting results back to the user, designing
energy-efficient distributed compression and transmission techniques, and
developing network-friendly media security solutions. At present, two categories
of sensing devices exist: one characterized as resource-lean (low-cost, low-
power) sensing devices such as motes and smart dust developed in UC Berkeley,
and the other represented by resource-rich multimedia sensors such as video
camera and microphone. The infrastructure will allow the co-existence of various
types of sensors and the use of multiple sensing modalities to achieve
coordinates system capabilities and performance. The project includes the
following activities:&lt;br/&gt; Middleware Development for Wireless Sensor
Networks,&lt;br/&gt; Adaptive Optimization as Middleware Services for
WSNs,&lt;br/&gt; Optimizing Multimedia Delivery over WSNs,&lt;br/&gt; Ultra-
wideband (UWB) for Wireless Patient Monitoring (WPM), and&lt;br/&gt; WSN
Applications for Homeland Security and Healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: This work enhances collaborative research, development and educational
capabilities. The platform should be able to support a broad range of WSN
applications of potential importance to national security. Expected impact could
be felt in US agriculture, economy, defense, homeland security, and
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;