* 0423528
* Mechanism of ATP-driven DNA Packaging in Bacteriophage T4
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Venigalla Rao, Catholic University of America
* Continuing grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2009
* USD 894,270.00

Double stranded DNA packaging in bacteriophages and herpes viruses is a
fascinating biological problem. In phage T4, a 56 mm DNA is translocated into a
pre-assembled capsid and organized into a highly ordered condensate having a
packing density equivalent to that of a DNA crystal. Two non-structural
terminase/packaging proteins, gp16 (18 kDa) and gp17 (69 kDa), recognize and cut
T4 concatemeric DNA and link it to the prohead by interacting with the
dodecameric portal protein (gp20, 61 kDa) situated at the unique vertex. A DNA
packaging machine is thus created, which translocates DNA into the capsid
utilizing ATP hydrolysis energy. After one headful length genome is packaged,
the terminase makes a second cut, dissociates from the DNA-full head and
associates with the newly generated end and links it to a second prohead to
continue packaging in a processive manner.

Phage DNA packaging motor was reported to be one of the strongest force-
generating biological motors measured to date. Which component powers this
extraordinary machine? Previous studies showed that the large terminase protein
gp17 exhibits a weak ATPase activity, which is stimulated by >50-fold by the
small terminase protein gp16. Molecular genetic, biochemical, and computational
approaches have defined an N-terminal ATPase catalytic center in gp17 and linked
its stimulated ATPase activity to DNA translocation. In this project, using a
comprehensive packaging model, fundamental questions will be addressed: i) Which
domains and amino acid residues in gp16 and gp17 interact to cause ATPase
stimulation? ii) What is the stoichiometry of terminase proteins in the
packaging machine? iii) Which transition in the ATPase catalytic pathway is
coupled to DNA translocation? iv) Are the ATPase subunits "fired" by a
sequential mechanism? v) Is rotational coupling the underlying mechanism of DNA
translocation?

A unique collection of well-characterized ATPase mutants will be used to perform
defined and quantitative biochemistry and tease out the molecular details of the
packaging mechanism. Collaborative cryo-EM and X-ray structural analyses of
terminase and packaging motor, and single DNA molecule packaging studies to test
the rotational packaging models, will complement the biochemical studies. Thus,
the project is designed to address core mechanistic questions of phage and viral
DNA packaging. It will advance the understanding of how viruses package genetic
material in the host cell, a fundamental requirement for successfully
transmitting the genome into a new host.

Broader Impact: Results from this project will have broad implications to the
DNA packaging field and ATPase motors in general. Additionallly, this multi-
dimensional project, encompassing molecular genetic, biochemical, biophysical,
computational, and structural approaches would serve as an exciting model to
train undergraduate and graduate students and establish a solid foundation for
future research careers. The students will have a unique opportunity to design
experiments independently, critically analyze a defined question, and apply the
rich T4 phage genetics and assembly information to solve it. The project will
provide exciting opportunities for the students to present their research in
International conferences such as Phage and Virus Assembly, and American Society
for Microbiology. Collaborations with researchers at the Purdue University,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, and Okazaki National Research Institute, Japan,
will broaden students' horizons and foster interactions with fellow student
researchers and senior scientists from these institutions. Concepts used in this
project will be taught to freshman undergraduate students in the molecular
biology laboratory, which is a requirement for all biology concentrators and
pre-med students from many disciplines. Graduate students from this project will
serve as Teaching Assistants for this lab, which helps them to develop teaching
skills and allows transfer of what they learned in the research lab to a group
of budding scientists at the undergraduate level.