* 0423242
* Building IT Skills among Inner City Youth in North Philadelphia through Development of a Community Geographic Information System
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Michele Masucci, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia James
* 08/31/2008
* USD 896,942.00

"Building IT Skills among Inner City Youth in North Philadelphia through
Development of a Community Geographic Information System" is a three-year,
youth-based ITEST project proposed by Temple University. The project will
provide 90 at-risk high school students, including women, Hispanic and African
Americans, with 120 contact hours of instruction per year in information
technology, spatial analysis and cartographic and design skills through their
creative involvement in developing a community-based Geographic Information
System. A total of 270 students will participate over the three-year duration of
the project. The year-round project will include five hours of weekly
instruction for twelve weeks per semester and three two-week intensive summer
programs of four hours per day. Instruction during project activities will be
provided in both English and Spanish. Parents and family members will be
involved throughout the instructional period. The project collaborators include
the Asociacion Puertorriquenos en Marcha (APM) Rising Sun Avenue Community
Technology Center, School District of Philadelphia, Delawarevalley.org, Forward
and Beyond Program of Harrison Campus Compact, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at Temple and Philadelphia Association of Community
Development Corporations.