* 0423825
* Inferences about population correlations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Michael Doherty, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2008
* USD 285,993.00

An important, scientific meaning of the term, "relationship," is the extent to
which the presence or absence of one attribute provides useful information about
the presence or absence of another. For example, if there is a relationship
between a symptom and a disease, then the presence of the symptom suggests the
presence of the disease. Another example would be the relationship between a
people's employment test scores and their subsequent performance on the job.
Using two different but related lines of research, we plan to investigate how
people form and maintain beliefs about relationships.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
one series of studies, we will employ both computer simulations and experiments
with human beings to investigate the counterintuitive proposition that, under
some mathematical conditions, people can detect relationships more accurately in
small than in large data sets. Recent research in Israel and Sweden has produced
contradictory evidence on this topic. However, our pilot research explains the
disagreement, and demonstrates that the mathematical structure of our
environment does indeed favor small rather than large samples, under certain
conditions. We plan to conduct additional research to determine whether human
beings can exploit this feature of the environment when they form beliefs about
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second series of studies will
investigate the conditions under which people form and maintain false beliefs,
which are assertions that a relationship exists when in fact there is no
relationship. This phenomenon, known as illusory correlation, has been studied
extensively with regard to prejudice and to the validity of personality tests.
We plan to examine how the mathematical environment described above, together
with current psychological theory, influences illusory
correlation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of our investigations will be
relevant to what has become a central issue in our understanding of the nature
of human thought--that is, the question of whether and to what degree people's
limited ability to process information can be adaptive in different
environments.