* 0423431
* RR:   Wireless Wind Tunnel:    A Testbed for Experimental Evaluation of Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Panganamala Kumar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2009
* USD 300,000.00

This project, evaluating protocols for wireless networks and developing scaling
techniques for physical environments, aims at deploying an anechoic chamber for
interference control, forming a testbed, referred to as the Wireless Wind
Tunnel. The uses of the testbed focus on:&lt;br/&gt; Evaluation of wireless
protocols (WP) in controlled environments,&lt;br/&gt; Development of channel
models suitable for simulation-based evaluation of WPs, and&lt;br/&gt;
Evaluation of techniques for scaling the physical environment to facilitate
realistic wireless experiments.&lt;br/&gt;The Wireless Wind Tunnel (WWT)
addresses some of the limitations based on computer evaluations resulting from
the present insufficient understanding of channel and system models for wireless
networks. These are not well understood and brute force accurate simulation of
the wireless environment are at present too complex. Existing hardware testbeds
suffer from one or both of the following shortcomings: &lt;br/&gt; Experiments
often cannot be repeated due to interference by other wireless devices operating
in the same frequency range and &lt;br/&gt; The parameters of the experiment
(such as the mobility patterns of the mobiles and scatterers in the environment)
are not fully controllable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This work
impacts the education mission, including course work, laboratories, student
projects. The testbed will serve as a demonstration tool. New educational
opportunities will open involving experimental research providing better
training and motivation. Facilities will be made available to a larger pool of
researchers. Additional impact is expected on communications systems in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;