* 0423717
* Institutional Self-Assessment of Science, Technology, and Mathematics Curricula
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Carla Sineway, Saginaw Chippewa Tribal College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

The overall purpose of the NSF-TCUP planning project is to enhance science,
technology, and &lt;br/&gt;mathematics education at Saginaw Chippewa Tribal
College. In addition, the project will lay the &lt;br/&gt;groundwork to apply
for an NSF-TCUP Implementation Grant to carry-out those strategies on a long-
term &lt;br/&gt;basis. These outcomes will be achieved through the following
objectives and methods: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Objectives: &lt;br/&gt;To
complete a comparative study of SCTC.s STEM curricula and STEM curricula of at
least two &lt;br/&gt;other colleges, including recommendations for curricular
improvement. &lt;br/&gt;To complete a written plan of action for revising SCTC.s
Plan of Learning by Students (PALS) and &lt;br/&gt;for training SCTC science,
technology, and mathematics faculty to design their coursework to include
&lt;br/&gt;quantifiable outcomes using the WIDS software. &lt;br/&gt;To complete
a Facilities and Infrastructure Plan based on projected curricular and
enrollment &lt;br/&gt;expansion over a three-year period. &lt;br/&gt;To complete
a first draft of the NSF-TCUP Implementation Grant application. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Methods: &lt;br/&gt;Systematically assess existing curricula and
compare to curricula at similar colleges &lt;br/&gt;Conduct survey of literature
and best practices &lt;br/&gt;Attend conferences and training sessions to inform
efforts &lt;br/&gt;Provide on-site training in instructional design and
assessment using a paid consultant &lt;br/&gt;Visit tribal college and community
college campuses to collect information &lt;br/&gt;Survey college's personnel
and infrastructure resources &lt;br/&gt;Develop long-range plans for curricular
enhancement &lt;br/&gt;Synthesize and incorporate information into planning
efforts to transform curricula