* 0423362
* Research Resources for Network Application Studies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert Kinicki, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 39,203.00

This project, developing practical tools for more effective performance
evaluation of networked applications and furthering work in adaptive streaming
media repair, studies end-user performance perception in network applications
through an integrated framework considering user, application, and network
layers. The research considers diverse network applications, aiming at bridging
the gap in understanding the increased diversity resulting from the rapid rise
of these new applications. Often, precise information is lacking regarding how
the network improvements benefit the network application. Thus, assessing the
benefits of new network treatments becomes difficult, and so does designing the
next generation networks that will effectively support QoS of emerging
applications. An Application Performance Studies Laboratory will be developed
addressing finely control network performance for a range of selected
applications. As appropriate, each of the projects will share research resources
in the new lab to measure performance for interactive applications, network
games, and streaming media repair. Specifically, the infrastructure enables the
following projects:&lt;br/&gt; Integrating measures of network performance with
user perception,&lt;br/&gt; Quality of service for network games, and&lt;br/&gt;
Perceived quality of adaptive streaming media repair.&lt;br/&gt;The methodology
employed integrating network performance with end-user application performance
allows targeting studies of new applications on emergent networks. The work
should culminate in advancing tools measuring the impact of the network and
application level treatments on the end-user performance. Novel mechanisms for
adaptive streaming media repair are expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The research involves strong integration of research and education,
enriching education with exciting possibilities in CS research. Undergraduate
senior projects will be instrumental in realizing the preparation of network
applications for effective studies. Additionally, a new related undergraduate
major will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;