* 0423639
* US-Ethiopian Cooperative Research:   Studies of Snowball Earth Sequences in N. Ethiopia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Nathan Miller, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/2006
* USD 26,908.00

Stern&lt;br/&gt;0423639 &lt;br/&gt;This award funds a research collaboration
among geologists at the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) and geologists at
Ethiopia's Mekelle University to integrate field mapping, remote sensing, and
geographic information systems in order to assess the historical and economic
context of poorly studied Neoproterozoic (~700 million years ago) sedimentary
rocks in northern Ethiopia. Israeli scientists are also involved in this
project, funded by a separate US-Israel grant. The geologic units of interest
coincide with a unique episode of global climate change, recently popularized as
the "Snowball Earth Hypothesis", during which Earth's climate shifted rapidly
between times of extensive ice cover and times when climate was much warmer than
today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to understanding of
the Snowball Earth Hypothesis by adding new geologic information from the
Arabian Nubian Shield, Earth's largest tract of Neoproterozoic crust. The
proposed interaction will help strengthen geology faculty and students in the
Dept. of Applied Geology at Mekelle University, Ethiopia's fastest growing
university, and an affiliated government-owned mining corporation (Ezana
Company). Interaction of UTD scientists with MU faculty and students and Ezana
personnel in Ethiopia, reinforced by short training visits to UTD by MU and
Ezana personnel will help these scientists develop and implement a plan for
incorporating new technologies (GIS, remote sensing) into their programs. Ties
developed between UTD and MU are expected to expand to links involving other
departments.&lt;br/&gt;