* 0423286
* SGER BS&I: Accelerating Discovery of New Species in Madagascar Using Remotely Sensed Data and Ecological Niche Modeling
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* A. Townsend Peterson, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 08/31/2006
* USD 80,142.00

SGER BS&I: Accelerating discovery of new species in Madagascar using remotely
sensed data and ecological niche modeling

Christopher Raxworthy and Townsend Peterson

Exploratory Work on a New Research Idea:- Raxworthy et al. (2003, Nature 426,
837-841) recently published results suggesting that remotely sensed data
(collected by satellites and the Space Shuttle) and ecological niche modeling
can be used to help identify areas with new species. Distribution modeling was
used to successfully predict chameleon species occurrences in Madagascar. But
some of these models also produced distribution error: they over-predicted
occurrences of species in 3 intersecting areas, which actually yielded 7 species
new to science. These new species exhibit characters supporting close
relationships to the species originally targeted for distribution modeling, and
they appear to share similar niche requirements. This novel result suggests
ecological niche modeling offers innovative potential for the discovery of new
species and thus can be used to direct survey efforts to areas of greatest
potential. The objective of this proposal is to test ecological niche modeling
using a broader range of animal groups. This work both is exploratory and high
risk; this is the first attempt to apply remote sensing data and ecological
niche modeling to accelerating the discovery of new species.

A Severe Urgency:- The Malagasy Government has recently announced a three-fold
expansion of the reserve network within 5 years. This magnitude of increase is
unprecedented, and unlikely to ever be repeated again owing to the rapid loss of
primary forest outside reserves. Although major elements of the reserve program
have been proposed (ANGAP, 2001), a small window of opportunity currently exists
for biologists to propose additional recommendations. Discovery of important
areas with unprotected new species, during the critical next two years of
reserve planning, would have a profound influence on the final reserve network
design. Major objectives:- 1) Produce ecological niche models for at least 200
species of amphibians, reptiles, and small mammals, 2) identify intersecting
areas of potential over-prediction and select sites to be surveyed, 3) survey
sites and rapidly work up collections to identify/diagnose new species, 4)
disseminate results concerning unprotected regional endemism to the Malagasy
Government, and 5) compare these new species discoveries against surveyed sites
selected blind to model results, to evaluate the utility of ecological niche
modeling for accelerating species discovery.

Broader Impacts:- Surveys will produce important voucher specimens (including
tissues), broaden international collaboration between AMNH and the University of
Antananarivo to include GIS and remote sensing, involve the participation and
training of at least four PhD students from the USA and Madagascar, and provide
data for a web-based international teaching module on distribution modeling
being developed at AMNH. Innovative biogeographic perspectives are expected to
have a profound influence on the establishment of future reserves in Madagascar.

Intellectual Merit and Project Significance:- The results and conclusions have
the potential to radically improve the way biologists and conservationists
select survey sites to document new species diversity. Confirming the ability of
ecological niche modeling to identify areas of unknown endemism would represent
a major advance, and offers exciting potential for accelerating species
discovery on a global scale. Obvious resulting benefits would include more
inclusive and timely conservation programs, and the availability of greater
biodiversity for ecological and evolutionary research.