* 0423645
* U.S.-Jordan Cooperative Research: Application of the Bifurcation and Chaos Theory to Soft-Switching Power Factor Correction Circuits
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Issa Batarseh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 28,000.00

0423645 &lt;br/&gt;Batarseh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative project by the Dr. Issa Batarseh, Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering at University of Central Florida, Orlando,
Florida and Dr. Dr. Ahmed Harb, Electrical Engineering Department, Jordan
University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan. The project deals with the
application of modern control theory to dynamic modeling of soft switching power
factor correction circuits. Limited research work has been conducted on
exploring the chaos behavior of high frequency ac-dc power factor correction
with soft-switching technique. The main objective of the proposed project is to
apply modern control techniques to newly developed power factor correction
topologies that target declining power quality in power processing systems and
thereby improve system performance. More specifically, the focus of the project
will be on the high-frequency resonant single-stage power factor scheme with
direct energy transfer. The PIs will study and analyze the dynamic stability of
the PFC circuit analytically, simulation and experimentally. The topologies
selected for this study were based on the research done by the PIs in previously
funded NSF projects. The procedure adopted for this work is to first develop the
discrete large-signal model of the proposed converters under open- and closed-
loop conditions, and then verify the developed models in Spice and Mat lab. The
impact of using bifurcation and chaos theory in PFC circuits is that it will
lead to the development of a nonlinear control to mitigate or even to eliminate
possible unstable oscillations. This will improve the performance of the PFC
circuit and will have impact on dynamic study of much other power electronic
circuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impact: The research results can
lead to developing analytical methods that are applicable to various types of
converters and leading to the ability to design more stable converters. Power
factor correction plays a major role in energy saving features of power
converters. Power quality is a major issue, as our society has to deal with so
many electronic equipments that depend on high-quality electric power. This
project will promote international collaboration in the area of energy-
efficiency in the Middle East region.&lt;br/&gt;