* 0423360
* Hybrid Models for Simulation-Based Prototyping of Decision Logic in Material Flow Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Douglas Bodner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 07/31/2006
* USD 197,797.00

This grant provides funding to create a new approach to discrete-event
simulation, a computational tool used extensively for design and operational
improvement of discrete material flow systems such as factories and warehouses.
This new approach combines two existing paradigms. The first is the process-
interaction paradigm, which efficiently models flow of material, customers or
work through a system, but has limitations in representing complex decision
logic. The second is the event-scheduling paradigm, which is used to model
complex systems, but is quite costly in modeling time and effort. By classifying
discrete material flow systems according to physical and decision logic
characteristics, generic decision logic units will be specified for different
classes of systems, using event-scheduling to encapsulate decision-making
behavior. These units will be interfaced with a process-interaction
representation of the physical system flow. The research will experimentally
compare results obtained using the new hybrid approach against those obtained
using simpler models, in terms of estimates of system performance. Since
computation time is a major concern with simulation, the project also will
measure the computational effect of having such decision logic units, as
compared to a simpler system representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successfully
completed, this project and the resulting hybrid approach to simulation modeling
methodology will improve the state of the art in modeling and analyzing systems
with complex decision logic. One major goal is to provide a better prototyping
capability, to test decision logic before it is implemented in today's
increasingly complex systems. By comparing the hybrid approach against simpler
representations across a variety of system types, an initial understanding of
the effect of level of detail in modeling will be achieved. Additional expected
results include impact on graduate and undergraduate education, and case studies
made available to the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;