* 0423460
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Multichannel Multihop Wireless LANs for Rapid Deployment
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Samir Das, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/2009
* USD 28,744.00

0423460&lt;br/&gt;Samir Das&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award
supports the U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Multichannel Multihop Wireless
LANs for Rapid Deployment. Professors Samir Das, State University of New York at
Stony Brook (SUNY) and Vasant Avaghade, Networking and Internet Software Group,
Center for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Pune propose an
experimental study to develop a prototype multihop wireless local area network
(WLAN) architecture. Their goal is to make the scheme completely transparent to
client devices so that it will be unnecessary to use client nodes with wireless
links to connect to a wired network through Access Points (APs). They will
explore use of multiple channels on multiple radio interfaces in each AP to get
a capacity enhancement, and develop and analyze channel assignment issues and
protocols. They also plan to study scheduling algorithms that can power off some
APs so that coverage can be maintained while extending the lifetime of the
network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The collaborating institution in India,
C-DAC, has been a leading research center for advanced computing for several
decades and currently is at the forefront of R&amp;D in networking and internet
technologies. This project will enhance collaboration between C-DAC and SUNY and
both institutions stand to benefit from the complementary expertise offered by
each partner. C-DAC has long experience in implementing research prototypes;
SUNY's expertise lies in basic research in networking, protocol development and
analysis. This project will have an impact on lowering the deployment costs of
telecommunication infrastructure and services in "developing" countries such as
India and will contribute to reducing the "digital divide" between those who can
and cannot use new information and communication tools effectively.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;