* 0423424
* Ice Radar Studies of Mt. Veniaminof Volcano
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Robert Jacobel, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2007
* USD 83,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Jacobel&lt;br/&gt;OPP-
0423424&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will
collaborate with scientists from the U.S. Geological &lt;br/&gt;Survey
(U.S.G.S.), Alaska Volcano Observatory (AVO) to study Mt. Veniaminof on the
Alaska Peninsula. The existence of a caldera ice field at the summit of this
active volcano provides a natural laboratory for the study of volcano-ice-lava
interactions and is thus an ideal setting for cross-disciplinary research. This
interdisciplinary project will produce important results for both the fields of
glaciology and volcanology. Recent studies by scientists at the Volcano
Observatory have shown that Mt. Veniaminof has a more complex and explosive
history than previously recognized, giving a new appreciation of its associated
hazards. Yet, at the present time topographic constraints on the past (and
future) pathways of both water and lava from the summit caldera are still
unknown because it is covered by ice. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigators will set up radio echo sounding experiments to explore the
geometry and history of the ice mass now occupying the summit caldera.
Potentially large ice volumes in the Veniaminof caldera raise the possibility of
future lahar flows, interesting from both a theoretical and hazards perspective.
Very small eruptions can produce outburst floods that have the potential to
mobilize large amounts of loosely-consolidated debris, becoming virtual sediment
factories with substantial impacts downstream. Specifically, they will measure
ice volumes and image caldera topography to predict where water produced by an
eruption would likely flow under a number of eruption scenarios. They will
determine the distribution of heat flow within the caldera by using the radar to
detect areas with liquid water. Finally, dependent on the thickness and extent
of debris layers buried within the ice, they will study the dynamics and flow
history of the ice field by mapping internal reflections revealed by the radar.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project follow from the
interdisciplinary collaboration between scientists from two very different
institutions: the U.S. G. S. AVO and an undergraduate liberal arts college, St.
Olaf College. This collaboration will provide excellent opportunities for
outreach and education through each of the organizations involved. Two
undergraduate students and a post doc will be involved in the project, together
with the Principal Investigator. The appointment for the post doc involves both
teaching and research, so that education is integral to the proposed activities.
Information dissemination and outreach is a statutory obligation of the AVO,
itself a joint program with the University of Alaska and the State of Alaska.
AVO is the principal point of contact for information on volcanic activity and
hazards assessment for government agencies, the media, and the public, and the
Observatory maintains a vigorous outreach and public information program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;