* 0423068
* 2004 Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Meeting; Buffalo, NY; June 3-4, 2004
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* David Kofke, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/2005
* USD 7,100.00

Errington, Jeffrey R., et al SUNY Buffalo

This is a proposal for travel support for approximately fifty graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers to attend the "2004 Midwest Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics Meeting" in Buffalo, NY on June 3 - 4, 2004.

This meeting emphasizes presentations and participation by graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars working in all areas of thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics. NSF-CTS has provided student travel funds for this meeting several
times in the past, and this action has been important in making attendance at
this meeting widely accessible to graduate students.

Broader Societal Impacts:

The Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Meeting is an annual forum
for engineers and scientists in the Midwestern U.S. to present and discuss their
work. All aspects of theoretical, computational, and experimental thermodynamics
research are included in this meeting. This meeting has a strong tradition of
emphasizing presentations from younger researchers, including undergraduate
students, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and young faculty, in a
collegial atmosphere. This grant will benefit young researchers who
traditionally have a harder time obtaining the finances needed to attend major
conferences.

The meeting will feature 30 to 35 contributed talks (20 minutes in length) and 4
invited speakers (each given 40 minutes). The invited speakers will be:

o Fernando Escobedo, Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, Cornell University o Christopher Roberts, Assistant Professor of
Chemical Engineering, University of Delaware o Daniel Lacks, Professor of
Chemical Engineering, Case Western University o Sharon Glotzer, Associate
Professor of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan

The invited speakers have been chosen in part to continue the traditional aim of
this meeting to recognize researchers at early points in their careers. As in
previous years, the meeting will not include any parallel sessions, so all
participants are expected to attend all presentations. This creates a collegial
atmosphere and encourages student participants to listen to presentations on a
broad range of topics.