* 0423385
* The Arctic LTER Project: Regional Variation in Ecosystem Processes and Landscape Linkages
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2011
* John Hobbie, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2011
* USD 5,696,360.00

This is the fourth stage of the Arctic LTER (ARC) located at the Toolik Lake
Field Station, Alaska, where the ecology of tundra, streams, and lakes is
studied to understand controls on ecosystem structure and function within the
long-term goal of predicting the effects of environmental change. Research has
been ongoing at the station since the 1970s, with the LTER project focusing on
the biogeochemical components of a series of connected streams and lakes that
collectively flow into and affect Toolik Lake, as well as the adjacent
headwaters region of the Kuparuk River. Extensive variability exists among the
various terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in the study area, but all are linked
via water and materials transport. The goal for this next phase of ARC is to
understand changes in the Arctic system at catchment and landscape scales
through enhanced knowledge of these linkages and interactions. Research will
identify and quantify intra- and inter-system linkages, determine controls of
the linkages and how they will be affected by a changing environment, and
predict how the entire landscape will respond to environmental change. A suite
of biogeochemical studies will target the interactions among the component
terrestrial, stream, lake ecosystems within this landscape. Short-term studies
will focus on specific materials to better understand inputs, climate drivers
and transformations of materials. Long-term studies will investigate effects of
changes in species composition, temperature, light and nutrients on four types
of tundra and the effects of nutrient loading and climate variability. Lake
studies will focus on landscape-to-lake linkages to understand controls of
terrestrial patchiness on productivity patterns in lakes. Researchers will also
examine in-lake processes and their relations to watershed inputs of nutrients
and dissolved organic matter. Objectives are to measure pelagic and benthic
production and coupling, illucidate food web structures, and determine how
watershed-stream-lake linkages regulate transformations in water chemistry and
patterns of productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts center around
the use of ARC research results to address the important societal goal of
predicting responses of Arctic ecosystems to environmental change. Data and
insights will be provided to Federal and State officials regulating the
development of oil and gas on the Alaskan North Slope. A collaborative
undergraduate/graduate course will be held for two weeks in the summers, with
undergraduate students trained in the field along with graduate students from
ten universities. The MBL's Science Journalism Course facilitates journalist
visits to Toolik Lake. The ARC LTER Schoolyard project involves a majority of
Native Alaskan students. K-12 students conduct and observe local field
experiments similar to those at Toolik Lake. Finally, participating ARC
scientists actively engage students, residents and local community officials in
the region by presenting volunteer lectures on science topics.&lt;br/&gt;