* 0424681
* LTREB:  Stream Ecosystem Structure and Function within a Maturing Deciduous Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Thomas Bott, Stroud Water Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2009
* USD 326,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: LTREB: Stream ecosystem structure and
function within a maturing deciduous forest&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Kaplan, Louis;
Newbold, Denis J.; and Jackson, John K.&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: Stroud Water
Research Center&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses long-term changes in
the ecosystem of a stream located an agricultural region of southeastern
Pennsylvania. Stroud Water Research Center scientists will focus on segments of
White Clay Creek, a designated National Wild and Scenic River System watershed,
that flow through: a 60- to100-year-old forest; a 20-year-old reforested meadow;
and a permanent meadow. Because scientists do not fully understand either the
short-term dynamics or the long-term stability of stream ecosystems, this study
will measure (1) the benefits of a forested stream compared to a meadow stream
and (2) the time frames needed to reach milestones for stream restoration and
reforestation projects. Scientists with expertise in chemistry, biology, and
ecosystem modeling will combine efforts to sample, analyze, and describe the
composition and activities of biological communities in the stream and its
watershed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research on White Clay Creek will provide
an evaluation of best management practices in agriculture and a time frame for
ecosystem recovery as a result of those practices. Stroud Center educational and
outreach programs will then convey these findings to farmers and landowners for
direct implementation, to public officials and community groups for policy
considerations, and to the teachers and students who will inherit the
watershed.&lt;br/&gt;