* 0424022
* Analysis of Complex, Multiple Electricity Markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2004,09/30/2006
* Chen-Ching Liu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 09/30/2006
* USD 152,692.00

Transmission congestion and inconsistent market rules between regions can impose
additional costs to consumers and jeopardize the reliability of interconnected
grids. Efficient grid improvement can enhance the transfer capability of the
interconnected grids and reduce the congestion costs to consumers. On the other
hand, different operation entities may have different market structures and
rules to clear energy market and handle congestion. How congestion inside an
individual market is handled has important consequences on power flows and
prices in neighboring markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is focused on
the economic analysis of congestion management rules and the optimization of
grid improvement decisions for social welfare enhancement in multiple
electricity markets. Different inter-regional coordination of congestion
management rules will be compared for the purpose of social cost and benefit
analysis. We will also explore how different congestion management methods
affect the strategic behaviors of the market participants and the market
equilibrium of an individual market in interconnected grids with multiple
markets. Global optimization techniques will be applied to analyze the economic
value of transmission capacity improvements incorporating the complex
characteristics of large-scale nonlinear power systems. The expected results of
this research are systematic methods to improve grid decisions for enhancement
of social welfare and efficient inter-regional market coordination to remove
barriers of inter-regional energy trading. &lt;br/&gt;