* 0424454
* MEMS Reconfigurable Antennas Integrated with Adaptive Space-Time Processing Algorithms for Use in Wireless MIMO Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Hamid Jafarkhani, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 12/31/2007
* USD 234,349.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research activity focuses on
innovative concepts and technologies in the interdisciplinary areas
of&lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic theory, communication theory, and radio frequency
microelectromechanical systems (RF MEMS).&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the
design, the analysis, the fabrication, and the testing of multifunctional
reconfigurable&lt;br/&gt;antennas operated in conjunction with adaptive space-
time processing algorithms for use in novel wireless&lt;br/&gt;communication
systems. In particular, man-portable or vehicle mounted integrated adaptive
multi-input multi-&lt;br/&gt;output (MIMO) microsystems used in environments
with rapidly changing multipath conditions are targeted. The&lt;br/&gt;goal is
to effectively exploit the theoretical gains in capacity and diversity offered
by multiple reconfigurable&lt;br/&gt;antennas in order to minimize the gap
between theory and practice. To accomplish this goal, the antenna
array&lt;br/&gt;properties (i.e. radiation pattern, the polarization, the
operation frequency, and the input impedance) and
adaptive&lt;br/&gt;transmission signaling schemes are jointly optimized to adapt
to the changing channel conditions. This joint&lt;br/&gt;optimization procedure
requires reconfigurable antenna elements capable of changing their properties
and an&lt;br/&gt;adaptive algorithm that uses the interrelationships among
antenna properties, transmission signaling schemes, and&lt;br/&gt;propagation
environment. Dynamic adaptation of the antenna properties is a recent UCI
development representing a&lt;br/&gt;major advancement in antenna design. In
parallel, algorithms that combine beamforming and space-time coding
to&lt;br/&gt;use partial channel information at the transmitter have also
recently been developed. The innovative technology,&lt;br/&gt;which will be used
to construct the reconfigurable antenna arrays, is a novel RF MEMS fabrication
technology&lt;br/&gt;developed in our group by a DARPA program. This technology
is compatible with microwave laminate substrates&lt;br/&gt;allowing monolithic
integration of MEMS with antenna elements on a printed circuit board. Due to its
monolithic&lt;br/&gt;integration capability, MEMS becomes a physical part of the
antenna geometry, which is the key in achieving high&lt;br/&gt;degree of
multifunctionality and structural reconfigurability. The project is organized
under the following main&lt;br/&gt;steps:&lt;br/&gt;1. Design, analyze,
fabricate, and test a new class of antennas providing multifunctionality
and&lt;br/&gt;reconfigurability in polarization, radiation pattern, operating
frequency, and array configuration.&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop adaptive coding and
signal processing schemes to take advantage of changing
channel&lt;br/&gt;environments.&lt;br/&gt;3. Determine the links among antenna
array properties, transmission signaling schemes (space-time
coding,&lt;br/&gt;spatial multiplexing, and beamforming), and propagation
environment (scattering density, disposition of&lt;br/&gt;the
scatterers).&lt;br/&gt;4. Experimental investigation of the MIMO system
established based on Steps 1, 2, and 3.&lt;br/&gt;5. Based on Steps 1, 2, 3, and
4 develop an adaptation algorithm through which Steps 1, 2, and 3
are&lt;br/&gt;integrated together in order to maximize the resources available
in MIMO channel at all times.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The
multifunctional reconfigurable antenna concept in the proposed work surpasses
the capabilities of and has a&lt;br/&gt;distinct difference with smart or
adaptive antennas. In the literature, a smart or adaptive antenna refers to an
antenna&lt;br/&gt;array of elements with no intelligence combined with signal-
processing capability through which the time domain&lt;br/&gt;signals from or to
the individual antenna elements are weighted and combined to optimize the
radiation pattern in&lt;br/&gt;response to the signal environment. On the other
hand, a reconfigurable antenna array consists of antenna elements&lt;br/&gt;each
of which has some intelligence. This intelligence stems from the ability of
reconfiguring the physical structure&lt;br/&gt;of individual elements through
which polarization, radiation and frequency properties of the array are
changed.&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the elements in the reconfigurable antenna array have
the ability to intelligently process the signals in spectral&lt;br/&gt;and
angular domains adding to the already present time domain processing of the
system. Due to the fundamental&lt;br/&gt;difference between smart antenna array,
i.e. phased array, and a reconfigurable array, the theory describing
the&lt;br/&gt;behavior of the reconfigurable antenna arrays will be developed
under this project. This will introduce a new section&lt;br/&gt;in the chapter
of antennas and propagation in electromagnetics textbooks. There is also a need
to develop the signal&lt;br/&gt;processing and communication theory that can
benefit from this new class of antennas. Furthermore the
integrated&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary research philosophy adopted throughout
this project will allow the PIs to develop and offer&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary
educational programs in the fields of electromagnetics, communications, and MEMS
that will&lt;br/&gt;answer the need for the new generation of engineers (in
particular among minority students) at UCI who can deal&lt;br/&gt;with and
provide solutions to the emerging multifunctional micro-communication-systems.