* 0424002
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Organization and Regulation of Organophosphorus Pesticide Degrading Genes in Soil Bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2010
* James Wild, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2010
* USD 28,221.00

0424002 James Wild Description: This award is for joint research in biochemistry
entitled US-India Cooperative Research: Organization and Regulation of
Organophosphorus Pesticide Degrading Genes in Soil Bacteria. The collaborators
are US PI James Wild, Texas A&M University and Professor Dayananda Siddavatam of
Sri Krishnadevaraya University in Anantapur, India. The researchers propose to
isolate different strains of organophosphorus pesticide degrading (opd) bacteria
from several regions of the world. This study will address questions about the
function of the opd gene cluster and provide a bacterial model system for
studying horizontal gene transfer. It could result in very pertinent data on the
opd gene cluster, horizontal gene transfer and the role of these genes in the
growth of bacteria. In addition to its contribution to fundamental understanding
of the regulation and organization of bacterial opd genes, this research will
have implications for the bioremediation of pesticides that are used worldwide
to control major insect pests. Scope: The US investigator has chosen to
collaborate with an Indian scientist that has substantial experience in
bacterial genetics, regulation, and diversity of opd genes. Combining the
complementary intellectual resources of both US and Indian laboratories will
greatly contribute to the eventual success of this project. This is a new
collaboration that will create an international relationship between the two
groups and provide a fruitful training opportunity for young scientists.









