* 0424043
* A Structural Approach to the Functional Genomics of Soluble Tandem ABC Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* John Hunt, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2009
* USD 961,813.00

ATP-binding cassette (ABC) Transporters have vital roles in the physiology of
living cells. The current grant will support efforts to apply structural and
thermodynamic understanding to elucidate the biochemical function of a broadly-
distributed set of soluble mechanoenzymes of unknown function that possess ABC
motor domains homologous to those in ABC Transporters. These homologues encode a
tandem pair of motor domains in a single polypeptide, leading to their
designation as soluble tandem ABC proteins or stABC's. The stABC's cluster into
10 sub-families likely to mediate distinct biochemical functions, and members of
2-6 families occur in every fully sequenced genome. Techniques in bacterial
genetics and proteomics will be applied, as informed by ongoing structural and
enzymological studies of ABC proteins, to elucidate the biochemical role played
by these proteins of known sequence but cryptic function. Thus, an
interdisciplinary genetic-biochemical-structural approach will be used to
elucidate biological function, which represents a vital research activity in the
post-genome era.

Broader Impacts: The project will contribute to the educational and training
activities. A course module treating protein structure from a thermodynamic
perspective has been developed. The proposed research will be integrated into an
undergraduate "project laboratory" course in which a genomics approach is taken
to addressing a current research problem in the laboratory. The undergraduates
use online bioinformatics tools to identify homologous proteins, which they
clone, express, and purify in order to perform biophysical assays that address a
central mechanistic question. The goal is to teach students how to use
laboratory research, disciplined by critical thinking, to address conceptual
questions about biological function and mechanism.