* 0424080
* Quantum Dot-Photonic Crystal Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Jelena Vuckovic, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 210,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0424080&lt;br/&gt;VUCKOVIC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
proposes to build two novel types of quantum dot-photonic crystal lasers: a two-
dimensional coupled photonic crystal resonator array (CPCRA) laser, and a single
quantum dot laser. The former is based on CPCRA structures that he has proposed
recently; such a laser would exhibit low operating threshold resulting from a
large spontaneous emission rate enhancement in photonic crystal microcavities,
together with increased output power (relative to conventional photonic crystal
microcavity lasers) resulting from the phase-coupled operation of hundreds of
photonic crystal microcavity lasers on a chip. The second type of laser that he
proposes is a single quantum dot laser, which represents an ultimate limit in
laser miniaturization. This laser would be based on photonic crystal
microcavities that he has proposed for cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) with
a single quantum dot exciton, and would represent a solid-state equivalent of a
single atom laser demonstrated recently. However, a single quantum dot laser
would not require a very complicated atom trapping mechanism, which limits the
duration of a single-atom laser operation at present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On
the application level, the development of photonic crystal lasers with low
threshold and increased output power is crucial for most of their proposed
commercial applications. In addition, the development of a single quantum dot
laser would be of great importance for ultra-low-power laser applications, as
the structure would have lower threshold than any conventional laser. On the
fundamental level, the demonstration of a single quantum dot laser would open
opportunities to study cavity QED and quantum optics in the solid state instead
of using atoms trapped inside cavities. Finally, as part of this project, the PI
will also develop an integrated research and educational program ranging from
fundamental science (quantum optics, quantum information science, and mesoscopic
physics) to engineering (photonics and optoelectronics). The PI believes that an
investment into education of a new generation of researchers and technologists
will enable exploitation of photonic crystals and quantum optics at their full
potential in the future. Moreover, by making researchers in other fields of
science familiar with his work, he will possibly create new applications and
research directions.&lt;br/&gt;