* 0424103
* Behavior in the Balance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Helen Longino, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 07/31/2006
* USD 42,701.00

The project has two dimensions: a comparative epistemological analysis of four
approaches in the sciences of human behavior and an analysis of the social and
cultural implications of the work. The point of the epistemological analysis is
to understand the kinds of knowledge of human behavior afforded by these
approaches by analyzing their methods and presuppositions of inquiry. The point
of the socio-cultural analysis is to understand the ways in which the scientific
research is responsive to social and cultural preoccupations in the larger
context and the ways in which the research is taken up in that context. The
study focuses on research directed at understanding the proximate causes of
individual behavior and on biological approaches or approaches that are
typically contrasted or seen as in competition with biological research. Thus,
this study surveys 1) behavior genetics (both classical and molecular), 2)
behavioral anatomy and physiology, 3) developmental psychology, and 4)
developmental and dynamic systems theories. These are the approaches most
closely engaged in contemporary versions of the nature/nurture debate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to identifying immediate social concerns
implicated in this research, the study will examine how general philosophical
concepts of human behavior and action are reinforced or undermined by scientific
research. The empirical studies analyzed address aggression and sexual
orientation. In the previous, epistemological, phase of the study, the
investigator developed an analytic matrix to tabulate characteristic questions,
investigative methodologies, and assumptions characterizing the different
approaches. This enabled her to characterize the ways central behavioral
concepts are operationalized, the different questions the approaches (can)
investigate, the methods and data characteristic of each approach, the
distinctive and shared assumptions that support interpretations of the data. The
social and cultural analysis she plans to undertake in the second phase,
consists of studying explicit and implicit valuations of the behavior and the
philosophical concepts of human action and volition embedded in the research.
These can be found in summations and review articles that indicate the perceived
significance of the work and the presentation of behaviors as targets of control
or encouragement. They are also discernable in choice of journals in which to
publish and the institutions funding the work. By looking both at how the
researchers represent their research to a larger public and how it is taken up,
the investigator will identify 1) the social interests served by the kind of
knowledge sought in the research and 2) the more general conceptions of human
action and responsibility that are implied in particular ways of thinking about
the behaviors studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central hypothesis of this study
is that the salience and the fascination of the nature-nurture debate in
connection with behaviors such as those whose investigation it follows keeps
attention on the etiology of individual behavior rather than on the phenomena
conceived in ways that might different policy implications. This hypothesis will
be investigated by examining 1) the continuity of conceptions of behavior
through different discursive contexts and 2) how controversies concerning the
empirical study of human behavior are represented in those contexts. By then
attending to and evaluating the representations of the policy implications
articulated by the authors whose work is examined, the author will bring the
results of this study to bear on social and political questions concerning
behavioral research. &lt;br/&gt;