* 0424526
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: El Marquesillo Archaeological Survey
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Robert Tykot, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2006
* USD 11,530.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert H. Tykot, Travis Doering will collect and
analyze data from the Formative period (c. 1250 B.C. to A.D. 200) Gulf Olmec
site of El Marquesillo, Veracruz, Mexico. Through a combination of
archaeological survey, artifact collection, mapping, and geophysical
prospection, Doering will investigate the structure and composition of the site.
The investigation of El Marquesillo presents an opportunity to examine a site
whose role within the social and economic landscape of the Formative period Gulf
Coast is uncertain. Data generated by this research will be used to evaluate
alternative models of Olmec settlement hierarchy and political economy.
Documenting and studying the site's structure and composition will yield
information about its political organization, and collecting and analyzing
artifact assemblages will produce data on local economic patterns and processes.
Combined, these data will provide new information on the sociopolitical
interactions among core and periphery sites within the region known as the Gulf
Olmec Heartland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary investigation of ceramic and
sculptural evidence at the site indicates that its inhabitants articulated with
other Olmec centers. The nature and timing of such interactions remain unknown,
however, as do the political and economic consequences of those relationships.
These are significant variables for understanding intraregional associations and
the long-term trajectory of Gulf Olmec civilization, as well as its impact on
the emergence and development of sociopolitical complexity in
Mesoamerica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will consist of an integrated
series of survey, collection, prospecting, and mapping techniques that will
detect and record landscape signatures, site constituents, and subsurface
deposits. The site will be mapped using a total station, magnetometer, and
electro-magnetic conductivity meter. Anthropic soil surveys will be used to
examine the presence and nature of subsurface deposits, with the greater goal of
understanding earlier activity loci for comparison with later site organization.
Profiling of selected segments of the dynamic river cut, which has exposed
significant portions of the site, will be used to link these sets of
observations together to form a diachronic picture of settlement organization.
Analysis of the surface collected ceramic and lithic artifact assemblages will
permit an assessment of patterns of intrasite distribution and will allow
inferences to be made concerning the degree to which the site's residents were
involved in intraregional exchange networks. The combination of these data with
photogrammetric techniques will result in a series of GIS-generated images of
the site that will offer a high resolution picture of the site's occupational
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this multi-stage research design using
non-invasive techniques, the research will evaluate contrasting explanations for
the political and economic role that El Marquesillo played in the Gulf Coast
Olmec sociopolitical hierarchy. The resulting data will contribute to the
limited body of evidence that presently exists concerning peripheral sites
during the Formative period on the southern Gulf Coast and form a base upon
which future investigations can build. A broader impact of this work will be the
enhancement of the co-investigator's scientific and archaeological capabilities
and an improved heuristic and practical relationship between archaeologists of
Mexico and the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;