* 0424145
* Estimation of MIMO Wireless Communications Channels:  Approaches and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jitendra Tugnait, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 08/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

Wireless channel is a challenging communications medium with relatively low
capacity per&lt;br/&gt;unit bandwidth, random amplitude and phase uctuations due
to multipath time-selective fading,&lt;br/&gt;intersymbol interference due to
delay spread and multipaths, and interference from other users&lt;br/&gt;due to
the broadcast nature of the radio channel. The physical link design goal is to
achieve data&lt;br/&gt;rates close to the fundamental information capacity
limits of the channel. Recent results have&lt;br/&gt;shown that MIMO (multiple-
input multiple-output) channels with multiple transmit and
receive&lt;br/&gt;antennas are capable of achieving enormous capacity gains over
single antenna channels. This&lt;br/&gt;has spurred key advances in space-time
processing to capitalize on increased Shannon capacity.&lt;br/&gt;Accurate
knowledge of the CSI (channel state information) of MIMO systems is a
prerequisite for&lt;br/&gt;most MIMO physical layer approaches. Traditionally a
training sequence, in lieu of the information&lt;br/&gt;sequence, is transmitted
during the acquisition mode to enable the receiver to design an equalizer
or&lt;br/&gt;estimate the channel in the presence of the aforementioned
uncertainties. In the fast time-varying&lt;br/&gt;case, the training sequences
may have to be transmitted periodically. For a given bandwidth, use&lt;br/&gt;of
training sequences decreases the effective information rate. In blind channel
estimation (system&lt;br/&gt;identification) and equalization no training
sequences are available or used. In semi-blind channel&lt;br/&gt;estimation
approaches, a combination of training and information sequence-based data is
used so&lt;br/&gt;that in addition to the training-based data, one also exploits
the information in the rest of the&lt;br/&gt;received signal. In superimposed
training-based approach the training sequence is \on" all the time&lt;br/&gt;and
is transmitted (at low power) concurrently with (superimposed on) the
information sequence.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is concerned with all such three
techniques for channel estimation for both single user&lt;br/&gt;and multiple
users systems and for both time-invariant frequency-selective channels and
frequency-&lt;br/&gt;and time- selective fading
channels.&lt;br/&gt;Identification of fast-varying nonstationary processes is
best handled via structured nonsta-&lt;br/&gt;tionarities. Our initial focus is
on time-varying channels described by a discrete-time
complex&lt;br/&gt;exponential basis expansion model (CE-BEM) resulting in either
a single-input multiple-output&lt;br/&gt;(SIMO) time-varying linear system for
single user systems or a multiple-input multiple-output&lt;br/&gt;(MIMO) linear
system for multiuser systems. For wireless channels such canonical models can
be&lt;br/&gt;derived based on certain physical parameters such as signal
bandwidth, channel Doppler spread and&lt;br/&gt;multipath spread, up to some
unknown time-invariant constants. Other modeling approaches such&lt;br/&gt;as
wavelet and polynomial bases, will also be considered. We are investigating
blind, semi-blind&lt;br/&gt;and superimposed training-based system
identification techniques for SIMO and MIMO channel es-&lt;br/&gt;timation,
multiuser interference suppression, and equalization and detection of desired
user's signal&lt;br/&gt;over asynchronous frequency- and/or time-selective
fading channels.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies
in its focus on some fundamental modeling,&lt;br/&gt;signal design and channel
estimation issues that cut across several applications areas (e.g.
wireless&lt;br/&gt;communications systems and networks, radio communications,
and underwater acoustics). Both&lt;br/&gt;theoretical and applications aspects
are being considered.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project lies in
graduate education of underrepresented groups,&lt;br/&gt;research at an EPSCoR
institution, participation of students in professional society meetings,
and&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of the research results through teaching at both
undergraduate and graduate levels&lt;br/&gt;(particularly the courses that are
part of the newly established Bachelor of Wireless Engineering&lt;br/&gt;degree
program at Auburn University).&lt;br/&gt;A-1