* 0424944
* CAREER: Brain Electric Source Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2004,05/31/2004
* Bin He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 05/31/2004
* USD 60,618.00

9875344&lt;br/&gt;He&lt;br/&gt;Brain activity is spatially distributed in three
dimensions of the brain and evolves with time. Recent advances in medical
imaging technology, such as functional MRI, have greatly increased our ability
to image brain functions with high spatial resolution. However, no single brain
imaging technology is currently capable of providing both near millimeter
precision in localizing regions of activated tissues and sub-second temporal
precision for characterizing changes in patterns of activation over time. While
electroencephalograms offer excellent temporal resolution to characterize
rapidly changing patterns of brain activation, conventional EEG techniques are
limited due to their inability to provide spatial information regarding brain
activity. Thus, it is of great importance to develop technologies, which can
non-invasively image brain activity with high spatial and temporal resolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A coherent research and teaching plan is proposed for the
CAREER program. The focus of the research is to develop Brain Electric Source
Imaging (BESI) methodologies to achieve high-resolution spatio-temporal mapping
of the human brain. The successful development of BESI methodologies will
significantly advance the state-of-the-art in the field of biomedical
engineering, and have an important impact on the fields of neurology and
neurosurgery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve the proposed research
objectives, the following aims will be addressed: (1) Boundary Element Head
Modeling - to develop engineering methods to link the cortical potential with
the scalp potential in a realistically shaped inhomogeneous head, (2) Brain
Source Image Reconstruction - to develop imaging algorithms reconstructing
cortical potentials from scalp potentials and determine optimal system
parameters in a realistic setting, (3) Experimental Validation - to validate
experimentally the proposed BESI methods in a realistic head phantom, and (4)
Initial Clinical Testing - to initially test the proposed BESI methodologies
from intraoperative cortical recordings in epilepsy
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An innovative teaching plan, tightly linked with
the BESI research, will include: (1) development of two new courses (a) "Neural
Engineering" (Graduate course), and (b) "Introduction to Neural Engineering"
(Senior/Graduate course), (2) development of internet-based neural engineering
courseware facilitating effective teaching and distance learning, and (3)
initiation and development of a new curriculum in Neural Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;