* 0424673
* The hydrodynamics of benthic predation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Marc Weissburg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 581,284.00

Intellectual Merit: This project will focus on how chemical signals mediate
patterns of olfactory predation. We will correlate prey characteristics and
environmental effects to the strength of the interaction between populations of
particular predator and prey species. This project has 3 major experimental
goals: (1). Quantify the structure of chemical plumes as functions of three
variables: prey size, prey density, and turbulence. (2). Quantify how predators
using different sensory mechanisms respond to variations in prey size and
density, and turbulence. (3). Investigate how ambient turbulence, prey size,
prey aggregation, and the interaction among these three parameters increases
susceptibility to predation in the field. The synergistic result of the fluid
mechanics, behavior, and field experiments will produce quantifiable linkages
between prey and environmental characteristics and patterns of predation and
community structures. The model system chosen for this study is the interactions
between blue crab and gastropod predators and their infaunal bivalve prey. The
behavioral disparities between rapidly (e.g. crabs) vs. slowly (e.g. gastropod)
moving predators suggest they rely on different signal properties, and therefore
may form a guild defined at least partially by the olfactory navigational
strategies. As observed in the recent NSF workshop on future challenges in
oceanography (OEUVRE), "fundamental advances in knowledge of turbulent mixing of
the ocean at all scales will result in understanding a host of problems from
water mass conservation to predator-prey interactions". This project will
address how the fluid physics of chemical signal transport and the biological
mechanisms of sensory reception mediate predation intensity in natural
populations. &lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: This study focuses on important
estuarine species (blue crabs, whelks, hard clams), each of which supports
important fisheries in Georgia and elsewhere. Defining predation intensity as
functions of physical and biological characteristics may be helpful for
management of crab, whelk and hard clam populations. Training will be provided
for two graduate (Ph.D.) students (one in Sensory Biology and one in Fluid
Mechanics), and one Post-doctoral associate. These individuals will experience a
rich interdisciplinary research environment in addition to developing the skills
to be leaders in their respective fields. Undergraduate students will also be
involved in data collection and analysis, particularly analysis of the
behavioral tracks, PLIF, and field experiments. The undergraduate will gain
valuable research experience and also will be exposed to interdisciplinary
issues and perspectives. The School of Biology currently has a summer REU in
aquatic chemical signaling and we expect that other undergraduates will develop
projects that are related to this project, and which will capitalize on our
integrative approach and techniques. This study will also connect well with on-
going graduate educational efforts, in particular our NSF IGERT program to
educate in the area of aquatic chemical signaling. Graduate students are
typically supported during their first year in the program and are expected to
be involved in research projects. Thus, in addition to the students supported by
this proposal, perhaps two additional graduate students can be expected to be
involved in the project each year. Laboratory exercises based on the methods and
results of the proposed study will be developed for the IGERT courses. These
exercises also will be used, possibly in a reduced form, for basic undergraduate
laboratories in Ecology and Fluid Mechanics. This will give undergraduates
exposure to interdisciplinary work, and foster an early appreciation for
breaking down boundaries between disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;