* 0424696
* Collaborative Research: Adjustment of the ACC to Variability in Southern ocean Winds: A Modal Point of View
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Hendrik Dijkstra, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2005
* USD 33,007.00

0424792

Intellectual Merit: The generation, propagation and upper-ocean mixing
associated with near inertial internal waves will be conducted using data
collected during the Eastern Pacific Investigation of Climate(EPIC2001)
intensive field survey. This work will advance our understanding of near-
inertial wave generation, propagation and decay at low-latitudes-processes that
are poorly understood though likely important in light of recent estimates of
the contribution of near-inertial wave mixing to the global mixing budget. Maps
of wind-flux into mixed-layer inertial motions also indicate that the Eastern
pacific Warm Pool (EPWP) may be a hotspot for low-latitude inertial wave
generation. Preliminary findings suggest that near-inertial wave-produced mixing
may influence entrainment at the base of the mixed-layer and the structure and
evolution of the region's shallow thermocline. Both time series and spatial data
from the EPIC2001 survey show that shear and turbulence within the thermocline
were dominated by a single, energetic, downward-propagating near-inertial
internal wave. The richness of the EPIC2001 data set, with temporal and spatial
sampling of the upper ocean and lower atmosphere from a number of platforms,
presents the unique opportunity to conduct such an investigation. Previous
studies of low-latitude near-inertial waves lacked spatial data to extend the
propagation and generation details beyond rough estimation.

The main scientific objectives of the project are to: 1. Quantify and describe
in time and space the near-inertial wave and mixing it produced at 10?N, 95?W.
2. Determine the influence of the wave on mixed-layer properties. 3. Estimate
the wave's properties using linear wave theory. 4. Quantify the wave's energy
flux and estimate losses to spreading and turbulent dissipation. 5. Use a simple
mixed-layer slab model to investigate the temporal and spatial variability of
wind forcing. 6. Use a wind-forced primitive equation numerical model to
investigate the wave's generation and propagation. 7. Compare our results with
those of past near-inertial wave research and linear near-inertial wave theory.

Broader Impacts: This research will be done in close interaction with other
EPIC2001 investigators and contribute to the EPIC goal of better understanding
atmosphere-ocean coupling in the EPWP and Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ).
The results will also provide a physical basis for improving parameterizations
of mixed-layer turbulent fluxes in ocean models utilized for making predictions
of mixed-layer depth and heat-content in a key climatic region. As part of the
project, a graduate student will complete his Ph.D. training in interpreting
oceanic turbulence data as part of the upper ocean response to atmospheric
forcing using modern analysis and modeling tools.

