* 0424931
* Collaborative Research:  Magnetic Properties of Greenland and Antarctic Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Pierre Biscaye, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2008
* USD 80,508.00

The Principal Investigators have successfully measured the concentration of
ultra-fine magnetic particles in ice samples from different climatic intervals
from the NorthGRIP core, Greenland, using low temperature (77K) isothermal
remnant magnetization (IRM) analysis and compared it with the mass concentration
of aerosol dust that varies by a factor of ten. The mean IRM intensity of the
ice varies by a factor of three from glacial to interglacial intervals, being
lower during interglacials. The magnetic measurements are reproducible and well
above the IRM intensity of ultra-pure water ice made under clean lab conditions.
The IRM acquisition curves of the ice samples are compatible with a mixture of
magnetite and subsidiary hematite contributions, magnetic properties that are
typical of pristine loess from the Chinese loess plateau, which is considered to
have the same source in the eastern Asian deserts as dust in Greenland ice.
Comparison of the IRM intensity and total dust mass of the ice shows a
remarkably good correlation, but also reveals a large uncorrelated
magnetization, which is essentially constant over the different climatic stages
and is the dominant component during intervals with very low measured dust
concentrations. The uncorrelated magnetization may be due to either a constant
flux of highly magnetic interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) or the more general
presence of ultrafine grain aerosol dust mass that were largely undetected in
the Coulter Counter measurements. The latter would imply that the actual dust
concentration contrast between glacial and interglacial intervals is much
smaller than estimated. These alternative hypotheses can be evaluated by
obtaining comparative data from ice cores from Antarctica, where the aerosol
dust flux is radically different (concentration, source) than in Greenland
whereas the flux of IDPs should be about the same. The Principal Investigators
will measure the magnetization of a suite of samples representing the full range
of glacial and interglacial dust concentrations from the Vostok ice core. IRM
acquisition curves will be generated for about 10 samples from each of 12
distinct climatic intervals using a new pulse magnetizer capable of generating
fields to 2.5 T on large (~50 cc) samples to achieve saturation and high signal
level. Dust concentrations will be measured on the same samples using a Coulter
Counter. Additional sets of samples from selected intervals with intermediate
dust concentrations will be analyzed from North GRIP to solidify the
magnetization vs. dust concentration curve from that region. SEM-EDXRF analyses
will be done to characterize the dust. A comparison of the magnetization vs.
dust concentration relationships between NorthGRIP and Vostok will allow them to
make quantitative estimates of the contributions to the uncorrelated
magnetization from the flux of extraterrestrial particles and possibly, the
undetected aerosol dust mass. The outcome of these novel experiments is expected
to have broad significance to our understanding of the role of dust in long-term
climate change.



