* 0424710
* BE/MUSES: Alternative Fuels and Powerplant Systems for Transportation: Impact on Environment and Society
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Lynn Johnson, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2005
* USD 115,000.00

BE/MUSES 0424710&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BE/MUSES / Alternative Fuels and
Powerplant Systems for Transportation; &lt;br/&gt;Impact on Environment and
Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BE/MUSES planning
project focuses on evaluating and prioritizing a broad range of
multidisciplinary criteria to determine optimum alternative fuel hybrid vehicle
configuration options for passenger vehicle transportation to maximize overall
environmental and human health benefits. Hybrid technology provides an excellent
opportunity for reducing vehicle emissions as they typically obtain twice the
fuel economy of their non-hybrid counterparts, with emission reductions
generally greater than a factor of two due to the unique hybrid vehicle-
operating environment. Hybrid vehicles can utilize a wide range of fuel and
powerplant options that require a widely varying degree of infrastructure
investment. The unique aim of this study is the evaluation and prioritization of
these factors with expansion into new areas including environmental life cycle
analysis (LCA) from fuel production to end-use, consideration of the effect of
limited fueling infrastructure on transportation patterns, pollution dispersion
analysis and their relation to urban growth. This optimization will vary
according to regional characteristics and will be considered for two
illustrative locations, the Denver Metropolitan area as well as a mega-city in a
developing nation. Total environmental impact will be considered from cradle-to-
grave, from fuel production to efficient end usage. The implementation of hybrid
vehicles powered with alternative fuels is critical in addressing the
increasingly detrimental environmental and human health impacts associated with
increasing petroleum usage worldwide, sustaining the national economy, and on
reducing national dependence on imported crude oil. The objective of this
planning project includes development of a multidisciplinary team with a diverse
background in fuel cell technology, powerplant performance potential, renewable
energy and fuel production, environmental and impact assessment, urban planning
and simulation, traffic simulations, and geographic information systems. This
provides a valuable opportunity for integration of systems analysis in
engineering education, while the importance of alternative fuels and vehicle
technology provides an effective means of attracting potential students to the
engineering field. Specific details of integration with engineering education
will be considered in this planning project. The project will be jointly managed
by Rober Wellek in CTS and Juan Pestano in CMS.&lt;br/&gt;