* 0424511
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Consequences of Regional Political and Economic Integration for Inequality and the Welfare State in Western Europe
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Arthur Alderson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 7,479.00

Around the world, societies are binding themselves together and building
regional economies and polities. The phenomenon of regional integration is a
dramatic social change with important sociological implications. This
dissertation research aims to answer two key questions. First, what effect has
regional integration in the European Union had on income inequality in European
societies? Second, how has regional integration shaped welfare spending in
European states? These questions matter because regional integration is pursued
by many societies that find themselves enmeshed in dense global networks (e.g.,
the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Common Market of the Southern Cone,
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations), yet there is little scientific
research on the consequences of regional integration. To resolve these research
questions, this project (1) develops innovative measures of regional integration
in consultation with EU experts at the Mannheim Center for European Social
Research and elsewhere, (2) collects data from the European Union archives and
the Union of International Associations, both located in Brussels, (3) compiles
standard measures of income inequality and the welfare state, (4) uses time-
series statistical analysis to estimate the association between regional
integration and international income inequality and differences among welfare
states, and (5) employs statistical techniques for panel data to analyze the
relationship between regional integration and national income inequality and
welfare spending. The broader impacts of this research include the following.
This project will contribute new evidence on the consequences of regional
integration, test hypotheses drawn from a variety of social science disciplines,
and advance debates in multidisciplinary literatures on globalization, the
welfare state, and income inequality. More generally, the project will
contribute to our understanding of changes in the geographic scale of social
action and the consequences of the institutionalization of new political and
economic forms. This research also will develop new measures of regional
integration that could be used by other scholars, the enhancement of
international research networks, and the dissemination of policy-relevant
findings on the consequences of regional integration.