* 0424312
* Collaborative Research:     Architecture and Implementation of Intelligent Transceivers for Ultra-Wideband Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Peter Kinget, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 08/31/2008
* USD 196,000.00

0424312 Kinget

In February 2002, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) revised its Part
15 emission rules and allowed the use of a large section of the radio-frequency
(RF) spectrum by commercial ultra-wideband (UWB) transmission devices. The
restrictions imposed on these devices include a limit on the transmitted power
spectral density of -41 dBm/MHz from 3.1 to 10.6 GHz and a minimum signal
bandwidth of 500 MHz. The availability of such a wide bandwidth has enabled
several new short-distance, low-power, high bit-rate applications for
communication, ranging and location-finding. Industrial standards proposals for
the use of the above bandwidth allow for very impressive throughput performance.
However, since time-to-market is a major constraint, many of these standards use
variants of well-known carrier-based communication methods.

This new FCC policy allows the public use of such a large spectrum for the first
time. Thus it opens opportunities for fundamentally new research in wireless
communications in topics such as radically new signaling methods and
architectures, and their integrated circuit realization, in contrast with the
traditional narrow-band approach of carrier-based modulation techniques.

Intellectual Merits: The PI proposes to use this unique opportunity to research
highly efficient, integrated circuit implementations of transceivers for UWB
radio applications. He will explore the trade-offs between the signaling and
system level, and the architectural and integrated circuit implementation level.
He proposes to investigate an implementation-friendly digital multi-carrier UWB
signaling format that is expected to alleviate major issues with UWB
communications, namely interference and multipath. He also plans to investigate
a low-power interference detector which detects the presence of undesired
signals in given frequency bands. The detector shares interference information
with other transceivers and allows for a unique intelligent interference
mitigation strategy. The interference detection strategy can be combined very
well with the proposed signaling format, with minimal hardware cost or power
overhead. These innovations are enabled by our proposed research efforts in the
efficient implementation of transceivers in VLSI integrated circuits. The low RF
output power-levels in UWB open the possibility to use current and future
nanometer CMOS technologies and exploit the impressive operation speed they
offer. He plans to develop a circuit implementation of the transceivers
including such circuit blocks as broadband amplifiers, high linearity
correlators and matched filters, high-speed D/A and A/D converters, and output
buffers.

Broader Impacts: Communication technologies and more specifically wireless
communication technologies play a prominent role in developing a broadly
accessible cyber-infrastructure. UWB radio technology opens exciting new
opportunities for applications and the proposed research on the realization of
an efficient physical layer is crucial enabler towards applications.

The shortage of analog, mixed-signal, and RF integrated circuit designers, with
in-depth knowledge of the communication systems aspects of the problem, has been
a continuous challenge for the advancement of this field. Through research
experiences and courses, his program will educate researchers and circuit
designers with the cross-disciplinary skills to invent new design principles for
integrated circuits in the context of the system in which they operate.

The program involves the collaboration of PIs at different institutions. It
leverages the industrial expertise and research backgrounds of both PIs. It
further offers unique opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to
interact with a broader research effort. To enhance the educational
opportunities for students in this emerging field, new courses will be
developed. For undergraduate students a research experience program is proposed
that will offer research projects specifically designed to provide hands-on
experience and extend their expertise.