* 0424787
* Collaborative Research:  Larval Transport in a Coupled-Estuary-Shelf System: A Modeling Study
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Charles Epifanio, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/2007
* USD 31,956.00

This project will investigate the interactive effects of advection, mixing,
organism behavior and environmental variability on larval transport in a
coupled-estuary-shelf system using a theoretical approach, and the blue crab,
Callinectes sapidus, as the model organism. Although previous research on larval
transport has focused on export and re-entry to an estuary, there is a critical
need to systematically examine the relative importance of multiple factors on
the regional-scale exchange of larvae between estuaries and on recruitment
variability. Numerical circulation models and particle-tracking algorithms have
matured to the point where they are ready to address these problems.
Investigators will use a coupled hydrodynamic-particle tracking model to
systematically isolate and evaluate the effects of advection, mixing, organism
behavior and environmental variability, and to integrate their complex and
nonlinear interactions. Observed wind- and flow-driven circulation patterns will
be simulated with a computationally tractable semi-idealized hydrodynamic model
of the Middle Atlantic Bight. Particles within the numerical model will simulate
blue crab early-life stages using the extensive information available from field
investigations and laboratory behavior studies in this region. This is the first
modeling effort that systematically focuses on the complex interactions between
advection, mixing, organism behavior and environmental variability in a 3D
numerical model that includes the latest understanding of sub-grid scale
turbulent processes, vertically resolved blue crab larval behavior, and the
ability to examine exchange between estuarine systems. Understanding the cause
of recruitment variability and the strength of connections between coastal
populations is a critical avenue of research for the recreationally and
commercially important blue crab. The blue crab fishery is a valuable resource
whose sustainability is currently in question in Chesapeake Bay. Understanding
the physical processes that generate recruitment variability, and the degree of
interconnectedness of estuarine populations, will help managers make more
informed decisions for maintaining a sustainable blue crab fishery. Although
focused on blue crabs, research results will be address fundamental, universal
questions about factors that control large-scale transport of planktonic larvae
on continental shelves, their return to nursery areas, and potential for
exchange between estuarine systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
enhancing our understanding of the complex factors that affect larval transport
and recruitment, this research program has a strong education and outreach
component, including development of an interactive web page. One undergraduate
summer student will gain numerical modeling and data analysis training. Also,
one teacher Fellow will gain experience working with scientists and translating
research results into lesson plans. The investigators involvement in the MA-
COSEE program, the mentoring of a teacher Fellow, and development of a web page
will promote direct interaction between scientists and educators and enable
broad dissemination of research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;