* 0424461
* A New Paradigm for Collaborative Research and Education in Sustainable Energy Systems and Supporting Information Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Anjan Bose, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

The proposed collaborative research emerges from the PIs efforts over several
years of collaboration with researchers around the world through conferences and
short-term visits. In particular, initial endeavors have focused on
collaboration with African researchers through a series of conferences on the
African continent and more recently through research exchanges at U.S.
universities. The objective in this proposal is to engage in more substantial
exchanges and to help develop a research and education infrastructure that can
take advantage of a wealth of under-utilized knowledge and man-power in Africa
as well as a region whose energy and information technology infrastructure can
be used as a test bed. We believe the proposed center can serve as a model of
international cooperation in research and education. The specific research will
be directed toward sustainable energy systems and the required information
technology infrastructure.

The main objectives of the proposed work will be to:

address challenges faced by African nations in developing the electric supply
system, and thus, provide new perspectives and ideas for U.S. engineering
problems, encourage interest from U.S. students in international projects,
particularly among under represented groups. take advantage of areas of
expertise within electric power systems that are more advanced in Africa, for
example, the greater reliance on distributed generation technologies due to the
weaker transmission links, provide an opportunity to give U.S. students a
different perspective on engineering issues, thus, enhancing their educational
experience, utilize a large well-educated pool of manpower in Africa that is not
being fully engaged and thus more efficiently perform important research, and
effectively use the existing U.S. research and education infrastructure in
training US students as well as students on the African continent.