* 0424583
* MII:  Infrastructure Improvement in Computer Engineering Education and Research: Computing, Networking and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* G.V.S. Raju, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 12/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a plan to increase the number of under-
represented students (Hispanics, African Americans, American Indians, and women)
pursuing M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering and computer science by
enhancing research opportunities in the areas of computer networking and medical
imaging. The project achieves its goal through three specific activities: (1)
enhancement of research infrastructure in the computer networks and computerized
tomography fields, (2) creation of collaborative research opportunities with the
other research institutions in the region and development of joint mentorship
program with local industry, and (3) improvement of minority students recruiting
and retention efforts. The research in this project is in the areas of security
of mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) and sensor networks and image reconstruction
in Computerized Tomography. The project develops methods for authentication, and
trust establishment and maintenance in MANETs. It also develops and implements
effective new methods of image reconstruction from projections that are based on
non-traditional tensor and paired representations of images in forms of
totalities of "independent" splitting signals. Creation of collaborative
research opportunities will enhance UT San Antonio research, and the joint
mentorship program will provide industrial experience to students. The results
of these planning efforts provide the basis for developing proposals to be
submitted to NSF's Computing Research Infrastructure program and Advanced
Research and Education program.