* 0424605
* LTREB:  Controls and Consequences of Exotic Plant Invasions in Abandoned Agricultural Land
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Peter Morin, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2010
* USD 264,918.00

The invasion of natural ecosystems by non-native plants is a growing problem of
global concern. These species may cause problems by causing declines in native
species or by changing the natural dynamics of, or ecological services provided
by, ecosystems. Exotic plant invasions therefore incur massive control costs to
alleviate these problems. Unfortunately, we lack sufficient data on most plant
invasions to determine what controls invasion and what the subsequent impacts of
those invasions may be. This project uses a long-term (45-year) data set
documenting vegetation dynamics (changes in species diversity and abundances
over time) in a series of abandoned agricultural fields in New Jersey to answer
a series of questions about non-native plant invasions. Since land abandoned
from agriculture is commonly heavily invaded by non-native species, it is an
ideal model system to study invasions. The long-term nature of the data gives a
much more realistic view of invasions, which typically occur over longer time
spans than the relatively short (1-3 year) studies common in this field. The
information gathered from these analyses should provide detailed explanations of
the role non-native plant species that may be applied to invaded areas around
the world. This project will provide training for at least six graduate (at the
Master's degree level) and several undergraduate students over its duration. We
also plan to develop educational resources that use the long-term data to allow
students at a variety of levels to explore the dynamics of land recovering from
agricultural practices and to educate students about exotic plant invasions. The
information generated by this study should produce management strategies for
addressing the control of plant invasions in a wide variety of systems.