* 0424292
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Resource Intensification and Sedentism in Prehistoric Central California:  A Bioarchaeological Perspective on Diet and Disease
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Lori Wright, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 12/31/2005
* USD 3,225.00

The bioarchaeology of central California is a neglected area of anthropological
research, in part reflecting the misconception that prehistoric societies from
this region exhibited little cultural change through time. Archaeological
investigations over the past several decades, however, have revealed substantial
change in subsistence patterns from a more generalized large-game hunting
adaptation in the Early Period (4500-2800 BP) to a more sedentary lifeway
involving the adoption of an acorn-storage economy during the Middle Period
(2800-1200 BP). In this project, the investigators will measure stable carbon
and nitrogen isotopes in human bone, and will study skeletal and dental evidence
of disease to examine temporal changes in diet, health, and the sexual division
of labor in archaeological skeletons from central California. This study will be
the first to evaluate prehistoric diet and health trends in the San Francisco
Bay and Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta using data from stable isotope analysis in
conjunction with paleopathology.&lt;br/&gt;Although population numbers in
central California were among the highest in North America at the time of
European contact, high population density was maintained in the absence of
agriculture. Many researchers have argued that the increase in abundance of
mortar and pestle technology throughout the Middle Period signified a transition
toward intensified acorn use, which may have provided significant nutritional
benefits since acorns are high in fat, can be stored for long periods, and would
have provided a valuable buffer against winter food shortages. More recently,
others have argued that increased sedentism and population growth throughout the
Middle and Late Period resulted in the depletion of large fauna, leading to the
intensification of less optimal foods, such as acorns and marine foods. Although
resource intensification models predict conditions associated with declining
health, few studies have directly evaluated the health consequences of
subsistence change and sedentism in central California. &lt;br/&gt;The results
of this project will provide a continuous biological record of prehistoric diet
and health for over three millennia of California prehistory, and will further
provide the foundations for future investigations in the region. This study will
greatly contribute to our understanding of the biology of prehistoric California
societies, and will serve as a basis for comparison with other nonagricultural
sedentary societies. &lt;br/&gt;One of the broader impacts of this project is
that it will provide the researcher with advanced graduate training and access
to state of the art methods in stable isotope analysis that will foster future
investigations in paleodietary research. Additionally, this research will be a
valuable contribution toward understanding the earliest lifeways of California's
indigenous populations, which will be of interest to living Native American
peoples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;