* 0424743
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Macroregional Interactions at the Onavas Valley, Sonora, Mexico, during the late Pre-Hispanic Period
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Paul Fish, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2005
* USD 11,990.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Paul R. Fish Mr.. Emiliano Gallaga Murrieta will
collect archaeological data recording pre-Hispanic (A.D. 1000-1550) material
remains in the Onavas Valley in the Middle Yaqui River area in southern Sonora,
Mexico. Geographical and physical conditions make the Yaqui River a natural
causeway between three well-established archaeological regions: Mesoamerica, the
U.S. Southwest, and Casas Grandes, Chihuahua. While researchers have debated at
great length about the connections during pre-Hispanic times between Mesoamerica
and the U.S. Southwest little is known about the regions in between where the
suggested interaction took place. What little archaeological evidence there is
suggests that people, shell (used for jewelry), and other products moved through
the Yaqui River Valley from the Sonora coast and may have reached as far as
Casas Grandes on the east side of the Sierra Madre Occidental, or the U.S.
Southwest to the north. The Onavas Valley Project will provide important data
allowing preliminary but critical insights into how pre-Hispanic communities
interacted with their environment and their neighbors in a poorly known portion
of Northwest Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is
to compare the cultural landscape of the Onavas Valley with those of the Hohokam
(in the U.S. Southwest), Cerro de Trincheras (northwest Sonora), and Casas
Grandes cultures. The comparison will provide the basis for an examination of
interactions among these areas and with Mesoamerica. To achieve this, we first
intend to discern and define the archaeological traditions within the Onavas
Valley and then examine non-local interactions with the aforementioned
neighboring areas. We plan to accomplish this goal via three approaches: 1) by
building a local chronology and a diagnostic inventory of recorded material
culture; 2) by establishing the landscape structure (settlement pattern and
ritual and ethnic landscape) of the area; and 3) by collecting and analyzing
evidence for the manufacture, use, and exchange of trade
goods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond research questions of interest to
archaeology, this project will have a broader impact by enhancing the level of
public understanding of archaeology in the communities of the Onavas Valley and
in Sonora, and in the Southwest of United States. The project will establish a
basis for future archaeological research and education in the area by enhancing
research collaboration between U.S. and Mexican scholars, and collaboration with
the local communities by involving students and volunteers from both countries,
and employing local workers. Public outreach efforts (posters, school visits,
town meetings) have been undertaken already in the principal communities of the
Onavas Valley and will continue during and after data collection and analysis.
Furthermore, the results of this investigation will be disseminated at
scientific meetings and in journals in both countries, in both Spanish and
English. Mexican and American students will gain personal and educational
experience by participating in a bi-national project and training in the methods
of field survey and material analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;