* 0424629
* Mental Models of a Mesoamerican Forest Environment and Human Health
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Scott Atran, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2007
* USD 124,900.00

Researchers have shown that different cultural groups, exploiting a common
environment, have very different cognitive models of animal-plant-human
interactions, and that these mental models are strongly correlated with, and
perhaps cause strikingly different environmental behaviors. This research
focuses on how different Lowland Maya cultural groups respond across generations
to conditions of radical change, including language loss, environmental
degradation, spatial displacement and dislocation. The project studies the
mental models of the environment, and the values and behaviors associated with
environmental and health-related decision making, of Lowland Maya people in the
Guatemalan Department of El Peten. The research will document similarities and
differences in folk-ecological models, environmental values and behaviors within
and across cultures; will examine the flow of information within and across
Indian and Ladino (Mestizo) groups; and will determine how relations between
cognitive models and their transmission promote or undermine successful
solutions to resource dilemmas and related conflicts. The research will study
how Lowland Maya notions of illness are embedded and sustained within a
vestigial cosmological framework of relationships involving humans, spirits and
the surrounding social and material environment; and will contribute to a
reliable cross-cultural methodology for understanding folk mental models of
illness and behaviors that result from them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods
include experiments that integrate modeling techniques from anthropology,
psychology, sociology and market research including the cultural-consensus
model, mental models and social network models. The research is designed to
assess within and between-population agreement on knowledge of plants, including
principles of classification, on values, and on types of causal reasoning that
drive decisions about how to tend the environment and treat human health
disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the new knowledge to be
created relate to environmental planners and decision makers who deal with "the
Tragedy of the Commons" and related social dilemmas pertaining to resource use.
This research will also show how environmental and human health are integrally
related among Lowland Maya, which will be important for health
planners.&lt;br/&gt;