* 0424742
* Nonlinear Internal Waves on the Inner Continental Shelf:   Their Dynamics and Associated Cross-Shelf Fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Robert Weller, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2007
* USD 137,771.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0424742&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many coastal regions
large amplitude, high-frequency internal waves and internal tidal bores have
been observed to propagate onshore. Because of their large amplitude, these
shoaling waves carry energy from their generation regions towards the coast, and
transport mass and buoyancy between the outer and inner continental shelf. Field
observations suggest that these waves may be critical for transporting larval
stage benthic organisms from the continental shelf back to nearshore regions,
where they can settle at appropriate habitats. The waves may also significantly
contribute to the cross-shore transport and dispersion of nutrients and
pollutants from sewage outfalls. In some regions of the coastal ocean,
particularly where winds and upwelling are weak, the cross-shore transport of
momentum and buoyancy due to nonlinear internal waves may be a dominant term in
the inner shelf momentum and buoyancy budgets. While field evidence suggests
that the importance of nonlinear internal waves on the inner shelf are
compelling, detailed investigations of the dynamics of these waves and their
associated fluxes are lacking and have yet to be quantified. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a researcher from the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution will examine the cross-shore momentum balance of shoaling and
nonlinear internal waves, as well as quantify the fluxes of mass, buoyancy, and
the Lagrangian transports associated with these waves. In addition to the field
observations that were collected in the summer and fall of 1996 and 1997 off of
Mission Beach, California, the Principle Investigator will utilize a two-
dimensional, rotating, nonlinear, non-hydrostatic model for his investigation.
The numerical model will be run using a domain with the same cross-shore
geometry as that of the field observations and will be forced within the
internal wave field observed at the offshore mooring site. To assess the
ecological importance of nonlinear internal waves, the cross-shore transport of
plankton through internal wave activity will be quantified and compared to other
transport mechanisms (e.g, upwelling relaxation or coastal trapped waves). In
addition, the feedback between nonlinear shoaling, breaking internal waves, and
the inner shelf density field will also be quantified to determine their
mechanistic relevancy to the inner shelf momentum and buoyancy budgets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The results gathered from this project
will not only yield a better understanding of the fate of larvae and nutrients
along the coast, but also clarify the fate of pollutants from rain runoff in
populated areas. Because of this project's applicability to the design of sewage
outfalls, a report of the conclusions from this study will be presented to the
City of San Diego Metropolitan Wastewater Department, who operates a sewage
outfall facility off of Pt. Loma, just south of where these field observations
were made. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;