* 0424768
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Working Class Transformation:  Collective Action in Labor and Community Struggles
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Howard Kimeldorf, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2008
* USD 7,500.00

This study investigates how collective action affects group formation. While
much previous scholarship has focused on the sources or causes of collective
action, this project redirects attention to the consequences of different modes
of collective action. In dialogue with a long theoretical tradition focused on
the tension between workplace and community as sources of class formation, the
central research question is: How do different forms (and sites) of collective
action affect transformations in working-class consciousness and practice? To
answer this question, my study examines three cases that are arrayed at
theoretically relevant points along a continuum that delineates different
logics-ranging from "economic" to "political"-of collective action. Through the
use of in-depth interviews, along with supporting participant observation and
archival materials, this project seeks to explicate how three modal types of
collective action yield distinct forms of group consciousness and practice. This
study promises to provide important insights for a number of scholarly fields.
It intervenes in the long-standing debate among scholars of class about the
importance of work versus community in working-class formation. It advances
theories of collective action and social movements by conceptualizing a model of
different logics of collective action and delineating a continuum along which
action can be categorized. And it takes these theories in new directions by
examining the consequences of action-specifically, how groups are transformed
through the vehicle of collective action. For students of social change and
sociologists generally this study contributes to our understanding of the
different dynamics of economic and political movements, workplace and community
struggles. Its broader impact derives from the fact that this study speaks
directly to debates raging in the American labor movement today, particularly
discussions of new organizing strategies involving labor/community
relationships. In shedding light on this pressing strategic and organizational
question, this study will help practitioners asses the impact of community-based
organizing strategies on working-class organizations and the labor movement
generally. It also speaks to contemporary economic and labor market trends as it
investigates that segment of the labor force that has become the main target of
unionization-low-wage workers in the service sector and light industry,
especially African Americans and Latinos who have been underrepresented in the
ranks of organized labor. In terms of both the cases involved and the concepts
examined, this study thus has relevance for researchers, teachers, and
organizers.