* 0424702
* An Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology Societies Summit Meeting: Critical Steps Toward a Biological Data Systems Confederation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Clifford Duke, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2007
* USD 80,000.00

A three-day conference of leaders of the major professional societies that
publish ecology, evolution, and organismal biology journals will be convened.
This conference has two goals: (1) develop a common policy statement on data
sharing and archiving, with a roadmap for implementation of this policy by the
societies and (2) to plan for one or more subsequent meetings to address such
issues as technological, intellectual property, economics, and training
concerns. There is an increasing need for researchers in the biological sciences
to address global problems, using data collected from around the world. As
computing speeds and data storage capacities have increased and costs have
dropped, technology has become less an obstacle to ready data sharing than are
the ingrained habits of the scientific community. Changing these habits requires
development of technological means, cultural inducements, and training
opportunities that make biological data, information, and knowledge available to
all potential users, including scientists, resource managers, decision-makers,
and students. Such systemic change is far more likely to be successful if
professional societies and funding agencies work together, rather than acting
alone. The consensus policy statement and roadmap will contain a specific set of
target steps and dates leading toward requirements for deposition in public
archives of all data supporting published papers. Implementation of this roadmap
will help address the cultural obstacles that constitute the primary obstacle to
universal data accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;