* 0424892
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hawaiian Place Names:  Mnemonic Symbols in a Performance Cartography
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Everett Wingert, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2006
* USD 11,500.00

Hawaiians used place names as mnemonic symbols to encode their knowledge of the
environment. Place names performed in daily rituals (such as stories, chant,
song, and dance) were a conscious act of reinforcing and making in place
genealogical connections, recreating cultural landscapes, and regenerating
cultural mores. Those performing these traditional practices deliberately
incorporated familiarity, awareness, expertise, and fluency of the spatial
relationships of their environments thereby communicating cartographically. This
is a form of "performance cartography" that does not fall into a mainstream
cartographic domain as defined by the Western scientific platform in the
discipline of cartography. This doctoral dissertation research project will
investigate Hawaiian "performance cartography," a cartographic tradition
cultivated in oral traditions still being practiced today despite the eroding
presence of Hawaiian names and cartographic traditions on Western map products
(like USGS topographic maps). This project will test the following hypotheses:
(1) Cognitive-based Hawaiian performance cartography still exists and is still
being practiced. (2) The imposition of a Western cartographic discourse failed
to extend, acknowledge, and/or incorporate the Native Hawaiian place naming
traditions. In addition, the research will also seek to understand the nature of
Hawaiian cartography, its parallelism with Western cartography, its depiction,
communication, display techniques. Among critical questions to be explored are:
Can Western cartographic techniques map processes such as Hawaiian performance
cartography? Are Hawaiian place names mnemonic symbols? How has Hawaiian
cognitive cartography evolved? What kept it alive? What kind of place names has
been preserved on maps and on the U.S. Geographic Names Information System
(GNIS) for the State of Hawaii? How well can Western cartographic techniques be
used to best represent and provide what "people of locality" need? This research
a will involve qualitative methodologies (interviews and reflexive writing) to
acquire and interpret Hawaiian place names, their meanings, and associated
stories from both textual sources and key persons. The field research will
consist of cataloging place names, conducting pre-field reconnaissance and
exploratory interviews, digitally recording and transcribing key persons' place-
name interviews and the researcher's reflections of or responses to the
interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the research are
anticipated to be a better understanding of the development of Hawaiian
cartography and its cognitive relationships with Hawaiian culture, livelihood,
and the landscape. The research will offer a comparison of its scientific
paradigms with those of Western cartography. The research also will enhance
understanding of why the presence of indigenous Hawaiian place names have been
steadily eroding with the standardization of topographic maps and the GNIS
database that are maintained by the USGS. The broader impacts of the results of
this research is a cooperative effort with the USGS to revive and preserve this
important Hawaiian tradition by suggesting and replacing place names back to the
Hawaiian tradition and adopt them into the GNIS. The project will help educate
mapping agencies as well as future Hawaiian generations about the cognitive,
cultural, spatial, cartographical implications of Hawaiian place names.
Furthermore, the project should raise awareness of indigenous cartography among
practitioners of Western cartography. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award will provide support to enable a promising student
to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;