* 0424048
* Nondeterministic Control of Discrete-Event Systems for Language or (Bi) Simulation Equivalence Specifications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Ratnesh Kumar, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

The objective of this research is a comprehensive study of nondeterministic
control of discrete event systems for language/simulation/bisimulation
equivalence based specifications. Past work on supervisory control considered
mainly the deterministic supervisors. To any end-user it does not matter whether
the supervisor is deterministic or nondeterministic rather whether it fulfills
the control task. In fact for nondeterministic plants (nondeterminism arises due
to unmodeled dynamics, which may be intentional or unintentional),
simulation/bisimulation equivalence based specification are more natural, and
nondeterministic control may be the only option to enforce them. Also, even for
language equivalence based specifications nondeterminism of control can offer
several advantages (as reported in our recent work). The proposal is aimed
toward developing further understanding of the advantages the nondeterministic
control has to offer for supervisory control for
language/simulation/bisimulation equivalence. The project includes
experimentation with two educational discrete-event "plants" located in our
controls laboratory. One is a manufacturing system whereas other is a chemical-
process plant. We also propose to extend our existing supervisory control
software to include the new algorithms of nodeterministic control
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of the project lie in it's
application areas of discrete-event systems including, manufacturing,
telecommunications and networking, traffic and transportation, chemical process
control, embedded system control, asynchronous hardware verification, and
software verification. With such a wide spread applicability of event-driven
systems, it is important to educate graduate students with discrete-event
background, and this proposal will involve 2 PhD students. The PI teaches a
course on Discrete-Event Systems each year through which the new results will be
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;