* 0424513
* IACUC 101 and Research with Free-Ranging Wildlife Workshop (May 2004 in Fairbanks, AK.)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* John Blake, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 20,100.00

The University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) will host a two-day Workshop for IACUC
101 Training and Research with Free-Ranging Wildlife: IACUC Review of Projects
Regulated by Multiple Agencies. This is the first workshop to be held in the
United States that specifically brings together the premier IACUC educational
program and the primary organizations involved in the oversight of field
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation (NSF) and the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) support a wide range of research activities
involving animals, some of which utilize non- traditional laboratory species in
field studies. These agencies require compliance with PHS Policy on the Humane
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, which incorporates extensive science-based
guidance addressing the use of traditional species in the laboratory. However,
although field research guidelines have been established by some scientific
organizations, Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUCs) and
principal investigators continue to have difficulty in the review and continuing
review of field research protocols. The management of field research, including
the issuance of permits to researchers, is under the oversight of multiple
federal (e.g. UFS&amp;WS and NMFS) and state wildlife agencies. These include
but are not limited to state wildlife laws, international treaties, and federal
laws protecting endangered species and marine mammals. In addition to management
and regulatory functions, many of these agencies also conduct field research,
often in collaboration with universities. IACUCs at institutions with
investigators conducting field research on their own or in collaboration with
agency colleagues must ensure compliance with a myriad of rules and also conduct
effective oversight of the research as required by their funding agencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the co-sponsoring agencies and host
institution for this workshop include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-To provide basic
IACUC 101 training for institutions that conduct field
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-To supplement the basic IACUC 101 training by
including mock IACUC scenarios that address field research issues, and including
representatives from wildlife agencies as adjunct
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-To bring representatives from institutions that
conduct field research together with the Agencies that fund or regulate such
research, and Agencies that conduct research on their own or may collaborate
with institutions, and provide a unique opportunity for productive interaction
and discussion of respective jurisdictions, regulations, and best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-To provide IACUCs, investigators, veterinarians
and institutional officials with an enhanced understanding of the various
agencies and their respective purviews, and with increased knowledge of how they
can more effectively facilitate and appropriately oversee wildlife research at
their institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-To create a forum for interagency and
institutional open discussion and exploration of common issues concerning the
conduct of field research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: A workshop
combining the IACUC 101 program with a one-day session addressing IACUC review
of field research projects will provide the framework for future educational
programs addressing the ethical review of field research. The integrity of
science will benefit from enhanced educational offerings addressing animal
research protections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Clarification of
ethical responsibilities and the process for reviewing field research projects
will improve the ability of investigators and independent animal welfare
committees to meet regulatory requirements and ensure high quality research
while promoting the responsible conduct of research. Moreover, bringing together
researchers, funding and regulatory agencies, and representatives of
organizations responsible for establishing field research guidelines offers a
unique opportunity to discuss common issues and consider a consistent process
for the review and continuing review of field based animal research. &lt;br/&gt;