* 0424792
* Near-inertial Wave Generation, Propagation and Mixing in the East Pacific Warm Pool
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Michael Gregg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2006
* USD 113,566.00

0424792&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The generation, propagation and
upper-ocean mixing associated with near inertial internal waves will be
conducted using data collected during the Eastern Pacific Investigation of
Climate(EPIC2001) intensive field survey. This work will advance our
understanding of near-inertial wave generation, propagation and decay at low-
latitudes-processes that are poorly understood though likely important in light
of recent estimates of the contribution of near-inertial wave mixing to the
global mixing budget. Maps of wind-flux into mixed-layer inertial motions also
indicate that the Eastern pacific Warm Pool (EPWP) may be a hotspot for low-
latitude inertial wave generation. Preliminary findings suggest that near-
inertial wave-produced mixing may influence entrainment at the base of the
mixed-layer and the structure and evolution of the region's shallow thermocline.
Both time series and spatial data from the EPIC2001 survey show that shear and
turbulence within the thermocline were dominated by a single, energetic,
downward-propagating near-inertial internal wave. The richness of the EPIC2001
data set, with temporal and spatial sampling of the upper ocean and lower
atmosphere from a number of platforms, presents the unique opportunity to
conduct such an investigation. Previous studies of low-latitude near-inertial
waves lacked spatial data to extend the propagation and generation details
beyond rough estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main scientific objectives of
the project are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Quantify and describe in time and space the
near-inertial wave and mixing it produced at 10?N, 95?W.&lt;br/&gt;2. Determine
the influence of the wave on mixed-layer properties.&lt;br/&gt;3. Estimate the
wave's properties using linear wave theory.&lt;br/&gt;4. Quantify the wave's
energy flux and estimate losses to spreading and turbulent
dissipation.&lt;br/&gt;5. Use a simple mixed-layer slab model to investigate the
temporal and spatial variability of wind forcing.&lt;br/&gt;6. Use a wind-forced
primitive equation numerical model to investigate the wave's generation and
propagation.&lt;br/&gt;7. Compare our results with those of past near-inertial
wave research and linear near-inertial wave theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This research will be done in close interaction with other EPIC2001
investigators and contribute to the EPIC goal of better understanding
atmosphere-ocean coupling in the EPWP and Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ).
The results will also provide a physical basis for improving parameterizations
of mixed-layer turbulent fluxes in ocean models utilized for making predictions
of mixed-layer depth and heat-content in a key climatic region. As part of the
project, a graduate student will complete his Ph.D. training in interpreting
oceanic turbulence data as part of the upper ocean response to atmospheric
forcing using modern analysis and modeling tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;