* 0424821
* Analysis and Construction of Polysaccharide Synthases and Production of Novel Biomaterials
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Paul DeAngelis, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 08/31/2007
* USD 425,000.00

Carbohydrate molecules are essential for the proper development and long-term
health of animals. With further modification, sugar polymers promise to be the
bioengineering tools of tomorrow and have other important applications in the
future. Research on polysaccharide synthases, a group of sugar polymerizing
enzymes, both expands basic knowledge and yields novel synthesis platforms.
Three new types of synthases that catalyze elongation of glycosaminoglycans
[GAGs] were recently discovered and analyzed. The overall goals of this project
are to study synthase catalysis with molecular biological, biochemical and
chemical tools, and then harness the knowledge to customize polymer synthesis to
create new optimal biomaterials. In Aim 1, the synthases will be studied by
mutagenesis, labeling studies, and kinetic analyses. In Aim 2, the initial
studies of hybrid GAG polymer production will be extended with the goal of
producing new bioengineering materials (e.g. biocompatible adhesives, customized
hybrid polymers). In Aim 3, the creation of a series of chimeric polysaccharide
synthases allows both the identification of regions responsible for sugar
transfer specificity and the creation of unique catalysts capable of novel
polymer synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Educational outreach
initiatives focused on the world of biotechnology will be continued such as
maintaining a website with career options and training tips for high school and
college students, and a graduate level advanced elective course on the science
and non-scientific infrastructure of biotechnology. In addition, mentoring of
high school students, undergraduate students, and graduate students in
laboratory research experiences will be continued including outreach to members
of underrepresented groups. Previous NSF-funded research leading up to this
project has already resulted patented and patent-pending inventions that were
licensed to three new biotechnology companies in Oklahoma; these companies are
developing and scaling up the GAG-based platforms for commercialization with
larger biotech partners. There will be a continuing effort to provide access to
future inventions. &lt;br/&gt;