* 0424447
* Dissertation Research: Pesticides and Cortisol Increase Among Mexican Immigrant Farmworkers - A BioCultural Assessment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Beti Thompson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 10/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

This research project will study the relationship between low-dose
organophosphate pesticide exposure and cortisol levels in humans by examining
this relationship in a Mexican immigrant farmworker community located in the
Lower Yakima Valley of Washington State. No investigation has yet studied
pesticide exposure from both a biological and cultural perspective. This project
will address this gap in the literature, and will play an important role in the
increased understanding of pesticide exposure in the US farmworker
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the strengths of two
major fields - anthropology and environmental health - to investigate the
relationship between cultural beliefs and practices, pesticide exposure, and
cortisol levels. This study will examine this association in an area where
agricultural workers are routinely exposed to high and low levels of
organophosphate pesticides. The aims of this investigation are to:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;1. Identify cultural beliefs and practices related to organophosphate
pesticide exposure among Mexican immigrant farmworkers using open-ended, in-
depth interviews; &lt;br/&gt;2. Assess the role of cultural beliefs and
practices on organophosphate pesticide protective behavior (ex. use of
protective gear) by comparing themes from in-depth interviews to questionnaire
survey responses about personal protective behavior.&lt;br/&gt;3. Assess the
role of cultural beliefs and practices on organophosphate pesticide exposure by
comparing themes from in-depth interviews to measured metabolites of
organophosphate pesticides in urine.&lt;br/&gt;4. Assess the association between
organophosphate pesticide exposure and cortisol levels by comparing metabolites
of organophosphate pesticides in urine to measured salivary cortisol levels in
spray and non-spray seasons.&lt;br/&gt;5. Identify and measure levels of
psychological stress among Mexican immigrant farmworkers by using a culturally
appropriate, investigator-developed instrument examining Mexican immigrant
farmworker stress. This scale will control for the effect of psychological
stress on cortisol levels, and has been tested and validated by the investigator
in the Lower Yakima Valley community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
contribute to the larger scientific community by increasing participation of
underrepresented groups involving ethnic minorities as both participant and
investigator. This research will also increase the study of cultural behaviors,
perceptions and practices in the health and medical sciences, which will
increase overall understanding of how culture and behavior influence health.
&lt;br/&gt;