* 0424744
* Collaborative Research: Carbon System and CFCs in the Southeast Pacific Subantarctic Mode Water/Antarctic Intermediate Water Formation Region
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Rana Fine, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0424744 / OCE-0424921&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep mixed
layers dominate the upper ocean where Subantarctic Mode Water (SAMW) and
Antarctic Intermediate Water (AAIW) are formed in the southeastern (SE) Pacific
north of the Subantarctic Front (SAF). The cold thick layers have low salinity
and high gas content that fills almost all of the southern hemisphere and
tropical oceans at lower thermocline to intermediate depths. SAMW/AAIW formation
has a major impact on the oceanic sink for anthropogenic CO2, whose largest
uncertainty is at intermediate depths. However, AAIW is probably the only
intermediate-depth, large-scale water mass that has not been studied in winter
at its major source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers from the
University of Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine &amp; Atmospheric Science and
the University of California-San Diego Scripps Institute of Oceanography will
study the processes responsible for the formation of SAMW/AAIW in the SE
Pacific. Though the overall goal of the project is to characterize carbon and
tracer properties in the thick SAMW/AAIW layers in the SE Pacific formation
region, measurements of carbon system parameters and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
also be taken to: 1) map wintertime carbon system and CFC properties in the
major SAMW/AAIW formation region; 2) compare the observed wintertime air-sea CO2
disequilibrium to the average disequilibrium terms estimated using the ?C*
approach; 3) investigate the possible relationship of upper ocean features
(e.g., convection, eddies, interleaving, currents) to the carbon and tracer
characteristics of newly formed deep mixed layers of SAMW/AAIW; and 4) estimate
CFC ages and a local AAIW formation rate to assess the relative effects of
advection versus mixing of newly formed AAIW. The results yielded from this US
and Chilean collaboration will fill an important and large gap in global ocean
observations, both for physical processes that impact long-term climate change
and for processes governing the carbon cycle. The results will be disseminated
broadly to enhance scientific and technological understanding and will be
available for use in models of processes that control the uptake and transport
of anthropogenic CO2 into the ocean interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;