* 0424062
* Structural and Functional Analysis of the Bacteriophytochrome Photoreceptors: Models for the Phytochrome Superfamily
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Richard Vierstra, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 02/29/2008
* USD 414,000.00

A complex array of photoreceptors help cellular organisms detect and respond to
their light environment. One of the most influential is the phytochrome
superfamily, a large and diverse group of photoreceptors present in both
prokayotes and eukaryotes. They are photochromic pigments that use a linear
tetrapyrrole or bilin chromophore to sense red and far-red light. Phytochrome-
type photoreceptors were first discovered in higher plants by their ability to
initiate numerous photoresponses critical for agricultural productivity. More
recently, they have been shown to also exist in various microorganisms,
including cyanobacteria, eubacteria, fungi and slime molds. The goal of this
research project is to further understand how phytochromes function through an
in-depth analysis of the bacteriophytochrome subfamily, a collection of related
phytochromes that were recently discovered in bacteria and fungi. These
bacteriophytochromes offer an attractive opportunity to study phytochromes in
simple genetically-tractable organisms that possess few photoreceptors and lack
the complications of photosynthesis, and the ability to generate ample
quantities of homogeneous and stable pigment needed for structural analyses.
This project specifically will attempt to: (1) solve the first three-dimensional
structure of a phytochrome-type photoreceptor by X-ray diffraction analyses of
bacteriophytochrome crystals, and (2) exploit various genomic methods to define
how these photoreceptors function in microorganisms. Completion of this research
will provide the first detailed picture of how phytochromes work mechanistically
and affect the behavior of microorganisms. More broadly, this work will
ultimately help elucidate how higher plants sense their light environment via
this unique photoreceptor type and thus could have important agricultural
implications. In addition, the research will enhance scientific infrastructure
via a cooperative college/university arrangement for the training of
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in modern molecular
techniques.