* 0424104
* U.S.-Iraq Cooperative Research: The Mesopotamian Marshlands from Disintegration to Restoration
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Mohamed Sultan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/2004
* USD 31,478.00

0424104 &lt;br/&gt;Sultan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a collaborative research between Dr. Mohamed Sultan, Department of
Geology, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York and Dr.
Sabbar Al-Kaisy, Department of Applied Geology, University of Tikrit, Tikrit,
Iraq and Dr. Ahmad Al-Dousari, Environmental Sciences Department, Kuwait
Institute for Scientific Research, Kuwait-Safat, Kuwait. They seek a better
understanding of the temporal land cover and land use changes (LCLUC) that
occurred over the Mesopotamian marshes in response to the reduced fresh water
supply induced by damming and water diversion practices and to monitor the
ongoing recovery. Archival remote sensing data and GIS applications will be
applied to assess and monitor LCLUC. A web-based GIS database will be generated
to host the data (field and satellite-based) and interpretations. Temporal
remote sensing data and relevant maps for the marshes will be compiled and co-
registered to a unified UTM projection. The remote sensing data will be
processed to minimize extraneous spectral variations. The products will be
mosaicked together, and change detection techniques will be applied to the
normalized data in order to monitor temporal and spatial LCLUC across the
marshes. The results will be calibrated against available maps and published
ground truth data. A training component will be conducted in the USA to enable
the foreign scientists to conduct the outlined tasks. An ultimate goal of this
project is to document the spatial and temporal variations in LCLUC over the
entire Mesopotamian marshes over the past four decades and throughout the
duration of the project as well (2004-2006). This will include the development
of methodologies for monitoring the temporal and spatial evolution of marshlands
in general, and the Mesopotamian marshes in particular, and the generation of a
data set that is needed to construct and to calibrate regional hydrologic models
for the entire Tigris-Euphrates basin. The models are needed to predict the
impacts of engineering projects on the marshlands and the Gulf ecosystems. The
integrated methodology developed will be applicable to other wetlands in arid
and semi-arid countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impacts: Data
will be collected on the effect of development of dams and drainage schemes over
the past decades on the changes in the Mesopotamian marshlands that are now
largely replaced by salt-encrusted deserts, and the signs of environmental
recovery locally observed in the last few months. Several graduate and
undergraduate students, including women, will be trained in a variety of state-
of-the-art remote sensing, GIS, and hydrologic research tools. The outputs
(spatial and temporal variations of the Mesopotamian marshes) are essential data
sets for guiding the ongoing activities to revive the marshlands. The data and
interpretations will be widely disseminated using web-based GIS technologies.
The project will promote international scientific cooperation between the U.S.,
Iraq, and Kuwait. &lt;br/&gt;