* 0424996
* Dynamics of cnidarian-algal symbioses
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2010
* Mary Alice Coffroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2010
* USD 600,000.00

Symbioses between cnidarians and dinoflagellates in the genus Symbiodinium are
widespread in the marine environment. Their importance to reef-building corals
and reef nutrient cycles is well documented and loss of these symbionts (termed
coral bleaching) can lead to reef degradation and coral death. A growing body of
research shows that these symbionts are genetically diverse and vary in their
response to environmental perturbations. A comparison of symbiont diversity
across multiple host taxa and a determination of how flexible symbioses are in
response to environmental perturbation are essential to understanding host and
symbiont distribution patterns and to identifying the processes critical to
maintaining a viable symbiosis.

The objective of this project is to examine how Symbiodinium diversity is
established and the processes that control the distribution of different taxa of
Symbiodinium. This work will identify and compare symbioses characterized by
host-symbiont specificity with symbioses that change with environmental
conditions. Molecular techniques (microsatellite polymorphic loci, length
variation in chloroplast 23S rDNA and sequence analysis of nuclear ribosomal
internal transcribed spacer regions) will be used to characterize Symbiodinium
diversity in the initial symbionts colonizing planulae as well as diversity of
the symbiont complement within single host colonies and within and among host
populations and species. Specifically, the "baseline" diversity of Symbiodinium
will be determined through population scale surveys of each host species over a
range of habitats and the manner in which the symbiont community varies among
hosts and across environments assessed. Phylogenetic comparisons of symbionts
from closely related hosts will test for co-speciation and population genetic
analyses will examine connectivity between Symbiodinium populations. A series of
manipulative experiments examining the processes maintaining the variation (or
lack there of) observed in the baseline diversity surveys will then be conducted
to test the importance of host genotype vs. environment (GxE) in determining the
complement of symbiont in the adult host and to characterize the fidelity of
symbiont-host partnerships (i.e., specificity vs. flexibility of the symbiosis).
Quantitative real-time PCR will be used to quantify the abundance of different
symbiont taxa within hosts over time. These data will help to determine if
changes in symbiont populations can be induced and if symbionts within a given
host reflect host-symbiont specificity, environmental selection among symbionts
or stochastic, founder effects.

Understanding the dynamics of Symbiodinium has important ramifications for
understanding how the symbiosis responds to environmental changes and thus the
short and long term responses of reef taxa to climate change. Symbiodinium is a
diverse group and if this diversity is widespread within single host colonies or
if the association is in a state of continual flux, then changes in host algal
community structure can generate changes in functional and physiologic traits of
the host-symbiont system. Alternatively host taxa with fixed complements of
symbionts would be less able to acclimatize to changing environmental
conditions.

Broader Impacts: This work will result in the training of at least 2-3 graduate
students and at least 8 undergraduates. Through this project these students will
have the opportunity to participate in research in both a lab and field setting,
learning a range of molecular and algal culturing techniques. Projects based on
this proposal will also be introduced in a field course enabling groups of
students to design and carry out field studies based on this project. The
extensive culture collection housed at the University at Buffalo is an important
resource that is available to researchers worldwide. The funding will enable the
collection to be maintained and enhanced.