* 0424135
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  An Evaluation of contextualized contrastive analysis in Language Arts Instruction
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* John Rickford, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2006
* USD 14,400.00

Good writers know how to use language, and sociolinguists know how language is
used. Would teachers and students in writing classes benefit from adopting a
linguist-like sensitivity to language patterns and attitudes? Is there a way to
make technical linguistic knowledge about the details of dialect features
immediately useful in a classroom setting? And would such knowledge improve the
writing experiences and achievement of children who speak a nonstandard dialect
such as African American Vernacular English (AAVE)? With support from the
National Science Foundation, Dr. John R. Rickford and doctoral candidate Julie
Sweetland will investigate the effects of a language arts curriculum designed
with the needs of child speakers of African American English in mind. Over the
course of eight weeks, upper elementary students (grades 4-6) in ten urban
classrooms will be led to identify, discuss, and write about linguistic
variation as it is presented in several selections of award-winning children's
literature, and will learn to connect those concepts to their own ways of
speaking and writing. The heart of the curriculum is a set of seven writing
prompts that are fun activities with a hidden purpose-each prompt designed to
elicit a specific feature of nonstandard grammar in order to target that feature
for instruction. For example, students will write their own versions of Sandra
Cisneros' book Hairs/Pelitos. Children's responses will typically include a
large number of possessives, a grammatical feature that is realized differently
in standard English and African American Vernacular English (e.g. my mother's
hair vs. my mother hair). Their writing will thus provide a natural context in
which to learn about standard use of apostrophe-s during the revision process.
Respect for children's ways of speaking will be evidenced throughout the
lessons, as teachers will engage in summer training designed to help them learn
to contrast the vernacular with the standard, rather than correct the vernacular
to the standard, a subtle shift in instructional stance that previous studies
have established as an effective teaching practice. The current research will
compare the progress of children taught using the experimental 'contextualized
contrastive analysis' method with that of students in control classrooms.
Children's progress will be evaluated using multiple measures, including changes
in frequencies of stigmatized AAVE features used in writing; rater assessments
of overall writing quality; students' ability to articulate their knowledge
about the respective features and social connotations of AAVE and Standard
English; and students' affective responses to instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intervention design represents a synthesis and
application of principles and findings from a wide range of relevant research:
sociolinguistic descriptions of the structure of nonstandard language varieties;
theoretical perspectives on language attitudes, language ideology, and the role
of affect in language learning; and current pedagogical techniques such as the
'process' approach to teaching writing. In this broad, interdisciplinary
approach, the intervention design moves beyond previous efforts by linguists to
affect instructional practice. Educators are increasingly recognizing the need
to address dialect diversity in instruction but face at least two obstacles in
doing so: a dearth of practical, ready-to-use instructional materials, and a
shortage of strong evidence that dialect-based methods are effective. This
research addresses both concerns, and provides a model for instruction that is
adaptable to a variety of teaching contexts. In addition, evidence of the
effectiveness of dialect-based instruction would certainly be a valuable
addition to a public discourse that often relies on misconceptions and
stereotypes, as evidenced by the 1997 Oakland 'Ebonics' controversy. Most
important, by taking on the difficult task of translating theory into practice,
this project represents a step in the continuing struggle for educational and
social equity. The knowledge base of sociolinguistics is the ideal site on which
to build an educationally sound, socially just, and culturally sensitive
pedagogy that increases marginalized groups' access to the language of
educational and economic attainment. This research represents a step in
realizing that potential.&lt;br/&gt;