* 0424198
* Modeling, Design, and CMOS Performance Projections of Nanoscale Double-Gate FinFETs
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Jerry Fossum, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2007
* USD 179,984.00

The objective of this research is to aid and expedite the development of
optimally designed nanoscale double-gate (DG) FinFETs for integrated circuit
(IC) applications beyond the gatelength scaling limit (Lg < ~45nm) of today's
conventional, or classical CMOS technologies. Although FinFET technology is
related to conventional MOSFET technology, the nonclassical DG device is quasi-
planar with the channel and source/drain extensions formed in an ultra-thin
vertical silicon (Si) fin. Thus, the device processing is complicated because of
uncertainties in how dopant impurities diffuse in such thin fins, and the device
design is complicated because of complex physics underlying the electrostatics
and carrier transport in such thin fins. The research will address these
complications in both device processing and device design, as well as project
performances of nanoscale-FinFET CMOS. It will be based in large part on a
physics-based compact model (UFDG) for generic DG MOSFETs, having a small number
of process-based parameters that relate directly to the device structure as well
as the underlying physics. The process/physics basis of UFDG renders it quasi-
predictive and, when implemented in a circuit simulator, capable of projecting
nonclassical CMOS performance and its sensitivity to expected fluctuations in
the fabrication process. The research will comprise three stages, all of which
could necessitate UFDG upgrades. First, UFDG, supplemented by a suite of
numerical device simulators, will be used for inverse modeling of FinFETs
fabricated at Freescale Semiconductor (formerly part of Motorola) to learn how
to effectively dope the Si fins, e.g., the source/drain extensions, and how to
characterize doping profiles in the fins. Second, UFDG and the supplemental
tools will be used to optimally design FinFETs, e.g., with regard to gatesource/
drain underlap (and bias-dependent Leff > Lgate) and its control of short-
channel effects and the Ion/Ioff ratio. Third, UFDG/Spice3 will be used to
project CMOS performances with optimal FinFET designs. Technological support
from Freescale will aid, verify, and demonstrate the optimal designs. The
intellectual merit of the research is reflected by its two main contributions:
(1) physical insights and guidance regarding the optimal design and fabrication
of nanoscale FinFETs, including experimental demonstration, and (2) a reliable
physics-based compact model that could be used for future design of CMOS
circuits comprising nanoscale FinFETs, in addition to aiding the device
technology development. The broader impacts of the research will be on the
education of students and engineers in the area of nonclassical nanoscale device
technologies and physics, with emphasis on FinFETs but with a broad basis for
application to other, potentially viable IC technologies that can be scaled
beyond the limit of conventional CMOS. New graduate courses will be defined
based on the research. And, by promoting the continual advancement of nanoscale
IC technologies, the semiconductor industry and its customers will be impacted
positively.