* 0424983
* Center for the Mathematics Education of Latinos (CEMELA)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2004,02/29/2012
* Marta Civil, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 02/29/2012
* USD 10,500,000.00

The Center for the Mathematics Education of Latinos/as (CEMELA) addresses the
mathematics education needs of the largest and most rapidly growing minority
group in the country, a diverse group that has one of the most disturbing
patterns of academic achievement. Given the unique language, social and cultural
factors associated with working-class/low-income Latino/as students and
communities, a multidisciplinary approach is necessary to address their
education. Although there are well-established scholars who focus on the
education of Latinos, their research is in the areas of policy, language and
culture, not primarily in mathematics education. Few mathematics education
scholars have multidisciplinary expertise in the particular areas relevant to
the learning of mathematics by Latinos/as. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
Center for the Mathematics Education of Latinos/as is to advance the field of
mathematics education by:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(A) Developing an integrated
model that connects mathematics teaching and learning to the cultural, social,
and linguistic contexts of Latino/as students and &lt;br/&gt;(B) Increasing the
number of mathematics educators and teachers with this integrated knowledge to
ultimately improve the mathematics education of Latinos/as, particularly those
of low-income backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal will be achieved by
the collaboration of experts in mathematics education, mathematics and language
and culture in education. CEMELA brings together in Arizona, The University of
Arizona, Sunnyside Unified School District and Tucson Unified School District;
in Illinois, The University of Illinois at Chicago and Chicago Public Schools;
in California, The University of California at Santa Cruz, North Monterey County
School District and Pajaro Unified School District; and in New Mexico, The
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque Public Schools, Socorro Consolidated
Schools, and The Bernalillo Public Schools. Intentionally, the Center represents
diverse geographical contexts -- borderlands (UA), urban &lt;br/&gt;(UIC), rural
(agricultural/migrant) (UCSC) and rural/urban (UNM) -- to adequately capture the
corresponding diversity of educational and cultural experiences among
Latinos/as. &lt;br/&gt;