* 0424703
* Collaborative Research: Adjustment of the ACC to Variability in Southern Ocean Winds: A Modal Point of View
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Sarah Gille, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2008
* USD 193,998.00

abstract for 0424703&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project aims
to study the short-time scale adjustment of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC) to rapid and localized changes in wind forcing. The ACC is known to
respond coherently and rapidly to changes in wind forcing. This study will test
the hypothesis that this fast response of the Southern Ocean is governed by
normal modes, as is thought to be the case in the subtropical basins. The
Southern Ocean is unlike its subtropical counterparts in many aspects that are
likely to affect the adjustment process; the spatial (especially zonal) length
scale is much larger than for subtropical basins, prominent bathymetric features
like ridges are present in the Southern Ocean, and in the latitude range of the
Drake Passage, no meridional boundaries exist to accommodate a boundary current.
Furthermore, the ACC comprises a system of strong eastward jets that may affect
the Rossby basin modes. The project will address the following questions:
&lt;br/&gt;i) Is the adjustment of the Southern Ocean governed by basin
modes?&lt;br/&gt;ii) To what extent does the strong flow of the ACC modify the
basin modes and the adjustment process?&lt;br/&gt;iii) What is the role of the
bathymetric features in shaping the Southern Ocean response to wind
fluctuations?&lt;br/&gt;iv) To what extent is the Drake Passage a barrier for
barotropic waves and normal modes?&lt;br/&gt;v) What perturbations in wind
stress will lead to the most energetic
disturbances?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A better description of the
variability in the Southern Ocean has consequences for a large range of fields,
including weather prediction, wave-height prediction, navigation, and fishery.
In addition, understanding what governs the path and strength of the ACC and
their variability facilitates the&lt;br/&gt;interpretation of oceanographic
observations from drifters, pressure gauges, and remote sensing, and may
ultimately increase their accuracy. From another perspective, this project will
advance the development of implicit ocean models. These are relatively new tools
which provide a more fundamental understanding of ocean dynamics than
conventional models. The project will further the career development of a post-
doc working on a self-directed project. In the end, the community may have been
offered a clear insight into the way the ACC adjusts to rapidly varying winds.
This may lead to a better appreciation of its role in past climates, and,
ultimately, it may increase the ability to anticipate on its response to future
climate changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;