* 0424227
* Collaborative Research: CLIMODE
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* William Dewar, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2011
* USD 734,812.00

0424865&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This process experiment is
focused on the formation, evolution, storage, dispersal and large-scale
consequences of Eighteen Degree Water, the subtropical mode water of the North
Atlantic. Mode waters are a physical manifestation of air-sea exchange that,
through successive wintertime exposure, constitute a long-term memory within the
climate system. Present understanding of the annual renewal rate of these waters
and the responsible physical mechanisms is deficient; water mass transformations
inferred from climatological air-sea fluxes appear incompatible with both
volumetric analyses and estimated dissipation processes. It is hypothesized that
current formation rate estimates are inaccurate due to (i) poorly estimated air-
sea fluxes and (ii) poorly understood/represented lateral ocean processes.
Through a synthesis of ocean-atmosphere observations and modeling studies, the
CLIMODE program (CLIvar MOde water Dynamics Experiment) will:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) Investigate processes common to all subtropical mode
waters in the world ocean, which are found equatorward of strong zonal flows (in
particular the Gulf Stream, the Kuroshio Extension, the East Australian Current,
the Agulhas Return Current and the Antarctic Circumpolar Current). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Focus on a region of great importance in air-sea exchange huge
ocean to atmosphere heat loss occurs over the separated Gulf Stream where
uncertainties in flux estimates are large. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(iii) Explore
the cross-scale connection between water mass formation associated with
wintertime &lt;br/&gt;convection on the rim of the subtropical gyre, its
subduction into the stratified interior, and its dispersal and dissipation
around the gyre. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;(iv) Address a key process that is
presently poorly understood and inadequately represented in climate models - the
interaction of geostrophic eddies with mixed layers. This is one of the most
critical parameterizations that compromises the present generation of climate
models. CLIMODE will provide field observations and analysis of the interaction
of eddies and the mixed layer, in support of the CLIVAR Climate Process Team in
ocean mixing responsible for developing/testing parameterizations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: CLIMODE will have broad scientific impact because it
directly addresses oceanic phenomena and atmosphere-ocean coupling that have
climatic significance but which are inadequately represented in climate models.
Furthermore, through assessment/validation of the climate model
parameterizations of these processes, CLIMODE will have considerable societal
impact. The CLIMODE project will also contribute to the career advancement of
several graduate students and postdoctoral investigators who will participate in
the study. On average during the 5 year program, CLIMODE will directly support 5
students and 4 post-docs each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;