* 0424815
* Collaborative Research: Time-Series and Process Measurements of Dimethylsulfide Dynamics at BATS and in the North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 382,752.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0425166&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterization
and quantification of biosphere-climate interactions is critical to
understanding and predicting climate change. The feedback between biosphere and
climate is mediated to a significant degree by the dynamics of radiatively
active, biogenic trace gases. Quantifying the dynamics and air-sea exchange of
these gases is a major objective of the new I.G.B.P. (International Biosphere-
Geosphere Program) program SOLAS, the Surface Ocean Lower Atmosphere Study. The
biogenic production and subsequent ventilation of dimethyl sulfide (DMS) is
climatically important as it has been postulated that DMS and its atmospheric
oxidation products are part of a cloud albedo feedback mechanism which links
global biosphere and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in understanding
biosphere-climate interactions is hampered largely because it is difficult to
accurately constrain, parameterize, or validate models. There are simply not
enough field observations collected in conjunction with the appropriate
ancillary data to assess forcing factors in a mechanistic and predictive way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, scientists at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and the Bermuda Biological Station for Research will
collect and study new time-series data set of DMS dynamics, including critical
pool and rate measurements vital to assess not only the long-term variability of
the DMS pool (and major associated compounds) but also the short-term dynamics
of DMS and dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP - the main precursor of DMS in ocean
water) that underlie this long-term variability. By revisiting the same oceanic
gyre, this new study will represent the first long term comparison of DMS and
DMSP concentrations anywhere in deep ocean. The measurements made in the first
study will be repeated now, more than a decade later, in addition to a broader
suite of measurements to address new hypotheses about the factors controlling
DMS dynamics. Monthly measurements will include key turnover dynamics of DMS and
dissolved DMSP in surface waters using new 35S tracer methods, aqueous DMSO
concentrations, and diel variations in atmospheric DMS during the BATS cruises.
This comprehensive time-series and process sampling scheme will allow us to
describe mechanistically the controls on key DMS, DMSP, and DMSO turnover rates
and will serve as a unique validation data set for past and future modeling
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results from this study should
improve our understanding of the underlying mechanisms controlling DMSP and DMS
concentrations in oligotrophic waters and also provide key variables for model
calibration and validation, thereby improving our ability to simulate and
predict future biosphere-climate feedbacks. This research will also support the
research of a student and a postdoctoral investigator, and encourage
multifaceted interactions with scientists in several institutions in the US and
Europe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;