* 0424692
* BE MUSES:  A Multiscale Bayesian Framework for the Life Cycle Inventory of Industrial Materials - The Case of Transportation Fuels
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Bhavik Bakshi, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 12/31/2006
* USD 115,000.00

MUSES: A Multiscale Statistical Framework for the Life Cycle Inventory of
Industrial Materials - The Case of Transportation
Fuels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Biocomplexity: MUSES research and education plan
aims to utilize the latest advances in multiscale Bayesian methods to develop a
systematic method for integrating the equipment, process life cycle, and economy
scale analysis of a material's life cycle. Cross-disciplinary and integrated
modeling is appealing for evaluating the economic, environmental and social
aspects of materials use. However, previous efforts indicate the formidable
challenges in developing useful models due to the vastly different scales and
uncertainty. Economic models are at a relatively coarse scale, process life
cycle assessment is done at an intermediate scale, while engineering models are
at a finer scale. The proposed work will treat LCA as a multiscale statistical
data fusion problem, where data and models are available with different degrees
of spatial aggregation. The resulting multiscale model will be useful for
studying the impact of economic policies on finer scales. This exploratory
project will focus on developing the statistical framework, completing
illustrative examples and initiating the multiscale life cycle model for
gasoline. Techniques from environmental economics will quantify the
externalities during the life cycle of materials use, and will be used to
formulate policy alternatives. Furthermore, the proposed educational activities
will provide insight into the human response to environmental problems. This
will be used to devise effective teaching methods and meaningful socio-economic
policies, making this a fully integrated multidisciplinary project. This work
involves collaboration between chemical engineering, natural resources,
environmental economics and statistics. Collaboration with researchers in Brazil
and industrial partners has also been established.&lt;br/&gt;A workshop on
"Resilience Under Uncertainty: Technological, Economic, Ecological and Social
Systems" will bring together multidisciplinary leaders and researchers in this
emerging field. This project will be co-managed by ECS and DMII.&lt;br/&gt;