* 0424133
* Moored Mixing Measurements at the Equator
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* James Moum, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,672,711.00

0424133

A fundamental problem in understanding ocean dynamics is our inadequate
knowledge of how the ocean is mixed. In turn, this means that numerical models
used to predict future climate scenarios cannot properly parameterize oceanic
mixing, which is a sensitive component of their computations. This is especially
true in equatorial regions, where currents are strong, near-surface waters are
stratified, mixing is energetic and complex, and feedbacks to the atmosphere are
critical. A series of short process experiments between 1984 and 1991 revealed
the qualitative nature of small-scale interactions responsible for generating
turbulence and thereby mixing at the equator. Most importantly, these revealed
that significant variations in mixing occurred on time scales longer than could
possibly be sampled in short ship-borne process experiments. Indeed, there are
strong hints that variations in mixing rates-weak mixing prior to the 1992-93 El
Nino and strong mixing to conclude the 1997-98 El Nino-contribute positive
feedback toward modulating equatorial SST on El Nino/La Nina time scales. New
ways to measure mixing on time scales longer than a ship-borne process
experiment must be found.

A self-contained device to measure temperature microstructure using glassbead
thermistors will be designed, build and tested locally before being deployed on
a deep-water mooring. The objective is to develop a simple, reliable and
affordable device to be readily integrated into existing moorings. Specifically,
a suite of 10 devices will be deployed on the TAO mooring at 0 140W for an
initial period of 6 months. This deployment will be augmented by 4 days of
turbulence profiling at the mooring location. The moored devices will provide
the data to determine the turbulent diffusivity of heat (or buoyancy) and hence
the turbulent heat flux at each sensor location. By deploying many devices
vertically, the vertical divergence of the turbulent heat flux, or the heating
rate of a parcel of water due to turbulent mixing will be computed. By deploying
over a long time period, the influence of turbulent mixing on sea surface
temperature changes associated with long time scale events will be assessed. As
well, fundamental aspects of the narrowband internal wave field that are closely
linked to turbulence at the equator will be investigated - thereby contributing
to our understanding of the physical relationship between mixing and internal
waves above the core of the Equatorial Undercurrent.

Broader Impacts: The successful demonstration of moored mixing measurements will
lead to an affordable and reliable community tool that can be used to obtain
long records elsewhere in the ocean. This is especially important in determining
the role of vertical mixing as a feedback process to longer time scale events
such as El Nino and La Nina. This tool will contribute to the measurement suite
available for operational observing systems. Development and scientific analysis
will contribute to the training of one graduate student, several summer
undergraduate students and College engineers.

