* 0424664
* BE: MUSES/Materials Flow Modeling in Sustainable Industrial Systems Within Urban Centers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Catherine Ross, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 01/31/2007
* USD 115,000.00

"BE:MUSES / Modeling Materials Flows for Sustainable Industrial Systems in Urban
Centers" is an interdisciplinary "proof of concept" effort that links and
integrates separate models from engineering and planning to test the overall
hypothesis that regional location matters for industrial ecology. The
researchers seek to address the significant gap in thinking on sustainability
that has resulted from treating sustainable industrial systems separately from
sustainable urban systems. Efforts to mitigate the environmental impacts of
industry cannot be fully realized until this gap is closed.

The research will evaluate the potential to create hybrid models from materials
flow and urban systems models for examining the impact of regional location on
industrial ecology. In so doing, it will build an intellectual partnership
between researchers in the fields of chemical engineering, mechanical
engineering, and city and regional planning. The model development will be built
on a case of computer recycling and remanufacturing for the Atlanta metropolitan
region. Engineering has been working towards sustainable industrial systems, and
city and regional planning has been working towards sustainable urban systems.
This planning grant will directly impact society by demonstrating that
engineering and regional planning not only can work together to marry the goals
of sustainable industrial and urban systems, but must do so to realize greater
achievement of the conditions of sustainability than either discipline could
achieve independently. Accurate modeling of materials flows for urban centers
will contribute to the ability to develop market-based collection, recycling,
and remanufacturing systems and to ensure that the impacts stemming from the
consumption of greenfields are compared to those generated in urban areas in
need of economic revitalization.

