* 0424474
* SGER:  Improving the Utility of Paleoproxies from Coccolith Chemistry: Calibration and Analytical Advances
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Heather Stoll, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Howard J. Spero
* 04/30/2006
* USD 46,850.00

This SGER request funding to develop a new indicator of paleo-productivity of
coccolithophorid algae, based on elemental (Sr/Ca) chemistry of coccolith
calcite. Culture studies of a single species, Emiliania huxleyi, and analysis of
coccoliths from sediment core tops in two transects across upwelling areas,
suggest that coccolith Sr/Ca ratios vary with nutrient-stimulated changes in
coccolithophorid growth rates. However, it is unclear whether these responses
are widespread in the ocean, whether Sr/Ca variations in coccoliths are
triggered by nutrient concentrations or the effect of nutrients on growth rate,
whether a particular nutrient is responsible for this effect or if the state of
nutrient limitation in general drives the response, and whether these responses
are the same for different species. Calibration studies will be conducted
through nutrient-limited culture of three additional species (Calcidiscus
leptoporus, Coccolithus pelagicus, and Gephyrocapsa oceanica) and by analysis of
time series plankton and sediment trap samples before, during, and after
nutrient-stimulated bloom events. The very small amount of material collected in
plankton samples and some sediment traps can be analyzed only through the
development of a new ion probe (SIMS) technique capable of precise Sr/Ca
measurements of individual or small groups of 10-20 picked coccoliths. In
addition to improving calibration of the indicator, the SIMS ion probe technique
will also benefit Sr/Ca analysis of downcore sediments for paleoproductivity
determinations because it would eliminate elemental contributions from
noncarbonate phases and permit determinations of Sr/Ca on pure samples of a
given species or genera.