* 0424928
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing landscape disturbance and recovery across a WWI battlefield: Verdun, France
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Joseph Hupy, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 10,344.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Warfare and the physical environment have always
shared a close and interconnected relationship. Throughout history, warfare has
dramatically altered the face of the cultural and physical landscape. Despite
this, warfare remains an often overlooked form of anthropogenic disturbance.
While a large body of literature examines the ability of the physical
environment to influence battle outcomes, a limited degree of research explores
the inverse relationship, that is, the various effects of warfare upon the
environment. The destruction associated with modern warfare is particularly
catastrophic due to the extent, magnitude, and duration of contemporary wars.
These large magnitude disturbances radically alter the shape of the landscape,
limiting the ability of the landscape to revert back to its original state. By
pursuing two research objectives, this dissertation research will examine
landscape disturbance and recovery across the World War I battlefield of Verdun,
France. The first research objective seeks to characterize the degree of
disturbance across the battlefield. Eight study sites will be surveyed that best
reflect the varying degrees of disturbance, while maintaining similar
environmental characteristics, e.g., bedrock and soil type, across the
battlefield. Disturbance magnitude will be determined by sampling the many
craters derived from explosive munitions. Crater size and density will be a
focus of the sampling, as these are long-lasting indicators of disturbance
severity. Additionally, a survey of microtopography at each of the study sites,
when presented in slope profile, will be used to compare disturbance magnitude.
The microtopographic survey, in each of eight study sites, will record changes
in elevation to the nearest centimeter along several transects. The second
research objective seeks to characterize and understand spatial patterns of
landscape recovery across the battlefield. It is based primarily on parameters
associated with soil and vegetation data. Vegetation data will be sampled while
surveying landscape disturbance in objective one; these data will reflect
species diversity, variety in structure, density, and basal area; i.e. forest
stand quality. Soils and their development will be based upon application of the
Runge (1973) pedogenic model, which relates soil development to (1) water
available for leaching and (2) organic matter production. Soil development will
be ascertained by examining the degree of leaching of various cations from the
soil profile and the character/amount of organic matter that has accumulated to
form the O and A horizons. Also assessed will be soil pH and clay contents,
which should correlate to soil development parameters set forth within the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide insight into the ability of
a landscape to recover following a catastrophic anthropogenic disturbance. Given
the controversy surrounding the environmental implications of modern military
operations around the world, via both training and actual combat, it is
important to examine the impact military disturbances exert on the landscape.
Additionally, humans are increasingly reshaping the face of the earth through
activities such as mining, logging, intensive agriculture, and warfare. An
understanding of landscape recovery through the holistic approach of studying
geomorphic, soil, and bio-ecologic factors will help to better manage and
restore severely disturbed landscapes in the future. Such work not only promises
to open broad avenues of research within the context of geomorphology, it also
serves to provide society with a better understanding of how and to what degree
landscapes recover, following a catastrophic anthropogenic disturbance such as
war.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;