* 0424169
* A Comprehensive Study on the Impact of Power Electronic Loads on Power System Transient Response and Stability
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* W. Mack Grady, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2008
* USD 120,000.00

This proposal concerns the study of the role of power electronic loads in
interconnected power systems. Due to their nonlinear (switching) character and
increasing penetration, there is a critical need to understand precisely how
such loads will impact both stability and transient behavior of large and
medium-scale power systems. The proposed research combines analytical work,
simulation studies, laboratory experiments, and analysis of real field data to
address potential deleterious impact of such loads on the electrical power
system. Analytical study of the dynamical behavior of simple systems with power
electronic loads is proposed as a means of identifying the key mechanisms of
their complex behavior. These studies will in turn support the development of
state-of-the-art load and system models that enable simulation of medium and
large-scale power networks, with sufficient fidelity to evaluate the impact of
non-linear loads. Modeling work will involve developing aggregate load models to
capture the effect of hundreds of thousands of such devices. Experimental work
both in the laboratory in cooperation with EPRI-PEAC, and based on field data to
be supplied by Austin Energy (the municipal utility of Austin, Texas) will be
used to validate and tune the models and identify the key features of the
dynamical behavior expected from real systems. In turn, analysis and simulation
will be used to evaluate the stability and transient behavior of such systems
with increasing penetration of power-electronic loads.&lt;br/&gt;