* 0424741
* Interaction of Overflows and the Upper Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Jiayan Yang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2008
* USD 221,278.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0424741&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deep ocean is filled
with dense water masses that originate from a few marginal seas. These marginal
seas are partially blocked from the open ocean by a narrow strait and a sill,
which may cause a marginal sea to form an especially dense water mass in
response to heat loss or evaporation. This dense water escapes from the marginal
sea basin when it overflows the sill, and the resulting density currents have
come to be called 'overflows'. The dynamics of overflows are of considerable
complexity, including intense missing and dissipation and spatial scales from
tens of kilometers to a few tens of meters. In the past five to ten years they
have been an object of fairly intense study, owing principally to their well-
documented importance for the thermohaline circulation, and too energetic
features. However, most overflow studies have focused mainly upon the dynamics
of the dense overflow currents in isolation from the overlying ocean, which is
often assumed to be inactive. This may not be a valid assumption, or at minimum
it may miss an important and interesting element of overflow dynamics, namely
the interaction between the overflow and the overlying ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, researchers from the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution will put overflows into the context of an active ocean
by studying aspects of the overflow/upper ocean coupling that must occur. The
team of scientists will examine such questions as: how does the ocean and
overflow balance the mass loss/gain caused by entrainment; what influence do the
eddies created by baroclinic instability or other non-mixing, largely vertical
interactions have within the upper ocean; does the location of the overflow
matter; and how does topography affect the outcome of the interaction? To
elucidate the dynamics that couple an overflow with the overlying ocean, the
researchers will begin by examining the results of Jia (2000) as a primary
motivation and the Azores Current as a putative example of this interaction. In
the field however, they will carry out a process modeling study using a
comparatively simple model (simple compared to a full OGCM). Whether they will
find that the upper ocean has to be included in overflow models remains to be
seen, but it is almost certain that they are going to find that overflows have a
marked impact upon the upper ocean, as least locally in the region where
overflows entrain and descend most vigorously. Whether this impact is large-
scale, as occurs in the linear a-plume for example, also remains to be seen.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Overflows are important for
climate dynamics since they influence the characteristics of the long term
storage at intermediate to deep waters. This project will not only parameterize
overflows, which have traditionally have been too small for GCMs to resolve, but
also support a post-doc who will carry out the described program under the close
supervision of the PI and co-PI. The results from this research will be part of
the PhD student's dissertation and disseminated through such venues as AGU-
meetings and journal publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;