* 0424161
* Nanoheteroepitaxy of (In,Ga)N: Toward a Phosphor-Free White LED
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Timothy Sands, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 209,999.00

0424161 SANDS

Goal: The proposed research is directed toward the goal of demonstrating bright
red (~650 nm) electroluminescence from an (In,Ga,Al)N light-emitting diode (LED)
employing an active region consisting of an array of dislocation-free strained
(In,Ga)N nanorod heterostructures. Significance: National and international
solid-state lighting initiatives are aimed at replacing fluorescent and
incandescent lighting technologies with an LED alternative. A white LED
replacement technology with luminous efficiency of 200 lm/W, color temperature
comparable to the midday sun, and color rendering equivalent to conventional
illumination sources has the potential to reduce overall electric power
consumption and the associated power-plant emissions by 10%. Combining discrete
red (In,Ga,Al)P LEDs with green and blue (In,Ga,Al)N LEDs may suffice for large
outdoor displays, but this approach is too costly for general white-light
illumination. Today's most promising approaches utilize down-conversion of blue
or UV LED light with phosphors. However, efficiency and lifetime limitations
inherent to phosphor-based white LEDs suggest that a phosphor-free alternative
will be required.

Approach: The phosphors could be eliminated if one materials system could be
utilized for emission across the entire visible spectrum. Conventional planar
(In,Ga,Al)N LED heterostructures can be designed to emit from the UV into the
yellow. However, the large lattice mismatch between InN and GaN (10.8%) prevents
the fabrication of bright orange and red LEDs. The proposed research program is
based on the concept that lateral elastic strain relief in the nanorod topology
can extend the range of lattice-mismatch that can be accommodated coherently in
an (In,Ga)N heterostructure, thereby enabling the fabrication of bright
(In,Ga,Al)N LEDs across the entire visible spectrum. Self-organized GaN and
(In,Ga)N nanorods have been grown by halide vapor phase epitaxy (HVPE) and rf-
plasma molecular beam epitaxy without the use of foreign metal catalysts,
suggesting that the nanorod approach to a red LED may be feasible. The proposed
research will fund the P.I. and two of his graduate students (one fully
dedicated to this project, and a second who will split his or her effort with
another project that requires the same skill set) to identify the factors that
control the nanorod growth regimes in HVPE, metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition and reactive pulsed laser deposition (PLD). The theories of
nanoheteroepitaxy will be tested, and methods to control the nanorod diameter
distribution using porous anodic alumina templates will be explored. The work
will culminate in an attempt to demonstrate an (In,Ga)N nanorod-array LED with a
peak emission wavelength of ~650 nm (red). The P.I. and his students have unique
facilities to pursue this research, including a custom HVPE reactor for (In,Ga)N
nanorod synthesis, and a load-locked PLD system with ammonia process gas and
group-III metal targets.

Broader Impacts

Interdisciplinary Research Environment: The proposed research program will
support graduate student research in an interdisciplinary environment. The P.I.
has a joint appointment in ECE and MSE at Purdue, and his research group is
evenly populated with MSE and ECE graduate and undergraduate students, all of
whom are actively involved in the Birck Nanotechnology Center.

Outreach: The P.I. proposes to complement the proposed research program with the
development of a 30-min hands-on presentation than can be tuned for elementary,
secondary and adult layperson audiences. The focus of the presentation will be
on LEDs as an emerging nanotechnology success story, taking advantage of the
sensory stimulation and curiosity naturally evoked by these bright light
sources. The presentation will also bring in elements of other energy conversion
technologies that might benefit from nanotechnology, including solid-state
cooling, and the potential impacts of these new technologies on society.

Senior Design Projects: The P.I. will invoke the scientific and technological
contexts of the proposed research program in an annual MSE Senior Project,
involving 4-6 undergraduate students each academic year. The students will
utilize the laboratory facilities and interact with industrial mentors in the
design of novel growth, etching and nanofabrication processes for III-V nitride
heterostructures.

