* 0424612
* Support Planning and Assistance to the Ocean Sciences Division for the Physical Oceanography Disserations Symposia (PODS)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* Richard O'Grady, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Continuing grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2009
* USD 366,102.00

0424612

Intellectual merit: The goals of the Physical Oceanography Dissertations
Symposiums (PODS) are to provide an extended forum for presentation of the
thesis dissertations of 25 physical oceanography doctoral candidates in a
setting that encourages scientific discussions and interactions among the
speakers. The symposium will be a week-long combination of formal and informal
sessions to encourage the development of professional relationships that
facilitate future national and international interdisciplinary and inter-
institutional investigations.

Broader Impacts: An important goal is to provide the young Ph.D. with
information about the sponsoring agencies' programs in physical oceanography,
and some practical instructions on securing research support from those
programs. A final goal with far-reaching impact is to delineate emerging
frontiers in physical oceanography as well as the current state of the art by
the nature of the doctoral theses presented. The dissertation abstracts will be
published. A web site will be developed to include attendee contact information,
published abstracts, history of the PODS, research opportunities, news, photos,
and any additional information as requested by the supporting agencies
representatives.

The symposia will continue a successful series of two symposia previously
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF).and the Office of Naval
Research (ONR), with new contributions from the National Aeronautics and Space
Agency (NASA) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).