* 0424011
* Research in Nonlinear Control Systems Theory:  Lyapunov Functions, Stabilization, and Engineering Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Marcio de Queiroz, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 12/31/2007
* USD 171,143.00

Abstract DMS-0424011, Malisoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in Nonlinear Control Systems Theory:
Lyapunov Functions, Stabilization, and&lt;br/&gt;Engineering
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide new Lyapunov-based
stability methods in&lt;br/&gt;mathematical control theory, which are based on
the systematic use of&lt;br/&gt;generalized differentials, optimal control, and
the input-to-state&lt;br/&gt;stability framework. In particular, the project
will derive and apply new&lt;br/&gt;feedback stabilization techniques for
nonautonomous systems and&lt;br/&gt;underactuated mechanical systems on
manifolds that are not tractable by&lt;br/&gt;the existing theory. Other related
lines of research to be pursued&lt;br/&gt;include: a) the explicit construction
of time-varying control-Lyapunov&lt;br/&gt;functions, b) the analysis of
bifurcation points of discontinuous&lt;br/&gt;feedbacks, c) approximation and
regularity theory for Lyapunov functions,&lt;br/&gt;and d) the construction of
state estimators for output stable systems.&lt;br/&gt;By developing powerful new
engineering and mathematical techniques, this&lt;br/&gt;project will make it
possible to analyze a large class of important&lt;br/&gt;stability problems
across many disciplines using a single, systematic,&lt;br/&gt;user-friendly
approach. Feedback stabilization is used in many areas,&lt;br/&gt;including
engineering (e.g., control of autonomous air and surface&lt;br/&gt;vehicles for
military surveillance and reconnaissance missions) and&lt;br/&gt;systems biology
(e.g., analysis of cell receptors in models of viral&lt;br/&gt;infection). The
research will promote learning by supporting graduate&lt;br/&gt;student research
assistants, who will apply and validate the project&lt;br/&gt;methods in a
mechanical engineering control system laboratory. The project&lt;br/&gt;will be
carried out in an institution that traditionally attracts
many&lt;br/&gt;minorities, and special efforts will be made to recruit
research&lt;br/&gt;assistants from under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;