* 0424444
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Natural Hybridization Between Red-tailed Monkeys (Cercopithecus ascanius) and Blue Monkeys (Cercopithecus mitis) in Gombe National Park, Tanzania
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Clifford Jolly, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 07/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

This project is using a "natural experiment" to investigate an evolutionary
phenomenon that has rarely been considered, let alone studied in the field, yet
which may have been of great importance in the history of life. Species,
considered the basic units of natural diversity, are supposed to follow a one-
way evolutionary trajectory, becoming isolated first physically, then
reproductively. After that crucial point, a species is genetically independent;
it can acquire new variation, and the potential to evolve, only via mutation. A
new species that survives does so by carving itself a slice of ecological space,
and in doing so often becomes narrower, more specialized, in its behavior and
adaptations. This canonical pattern is undoubtedly frequent and central to the
process of evolutionary diversification. Some evidence suggests, however, that
the speciation process is not always irreversible; that under circumstances that
are unusual, but not impossibly rare, populations belonging indisputably to
different species can dissolve the reproductive barrier and form a new species
by fusion. Once completed, such fusions are much harder to recognize than
instances of conventional, splitting speciation. Indeed, the best evidence for
them often comes from molecular genetic information of a kind unavailable until
very recently. This project uses both observational and genetic data to test the
hypothesis that populations belonging to two species of monkeys in the Gombe
National Park, Tanzania, are in the midst of such a process. Red-tailed monkeys
(Cercopithecus ascanius) and blue monkeys (C.mitis) are good species, quite
distinct in appearance and behavior. Over most of the broad area where both
occur, they rarely hybridize, and hybrids are apparently unsuccessful. In Gombe
National Park, however, interbreeding over many generations has established
hybrids as a substantial minority within the breeding population. The study is
testing the hypothesis that unusual biogeographic and demographic conditions at
Gombe have driven the two species towards genetic and behavioral integration.
The Co-PI's field survey will quantify the density of parental species and
hybrids, and relate these to the distribution of forest habitat. Behavioral data
will be used to test the speculation that at Gombe both C.mitis and C.ascanius
tend to relate to hybrids, and members of the other species, with behaviors
normally reserved for conspecifics. The genetic phase of the study will take
advantage of recent technical advances that allow genetic material to be
recovered from "biodetritus" - such as feces. Genetic markers specific to the
two monkey species will be used to track the ancestry of individual monkeys in
the Gombe population, and hence infer the patterns of gene flow between the
populations and into the hybrids. The resulting PhD will qualify a female
scientist, with a proven teaching and public service record, to enter the
academic community. The fieldwork itself involves international collaboration,
and practical scientific training of personnel in the host country, Tanzania.
More broadly, it should also help to inform the general public about the nature
of biological evolution.

