* 0424462
* Low-Cost Distributed Solar-Thermal-Electric Power Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Seth Sanders, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2007
* USD 243,092.00

Low-Cost Distributed Solar-Thermal-Electric Power Generation

We discuss the technical and economic feasibility of a low-cost distributed
solar-thermal-electric power generation technology based on the use of a solar
thermal collector (STC)in conjunction with a free-piston Stirling engine.The
solar thermal collector is to be comprised of low-concentration nonimaging
concentrators and absorbers with spectrally selective coatings.The Stirling
engine converts moderate temperature heat to electricity by way of integrated
electric generation.In spite of its relatively low conversion e .ciency,the
proposed system can be a cost-e .ective alternative to solar photovoltaic
(PV)modules,as discussed in the project description. The system is conceived to
operate with collector temperatures in the range of 125 .C to 150 .C, which is
consistent with the use of stationary solar thermal collectors employing low-
concentration nonimaging re .ectors.Thus,the system avoids the costs and
maintenance issues associated with tracking collectors based on high
concentration ratio concentrators. We take the view that cost e .ectiveness of
solar electric technologies should be judged by output power per dollar rather
than by e .ciency or other technical merits.This view re .ects the observation
that there are vast untapped siting opportunities in both urban and rural
regions of the world.Research into photovoltaics has been focused on improving e
.ciency because there has been no signi .cant decrease in the inherent cost of
silicon wafer area.However,the proposed solar-thermal-electric system is
designed for fabrication out of low-cost materials.A collector is built of
glass,aluminum,copper,and insulation,while engines and generators are primarily
steel, aluminum,copper,and plastics.In high-volume manufacturing,the cost of the
proposed system will be determined by the weight of its bulk materials.This
study of solar-thermal-electric systems involves searching for a more cost-e
.ective balance between system e .ciency and materials cost. Broader Impacts
Energy independence and diversi .cation through the use of renewable dis-
tributed sources is essential for the future of our society.In the project
description,we make a case that the proposed technology will cost on the order
of $1 per Watt of peak output power.As such, this technology would represent at
least a .ve-fold improvement over photovoltaic technology in terms of cost.A
simple estimate of energy cost using the proposed technology based on an average
of only four hours per day of operation over a modest ten year lifetime
indicates a cost of about $0.066/kW-hr.Although not equal to the lowest costs
for electricity,this is certainly an energy cost that makes the technology very
valuable when considering the additional advantages of its nature.Namely,this is
a distributed renewable energy source with an availability that is fairly well
matched to peak demand times.Further,this technology is well suited to
distributed deployment in an analogous manner to that of photovoltaic
generation.As such,it will be valuable for remote sites where utility
infrastructure is non-existent or too costly as well as for residential and
business sites as an alternative to photovoltaics. The PI has been active in
integrating research into new and existing classes,and plans to con- tinue this
in conjunction with the proposed work.The PI also actively seeks to include
underrep- resented student groups in his projects.UC Berkeley hosts the SUPERB
(Summer Undergraduate Program in Engineering Research at
Berkeley,http://www.coe.berkeley.edu/cues/superb/index.html) program which
targets underrepresented and minority students.The PI plans to actively recruit
in the SUPERB program for students to participate in the proposed project during
the summer periods. Intellectual Merit A direct strategy for enabling a
renewable energy source by seeking to min- imize the cost-to-output-power ratio
is outlined.We analyze the cost of an integrated system including a solar
thermal collector and a low-temperature Stirling engine.Novel multi-phase free-
piston Stirling machine designs are proposed along with rigorous analysis
techniques for their design and evaluation.Speci .cally,a Stirling machine with
no mechanical linkages and only three moving parts is discussed.This is a design
that inherently permits for a long maintenance-free lifetime and for very low
frictional losses. 1