* 0424700
* BE MUSES: Biocomplexity in the Bioeconomy: The Natural and Industrial Ecology of Biobased Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2011
* Sue Greenhalgh, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/28/2011
* USD 1,848,869.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Biocomplexity in the Environment/Materials Use Science,
Engineering and Society project focuses on modeling the ecological, economic,
and social impacts of a large-scale transition to the use of biomass-derived
feedstock for the production of energy, fuel and products. The United States has
set ambitious goals of producing from biomass 25% of its chemicals and
materials, and 20% of its transportation fuel by 2030. Such a shift to biobased
production will have profound impacts throughout the coupled industrial,
agricultural and social systems. Very little information is available on the
material flow cycles of the envisioned bioeconomy, especially on how those
cycles are linked together, and on what the implications of changes in those
cycles might be for resource availability, economics, the environment, and
options for government policy. This research will use an integrated set of
local, regional and global models to study the implications of near- and long-
term bioeconomy scenarios. In parallel with physical process and substance flow
modeling, agriculture sector economic and environmental modeling, and social
impact assessment will be used to explore market structure, production, and
social drivers as influences on future material flows in the bioeconomy.
Researchers at Dartmouth College and the World Resources Institute will
participate on this project. In partnership with the Authentic Teaching Alliance
(ATA) we will use interest in the bioeconomy to motivate basic science education
by designing and testing learning modules for high school science classes around
key biobased conversion and production concepts. It is expected that results
from this project will allow us to better understand: (1) The flows of materials
in the bioeconomy; (2) if biobased production requires trade-offs with water
quality, climate change, and food production; and if so, the nature and extent
of those trade-offs; (3) the ability of agriculture to supply the feedstock
needs of large-scale bioproduction; (4) the coupling within the bioeconomy
between water quality and climate change brought about by changes in the flow of
nitrogen and carbon compounds; (5) the factors that influence farmers'
willingness to produce for the bioeconomy; and (6) the impacts of policy
mechanisms designed to promote the development of a bioeconomy. This award will
be managed by program officers in CMS / ENG, ECS / ENG and DMII / ENG,
reflecting the breadth of expertise brought to this broad multidisciplinary
topic in biocomplexity. &lt;br/&gt;