* 0424196
* Collaborative Research:     Architecture and Implementation of Intelligent Transceivers for Ultra-Wideband Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Ranjit Gharpurey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2006
* USD 120,000.00

0424196&lt;br/&gt;Gharpurey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In February 2002, the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) revised its Part 15 emission rules and allowed
the use of a large section of the radio-frequency (RF) spectrum by commercial
ultra-wideband (UWB) transmission devices. The restrictions imposed on these
devices include a limit on the transmitted power spectral density of -41 dBm/MHz
from 3.1 to 10.6 GHz and a minimum signal bandwidth of 500 MHz. The availability
of such a wide bandwidth has enabled several new short-distance, low-power, high
bit-rate applications for communication, ranging and location-finding.
Industrial standards proposals for the use of the above bandwidth allow for very
impressive throughput performance. However, since time-to-market is a major
constraint, many of these standards use variants of well-known carrier-based
communication methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new FCC policy allows the
public use of such a large spectrum for the first time. Thus it opens
opportunities for fundamentally new research in wireless communications in
topics such as radically new signaling methods and architectures, and their
integrated circuit realization, in contrast with the traditional narrow-band
approach of carrier-based modulation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The PI proposes to use
this unique opportunity to research highly efficient, integrated circuit
implementations of transceivers for UWB radio applications. He will explore the
trade-offs between the signaling and system level, and the architectural and
integrated circuit implementation level. He proposes to investigate an
implementation-friendly digital multi-carrier UWB signaling format that is
expected to alleviate major issues with UWB communications, namely interference
and multipath. He also plans to investigate a low-power interference detector
which detects the presence of undesired signals in given frequency bands. The
detector shares interference information with other transceivers and allows for
a unique intelligent interference mitigation strategy. The interference
detection strategy can be combined very well with the proposed signaling format,
with minimal hardware cost or power overhead. These innovations are enabled by
our proposed research efforts in the efficient implementation of transceivers in
VLSI integrated circuits. The low RF output power-levels in UWB open the
possibility to use current and future nanometer CMOS technologies and exploit
the impressive operation speed they offer. He plans to develop a circuit
implementation of the transceivers including such circuit blocks as broadband
amplifiers, high linearity correlators and matched filters, high-speed D/A and
A/D converters, and output buffers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Communication technologies and more specifically wireless
communication&lt;br/&gt;technologies play a prominent role in developing a
broadly accessible cyber-infrastructure. UWB radio technology opens exciting new
opportunities for applications and the proposed research on the realization of
an efficient physical layer is crucial enabler towards
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shortage of analog, mixed-signal, and RF
integrated circuit designers, with in-depth knowledge of the communication
systems aspects of the problem, has been a continuous challenge for the
advancement of this field. Through research experiences and courses, his program
will educate researchers and circuit designers with the cross-disciplinary
skills to invent new design principles for integrated circuits in the context of
the system in which they operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program involves the
collaboration of PIs at different institutions. It leverages the industrial
expertise and research backgrounds of both PIs. It further offers unique
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to interact with a broader
research effort. To enhance the educational opportunities for students in this
emerging field, new courses will be developed. For undergraduate students a
research experience program is proposed that will offer research projects
specifically designed to provide hands-on experience and extend their
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;