* 0424574
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New American Diversity in Interactions, Interpretations, and Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Mustafa Emirbayer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2007
* USD 7,408.00

In the last decades of the twentieth century, the foreign born population of the
United States expanded dramatically. Although the majority of immigrants reside
in major cities within a few states, new Americans increasingly settle outside
of traditional entry points and major urban centers, and in states that have
not, at least in recent history, been home to large foreign-born populations.
The new wave of immigrants includes what is arguably the first substantial
influx of native Africans since the end of the slave trade. These trends make
this research project examining "diversity struggles" in Lewiston, an
overwhelmingly-white Maine town thrust into the spotlight by tensions arising
from a recent influx of Somali immigrants, timely and relevant. Through
ethnographic work including interviews with Lewiston's public officials, new and
longtime residents, in-depth analysis of interactions in local businesses, and
comparative fact-finding in other communities that are home to large Somali
populations, this study addresses the following questions: How do changes in the
city population affect community members? How do old and new residents construct
racial, cultural, and religious "difference" in their interactions? Do residents
use experiences with "difference" to make sense of their community and new
neighbors? How and when do they orient their approach to "difference" to widely
available notions of "cultural sensitivity?" The broader impacts of this project
include the following. This project will contribute to sociological
understanding of cultural assimilation and integration, race, and immigration by
exposing the assumptions, experiences, and sense-making practices by which old
and new city inhabitants comprehend and construct community. Through the
dissemination of findings in multidisciplinary workshops and conferences and the
publication of results, this research will have a broader impact on the
formulation of immigration and refugee policy at the local and national levels,
prove useful to service providers in rapidly diversifying areas, and suggest new
approaches to dealing with diversity that allow communities experiencing new
immigration to develop and implement techniques designed to avoid problems, such
as persistent economic inequality and intractable residential and social
segregation, faced in many immigration centers.