* 0424166
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Evolution of the Reproductive System in Strepsirrhine Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Patricia Wright, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 07/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Reproduction is central to the existence of every organism, and reproductive
biology has long been a central issue in primatology. Of particular interest is
the study of reproduction in lemurs, a highly endangered primate radiation
confined to the island of Madagascar, and lorises, their understudied African
relatives. This study will analyze the many anatomical, behavioral, and
physiological differences among lemurs and lorises and the social and ecological
traits that influence these differences. The proposed research will address
three major topics of great significance to understanding primate biology and
evolution: (1) comparative anatomy of the reproductive system, (2) evolutionary
changes in the reproductive system, and (3) rates of evolution. The anatomical,
behavioral, and ecological characters generated in this study will be used to
test functional and evolutionary hypotheses about the reproductive system that
could not be tested with existing data. New anatomical descriptions and
photographs will be published for 24 species and numerous subspecies of lemur
and loris, constituting a major advance in our knowledge of their anatomy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has far-reaching impact on many
fronts. It involves international, collaborative research between scientists
from America and Madagascar that will result in the training of American
graduate students and undergraduate students (including females and minorities)
as well as students in Madagascar. The results of this study of the evolution of
primate reproduction will be of major importance both for the conservation of
endangered species in the wild as well as the maintenance of captive colonies
involved in a wide range of both basic and biomedical research. The results of
this study will be incorporated immediately into educational programs both in
the USA and in Madagascar as well as the extensive outreach programs at Duke
University Primate Center. Because this research involves attractive and
endangered species, the results of this work are likely to be of considerable
public interest and will reach a broad public audience.&lt;br/&gt;