* 0424503
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Detecting Selection in Primate Genomes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Caro-Beth Stewart, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,250.00

Following the completion of the human genome sequence, there has been growing
interest in identifying which proteins accrued adaptive sequence changes on the
human lineage due to positive selection. Identifying such positively selected
proteins entails comparing protein-coding DNA sequences from humans and other
primates in a statistical setting. With the recent completion of the chimpanzee
genome sequence, this approach has become possible on a large scale. A major
limitation of this approach, however, is that humans and many primate species
are too similar at the DNA sequence level for conventional statistical methods
to achieve their theoretically optimal power, potentially resulting in a high
number of positively selected genes being overlooked. The proposed research
develops a new statistical solution to this problem that is expected to have
significantly higher power to identify selected genes than do existing
approaches. The specific objectives of this proposed research are: 1) to develop
a new method to detect positive selection that maximizes statistical information
by pooling genes within mutationally similar regions of the genome; 2) to
characterize the new method's power to detect selection; and 3) to apply the
method to detect positive selection based upon the whole genome assemblies from
human and chimpanzee, as well as the forthcoming macaque monkey genome. The
proposed research is expected to considerably improve statistical power to
detect genes of adaptive significance between closely related species, such as
human and chimpanzee. The methods developed will be used to generate an
exhaustive portrait of positively selected genetic changes on the human and
chimpanzee lineages. This resource should provide a strong starting point for
numerous evolutionary and functional studies by researchers worldwide. All data
and computer programs developed in this project will be made freely available to
the research community over the Internet. The computational resources required
for this project will enhance the research infrastructure at the host
institution. As dissertation research, this project will contribute to the
education and training of doctoral candidate. The results of this study will be
widely disseminated through publication in scientific journals, and will be
presented at appropriate scientific conferences. This project will contribute to
society by helping to fulfill the long-term goals of the Human Genome Project
through enhancing understanding of human genetics and origins.

