* 0424579
* A Longitudinal Examination of Caregiving Processes in Adulthood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Brooke Feeney, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2008
* USD 399,999.00

In adulthood, romantic partners are frequently called upon to provide comfort
and assistance to one another in times of need. In fact, many adults come to
rely heavily on their romantic partner as an important source of support and
care. Not surprisingly, research indicates that social support and caregiving
are essential not only to personal health and well being, but also to the
development and maintenance of healthy and satisfying intimate relationships.
However, despite the fact that social support is so critical for well-being, we
know surprisingly little about the interpersonal support processes that occur
within close relationships. Moreover, the research that has been conducted has
focused primarily on one type of support - the comfort and assistance provided
to another in stressful situations (referenced in this proposal as the provision
of a "safe haven") - and has overlooked another important type of support - the
support of another's personal growth, goal strivings, and explorations in
situations that are challenging (referenced here as the provision of a "secure
base"). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary purpose of this investigation is to
address this critical gap in the literature by examining the "secure base"
function of caregiving in adult intimate relationships. Specifically, this
project will investigate couple members' support of their partners' personal
growth, goal strivings, and explorations, as well as the effects of this type of
support, and lack thereof, on the recipient (e.g., on the recipient's self-
perceptions, personal growth, psychological and physical well-being) and on the
relationship (e.g., satisfaction, stability). A secondary goal of this research
is to build upon existing research on "safe haven" caregiving by (a) examining
interpersonal dynamics surrounding, and long-term consequences of, this type of
caregiving in a sample of newly married couples and (b) jointly examining the
dynamics and effects of both safe haven and secure base caregiving in the same
sample of relationship partners. Because social support is an interpersonal
phenomenon, both types of caregiving will be examined as part of a dyadic
process that involves the characteristics and behavior of both interaction
partners. Daily and weekly diaries of events surrounding both secure base and
safe haven caregiving, as well laboratory observations and self-reports of these
dynamics, will be obtained for each couple. Observational and survey assessments
will be repeated one year later in order to test hypotheses regarding long-term
consequences of both types of caregiving. Because each type of caregiving serves
a different function, it is expected that secure base caregiving (the support of
a partner's "going out" for exploration) will have important immediate and long-
term consequences that are distinct from those that are likely to be afforded by
safe haven caregiving (the support of a partner's "coming in" in times of
stress). For example, the unique consequences of receiving secure base
caregiving (both immediately and over time) are likely to be higher levels of
self-esteem, perceived competency, self-confidence, and self-efficacy, and
greater willingness/efforts to engage in exploratory activities involving the
pursuit of goals, acceptance of challenges, and attempts to learn new
things/make new discoveries. Thus, long-term improvements in the self (personal
growth) are likely to be important consequences of secure base support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hoped that the results of this research will
contribute to theoretical advances regarding the nature, functioning, and
importance of relationships in adulthood, and to the impressive body of research
in the marital literature that attempts to identify the complex intrapersonal
and interpersonal factors that predict marital satisfaction and stability. The
fundamental importance of studying support/caregiving processes as they unfold
within everyday interactions between relationship partners lies in the long-term
consequences of these interactions for individual and relationship functioning.
&lt;br/&gt;