* 0424839
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: To Father or to Fight? Mass Conscription and the Politics of Masculine Citizenship, France, 1913-1939, and the United States, 1917-1944.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Craig Calhoun, New York University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 08/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

The obligation to act as conscripted citizen-soldiers for the modern state is
one of the most important duties required of male citizens, especially in France
and the United States where a republican citizen-soldier tradition emerged. Yet
from the first decades of the twentieth century, male citizens have also been
supported by the French and American states as "breadwinning" heads of families.
At times this has conflicted with the citizen-soldier tradition, since
conscripting fathers has contradicted the duty to act as fathers supporting
families. This conflict reached its apex in France and the US between the World
Wars, and throughout WWII in the US, when legislation was enacted that still
informs contemporary policy. Using a comparative-historical methodology, I ask
why the French rejected exempting fathers from military service, whereas the US
chose to defer fathers from the draft. I argue that gendered ideologies
regarding fatherhood affected these outcomes. Consulting archives around
Washington DC, and Paris, France, I will examine transcripts of debates and
commissions in the US Congress and French Parliament, reports by military
leaders and manpower commissions, executive branch reports such as that of the
War Department, daily newspapers, journals of social movements, and national
legislation enacted. By emphasizing how fatherhood has been supported such that
it has even challenged the citizen-soldier ideal, this dissertation advances
knowledge in the fields of gender, citizenship, and military sociology.
BroaderImpacts: The integration of women into the military raises many questions
regarding the conflict between caring for families and serving the state as
soldiers. However, this project reveals that such a dilemma is not unique to
women soldiers, but has an historical precedent regarding male soldiers that was
both debated and adjudicated in the first half of the twentieth century.
Additionally, the import of supporting fatherhood through state policy is being
increasingly emphasized in the US. Since draft legislation is still largely
based upon the conscription rules of the interwar era, it is informative to
understand how past legislation regarding drafting fathers would inform a
contemporary draft, and at the same time, how it was differently adjudicated in
another country such as France.