* 0424234
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Habitat Quality and Stress: Fecal Cortisol Levels in Three Species of Malagasy Lemurs (Varecia variegata, Eulemur Fulvus rufus &amp; Eulemur rubrive
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Deborah Overdorff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 07/31/2005
* USD 11,172.00

Exposure to prolonged environmental and social pressures can inhibit
reproduction and immune function in vertebrates. The lifetime reproductive
success of primates impacted by these stressors is reduced more severely than in
other mammals due to the slow rate of reproduction and development of offspring.
Lemurs in particular may be most sensitive to ecological stress, as Madagascar's
environment is notably harsh and unpredictable. Several traits unique to lemurs
(e.g., female dominance, flexible activity patterns, small group sizes), when
compared with other primates, are hypothesized to be adaptations to ecological
stress, and conserve energy and maximize resources in a stressful environment.
However, scant field research has been conducted to test this hypothesis.
&lt;br/&gt;Very little is known about the stress response in natural habitats.
Measures of cortisol, a hormone released in response to stress, can
quantitatively assess stressors in wild animals, and do not require animal
handling. Annual hormonal profiles will be constructed to identify ecological
and reproductive correlates to cortisol excretion. Using the red-bellied lemur
(Eulemur rubriventer) as a model, and cortisol as an indicator of stress, this
study will investigate how food abundance, reproduction, and habitat quality
interact in Ranomafana National Park, Madagascar. The following will be
explored: (1) Are fluctuations in food abundance reflected in cortisol levels?
(2) Are different reproductive stages reflected in cortisol levels? (3) Does
synchronizing infant weaning with particular ecological events offset the costs
of this activity? (4) Does habitat disturbance affect the duration and magnitude
of the stress response to food abundance and reproduction?&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to its relevance to understanding lemur evolution, this project will enable
future comparisons with studies on other lemur species, which will help identify
species more vulnerable to stress. Constructing hormonal profiles of Malagasy
primates will also provide a basis for comparisons with primates from other
regions which are not subject to Madagascar's unique environment.
&lt;br/&gt;This study will continue to provide hands-on experience in fieldwork
and data collection for Malagasy and non-Malagasy university students. Malagasy
students will also receive academic and financial support for the completion of
Master's degrees. Public lectures will facilitate interaction with local people,
and collaboration will occur with faculty from the University of Antananarivo.
Final reports will be filed with park agencies to contribute to conservation
efforts in Madagascar and promote scientific collaboration with other
researchers in the area. &lt;br/&gt;