* 0424919
* CAREER: Role of Spatiotemporal and Identity Continuity in Object Constancy
* NONE,NONE
* 01/20/2004,07/31/2006
* Anne Hillstrom, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Amber L. Story
* 07/31/2006
* USD 189,500.00

Philosophers, artists, and scientists for centuries have thought about how
people organize the continuous flow of information reaching our sensory organs
into discrete, individuated perceptual objects. As advances have been made in
understanding vision, this topic has reemerged in cognitive psychology,
artificial intelligence, and neuroscience. An object is individuated when the
observer (1) perceives its features as belonging to a connected unit, (2)
perceives its features as separate from things that are not part of the object,
and (3) perceives that it is or is not something that was present sometime in
the recent or distant past. An object that is believed to be the same even when
it undergoes changes exhibits what is called object constancy. Much of what we
know about object individuation and constancy in adult perception has been based
on self-report methods. This research will explore the nature of object
individuation and object constancy in tasks in which observers are attending to
an object but are unlikely to be reasoning about its individuality or constancy.
The research will employ a variety of tasks that have been developed in recent
years to demonstrate ways in which attention to objects differs from attention
to the space that objects occupy. The research will determine whether attention
to objects is affected by disruptions to identity continuity or spatiotemporal
continuity (i.e., the degree to which it is consistently present and moves
through space in a physically possible way). By exploring which discontinuities
disrupt attention to objects, the research will establish which continuities are
critical to object constancy. In real scenes, spatiotemporal and identity
discontinuity rarely are independent of each other. In contrast, this research
will take advantage of media special effects that can dissociate them. For
example, spatiotemporal discontinuity will sometimes be accomplished by an
identifiable object disappearing unexpectedly and reappearing abruptly, and
identity discontinuity will sometimes be accomplished by one object morphing
smoothly into another. One part of the project will build on previous findings
that once one part of an object is attended, it is easier to detect a
subsequently presented target feature when it is elsewhere within the attended
object rather than equidistant from the attended location but in another object.
This project will investigate what disrupts this same-object benefit. For
instance, spatiotemporal changes or identity discontinuities will be introduced
to the cued or uncued object between the time the cue is presented and the time
the target is presented, to see if the same-object benefit is disrupted. The
research will also look for disruptions in speed and accuracy of responses to
the display. Finally, it will also explore how eye movements are affected by the
discontinuities. The direct goal of this research is to understand the
fundamental nature of object constancy and individuation. However the results of
the research will also have implications for engineering robotic systems that
use machine vision to guide manipulation of dynamic objects. Such robotic
systems need to differentiate which parts of visual information belong to
coherent objects and which belong to different objects. In a different realm,
knowledge of what sorts of changes distract people who are processing dynamic
displays will aid designers of videos understand how special effects can be used
to guide people's attention.