* 0424798
* Children and Rural Education (CARE): Left Behind from the Start -- A Conference to be Convened at the University of Louisiana, Monroe, in Monroe, Louisiana, April 3-5, 2005
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Luke Thomas, The University of Louisiana at Monroe
* Standard Grant
* Glenn C. Markle
* 02/28/2007
* USD 199,975.00

This project, the CARE Conference, will assemble representatives of all
stakeholders and leading researchers in rural SMET education to establish a
comprehensive national research agenda for rural education and discuss how to
make rural schools places where people want to teach, prepare pre-service
teachers for rural challenges and provide an environment designed for
professional growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals for the CARE Conference
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Assemble representatives of governmental and non-
governmental organizations, rural school systems, their university partners, and
leading researchers in SMT and rural education and teacher recruitment,
retention and quality.&lt;br/&gt;2. Enhance the information exchange among these
groups.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop a national agenda that will motivate research on
rural SMET education and the rural SMET teacher professional
continuum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CARE Conference focuses on very important
issues, which are timely and difficult. Recruitment and retention of quality
science and mathematics teachers in rural schools has been a long-standing
problem. The conference format offers the opportunity for scholars and
stakeholders to discuss current research and programs that could be useful in
addressing teacher recruitment and retention within the context of the quality
and stability of rural schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide array of
stakeholders in SMET and rural education has been identified and is committed to
the success of the project. Rural education problems exist nationally but
generally have been addressed locally or regionally. The establishment of a STEM
research agenda that emerges from the conference is to provide strategies for
addressing STEM problems in rural schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the use
of technology, e.g., Access Grid and direct streaming video, anyone interested
can participate. The Virtual Laboratory will provide for learning community
support to broaden the audience in the conversation. &lt;br/&gt;