* 0424416
* Collaborative Research:     MEMS from Organized Mesoscale Architectures of Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Kimberly Foster, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2007
* USD 170,000.00

The objective of this research is to harness mesoscale assemblies of organized
mesoscale architectures of highly oriented multi-walled CNT's actuation and
sensing using the microelectromechanical systems MEMS platform. In particular,
we will create a new class of devices and microsystems using preferentially
grown CNTs on Si-based MEMS structures. The CNT-MEMS hybrid structures will be
fabricated by a combination of Si/SiO2 processing and a unique multidirectional
CNT growth process. We will then measure the mechanical actuation and response
dynamics of a wide variety of structures including cantilevers, torsion beams,
membranes of various shapes in inert and electrochemically active environments
for applications such as electrical-pulse based triggering and sensing.
transduction schemes in mechanical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of this work enable the translation of the attractive
properties of individual CNTs into a completely new "break-through" technology
of nanotube-mesostructrure-based microdevices on silicon via standard micro and
nanofabrication. The proposed research has the potential to demonstrate a
completely new "break-through" technology that will pave the path for
integration of CNTs into MEMS platforms, yielding a variety of new
nanotechnology-based microdevices actuators and sensors. The broader impacts
involve interaction at many educational levels. Through connections previously
established with the support of MESA(CA Science outreach program), the PI and
the graduate students and/or REU's supported by this grant plan to visit science
classes in the Junior high, and conduct science experiments related to nanoscale
research. This newly emerging and exciting area will serve as a medium in our
outreach activities to attract bright high-school students to science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;