* 0424210
* Refractive Optics Based on Metallic Nano-optic Lenses
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Hong Koo Kim, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 205,000.00

0424210&lt;br/&gt;KIM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is
to develop a new class of optics and devices based on metallic nanoaperture
array structures that performs beam-shaping functions in a fashion distinctly
different from the conventional optics. The proposed devices are designed to
allow refractive transmission of light through metallic nanoapertures involving
plasmonic interactions. An incident beam couples into a surface plasmon mode and
propagates along a nanoslit formed in metal. At the exit surface, the surface
plasmon wave decouples into radiation modes. In the proposed structures, the
phase retardation of optical waves emanating from nanoaperture elements is
controlled by metal thickness and/or refractive index in the aperture regions.
The PI's preliminary study based on finite-difference time-domain (FDTD)
simulation demonstrates a beam shaping (focusing and collimation) capability of
a convex-shaped metallic nanoslit array lens. He proposes proof-of-concept
experiments and plan to develop the metal-based refractive optics into an
enabling technology for a new class of beam-shaping devices. The scope of the
proposed research covers design, fabrication, and characterization of nano-optic
structures and study of the plasmonic phenomena occurring in the metallic
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
study is expected to lead to the development of a new class of optical device
technologies that will make major contributions to various fields, such as
imaging, lithography, patterning, spectroscopy, communication, information
technology, and health care. This research will provide an educational paradigm
for training the future scientists and engineers for the emerging field of
nanophotonics and plasmonics. The research team will be proactive in recruiting
students from under-represented groups to the program. The present proposal
includes support for two undergraduate students each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;