* 0424235
* Unexpected Immune Diversity in the Purple Sea Urchin
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* David Raftos, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 08/31/2008
* USD 550,000.00

Unexpected Immune Diversity in the Purple Sea Urchin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
humans, the immune system has two subsystems: the innate and the adaptive immune
systems. The innate system first recognizes the presence of a pathogen and
alerts the adaptive system to make antibodies and directs other adaptive
responses. However, only vertebrates have an adaptive system, while
invertebrates such as the purple sea urchin survive with only the innate system.
The sea urchin innate immune system responds to the presence of pathogens by
marking them as foreign, which results in the uptake of the pathogens by cells
capable of killing them. Recent study designed to identify genes that were
turned on in response to the presence of bacteria showed that one particular
gene, called 185/333, was activated significantly more than all the rest.
Although the protein encoded by this gene has not been previously identified in
other organisms and its function is unknown, analysis has shown a significant
level of diversity in these proteins, reminiscent of the antibody diversity
generated by the adaptive immune system in higher vertebrates. This variability
includes the protein structure, which shows the presence and absence of 24
different regions and variability in the sequence of the amino acids. The
protein appears to be secreted, has separate regions rich in glycine and
histidine, repeated sequence regions that may be used to bind to cell surfaces,
and short regions that are very acidic. Curiously, no clear mechanism to keep
the protein stably folded was found. The diversity in the proteins was expected
to be encoded by many genes in an animal like sea urchin, however, evidence
suggests that there are only a few. In order to understand the diversity in the
genes and how it may affect the functions of the encoded proteins, two major
aims will be undertaken: Aim 1. Characterization of the gene(s). The number and
structure of genes will be analyzed in order to reveal how different regions of
the protein are linked together, uncover the source of the amino acid
variability, and investigate the response to bacterial challenge by specific
cell types. Aim 2. Characterization of protein(s). It will be determined when
the proteins are produced with respect to bacterial challenge. The function(s)
of the proteins will also be characterized and any functional diversity among
the proteins will be identified. This project is an initial investigation of an
unexpectedly diverse innate immune response mounted by the sea urchin towards
bacterial pathogens and may lead to a significant change in the understanding of
the immune responses in animals other than higher vertebrates. Broader impacts:
A change in the understanding of invertebrate immune capabilities may eventually
alter the approaches employed within the research community for investigating
immune responses in animals other than vertebrates. Research training will be
undertaken for graduate and post-doctoral students and will promote exchanges of
both student and senior researchers between the US and the co-investigator's lab
in Australia. Research opportunities for undergraduates will be available in our
laboratories, and assistance will be offered to undergraduates searching for
research opportunities for placement in other local laboratories. In the past,
trainees were 69% women and 46% underrepresented minorities. This demographic is
not expected to change in the future. &lt;br/&gt;