* 0424422
* Team for Research in Ubiquitous Secure Technology (TRUST)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2005,10/31/2018
* Sosale Sastry, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2018
* USD 40,814,545.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Team for Research in Ubiquitous Secure
Technology (TRUST)&lt;br/&gt;Dr. S. Shankar Sastry, Principal
Investigator&lt;br/&gt;University of California at
Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer trustworthiness continues to
increase in importance as a pressing scientific, economic, and social problem.
The last decade has seen a rapid increase in computer security attacks at all
levels, as more individuals connect to common networks and as motivations and
means to conduct sophisticated attacks increase. A parallel and accelerating
trend of the last decade has been the rapidly growing integration role of
computing and communication in critical infrastructure systems, such as
financial, energy distribution, telecommunication and transportation which now
have complex interdependencies rooted in information technologies. These
overlapping and interacting trends and needs force us to recognize that
trustworthiness of our computer systems is not an IT issue alone; it has a
direct and immediate impact on our nation's critical infrastructure and
workforce issues. As a consequence, there is an acute need for developing a much
deeper understanding of the scientific foundations of cybersecurity and critical
infrastructure systems, understanding the economic and public policy drivers and
impacts for cybersecurity, and assuring the workforce required for research and
development. &lt;br/&gt;In response to these needs, the Team for Research in
Ubiquitous Secure Technology (TRUST) will be devoted to the development of a new
science and technology that will radically transform the ability of
organizations (software vendors, operators, local and federal agencies) to
design, build, and operate trustworthy information systems for our critical
infrastructure. The Center will bring together a team with a proven track record
in relevant areas of computer security, systems modeling and analysis, software
technology, economics, and social sciences. The team consists of investigators
from the University of California at Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon University,
Cornell University, Stanford University, Vanderbilt University, and San Jose
State University. The research team will be advised and supported by an External
Advisory Committee (EAC) with strong representation of vendors of information
technology, critical infrastructure protection providers, and other relevant
stakeholders. The STC team, including the researchers, education group, and the
knowledge transfer group, the EAC, and participant groups will promote workforce
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;Through the active coordination and integration of efforts,
TRUST researchers will consider security in a hierarchy of approaches that
ranges from secure embedded systems to complex interdependent systems, each
approach informing and building upon the others. Equally important, TRUST will
address economic, social, and privacy considerations as the technology is
acquired and absorbed into cybersecurity products and the critical
infrastructure. The integrated, multidisciplinary approach made possible by the
Center mode of funding will allow solutions to synergistically emerge from a
"holistic systems" view of computer security, software technology, analysis of
complex interacting systems, and economic and public policy.&lt;br/&gt;The
unifying approaches of TRUST are computer security for component technologies,
composition of components into secure systems, test and evaluation strategies,
social and economic factors for successful security and the integration of the
Center's research with education and knowledge transfer. Leveraging the prior
investments of NSF, DoD and other agencies in various application testbeds,
TRUST will continuously test the technologies resulting from its research. The
role of the testbeds will be to integrate and evaluate technologies in specific
and realistic systems, keep the research on track to answer societal objectives,
and demonstrate the technologies for stakeholders in real systems. &lt;br/&gt;To
achieve and demonstrate the core objectives in the selected real-life testbeds,
TRUST will pursue a strongly coordinated research agenda in the following areas
Security Science (1) Software Security; (2) Trusted Platforms; (3) Applied
Cryptographic Protocols; and (4) Network Security&lt;br/&gt;Systems Science: (1)
Complex Interdependency Modeling and Analysis; (2) Secure Network Embedded
Systems; (3) Model-based Integration of Trusted Components; and (4) Secure
Information Management Software Tools.&lt;br/&gt;Social Science: (1) Economics,
Public Policy and Societal Challenges; (2) Digital Forensics and Privacy; and
(3) Human Computer Interfaces and Security.&lt;br/&gt;TRUST will have an
education and outreach component that focuses on integrating research and
inquiry-based education and on transferring new and existing knowledge to
undergraduate colleges, educational institutions serving under-represented
populations, and the K-12 community. In so doing, TRUST will help lay the
groundwork for training the scientists and engineers who will develop the next
generation of trustworthy systems, as well as to help prepare the individuals
who will ultimately become the users, consumers and beneficiaries of such
systems.&lt;br/&gt;TRUST will also take a comprehensive approach to knowledge
transfer. Since TRUST addresses well-defined and long term societal needs, the
results in computer security, privacy and critical infrastructure protection
will be easily communicated to decision makers, policy makers, and government
agencies. With respect to industry, the selected integrative testbeds will be
the focal points to interact with major stakeholder industries: power,
telecommunication and embedded systems. Since TRUST will comprise multiple
institutions, including technology vendors, infrastructure providers and leading
research universities, the result will be wide spread dissemination, adaptation
and continued evolution of ubiquitous secure technology. &lt;br/&gt;The legacy
of TRUST to the nation will be the creation of a science and technology base,
policy base, educational base, and technology transfer methodology for
cybersecurity. The long-term research agenda of TRUST will not only advance the
frontiers of knowledge in trustworthy computing; it will influence on a national
scale future academic research, industrial R&amp;D and education as TRUST
researchers identify new directions of inquiry, disseminate their findings to
the broader community, and produce a diverse group of skilled graduates who will
advance the field further yet.&lt;br/&gt;