* 0424016
* 2004 Marine Microbes:    Gordon Research Conference; June 2004; Roscoff, France
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* William Li, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 03/31/2005
* USD 8,200.00

The workshop will be held in June 2004 in Roscoff, France. The first meeting in
this series will be entitled "Picophytoplankton: from ecology to genomics". This
award will provide partial support for the participation of invited speakers,
discussion leaders and young investigators. The objective of this conference is
to explore original concepts in pico-phytoplankton research with a view to
unifying the outcomes that have emerged from separate disciplines in the past
two decades. For the first time, leading researchers from all major areas of
picophytoplankton study will be gathered together at a GRC, which offers a
unique forum for open discussion. The plan of this 5-day conference is to
explore topic areas tat include taxonomic diversity, molecular approaches,
physiology, ecology, and genomics. The goals of the conference are to promote
learning and participant diversity, and attendance will be open to scientists,
technologists and educators from academia, government and industry. A forum is
thus provided for support and encouragement of young scientists as they
establish initial scientific and personal contacts. The large number of
participants will allow registrants to be drawn from underrepresented groups and
from a wide geographic base. The conference also provides an opportunity to
enhance infrastructure for research and education, and will provide a venue
where US academic institutions, industry and government are able to network with
international partners.