* 0424213
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Origins and Impact of the Inca State: A Bioarchaeological Investigation of the Cuzco Valley
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Phillip Walker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 06/30/2005
* USD 10,500.00

This project is a bioarchaeological study of the health status and population
affinities of the prehistoric Cuzco Valley population of Peru. Despite the
wealth of information on the Inca, the origin of their state remains obscure. In
the proposed research, longstanding hypotheses concerning the geographic origins
of the Inca will be tested through analyses of cranial vault modification and
skeletal and dental traits. Paleopathological data will be used to document the
health consequences of increasing sociopolitical complexity. By combining
physical anthropological and mortuary data, this study will shed new light on
the emergence and development of the Inca state. The intellectual merits of this
research lie in the data it will provide on the origins of the Inca and their
expansion into the largest empire in the prehistoric Andes. The research will
also shed light on the relationship between the Inca state and the earlier
Tiwanaku state. Analyses of pathology and trauma will provide key information
regarding the impact of the state on health and the role of warfare in state
formation. Moreover, by adding to a growing database of analyzed skeletal
collections from throughout the Andean region, this research will help
bioarchaeologists gain a broader perspective on the influences state level
societies have on the living conditions of local populations under their
control. The broader impacts of this research include its contributions to
graduate training and education and fostering the development of international
scientific cooperation. Finally, the dissemination of this research in Peru will
contribute to the growing indigenous interest in the cultural achievements of
the Inca.