* 0424840
* Dynamical Effects of Solar Ultraviolet Variations in the Lower Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Lon Hood, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 226,192.00

This project is designed to test mechanisms for transmitting the direct upper
stratospheric effects of solar ultraviolet variations to lower levels in the
tropical and subtropical atmosphere, using a combination of observational and
mechanistic modeling techniques. The results of previous research showing that
the dynamical effects of solar ultraviolet variations in the tropical lower
stratosphere may occur through a modulation of the Brewer-Dobson circulation
will be investigated in greater detail to establish the presence or absence of
solar-induced decadal variations in extratropical wave forcing. Using accurate
ozone profile data and Eliassen-Palm planetary wave flux divergences, the
existence of decadal variations in wave forcing and tropical upwelling rates
will also be investigated &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project with also extend
existing studies showing that the occurrence and/or timing of stratospheric
sudden warmings at high winter latitudes can be influenced by upper
stratospheric zonal winds, which are in turn perturbed by the direct effects of
solar ultraviolet variations on ozone photochemistry and radiative heating.
Specifically, evidence will be sought to determine if the observed thermal
responses to 27-day solar ultraviolet variations in the tropical tropopause
region are caused by solar ultra-violet-induced changes in the occurrence of
sudden stratospheric warmings. This should enable identification of dipole and
quadrupole structures of the response, which would be indicative of the
dynamical effects of extratropical warmings and wave absorption events.
Successful identification of the cause(s) of these variations will impose
significant new constraints on climate models so that the solar forcing
contribution to climate change can be more accurately estimated. The project
will facilitate the training of one graduate research assistant.