* 0424074
* Dynamics of Basin-Scale Arctic Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Jiayan Yang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2008
* USD 221,277.00

The dynamics of large-scale ocean circulation in the Arctic must be very
different from that in any lower-latitude ocean basin since the two processes
that constitute the leading order dynamics of a basin-scale circulation, i.e.,
(1) the Sverdrup flow driven by Ekman pumping/sucking and (2) a western boundary
layer current that closes the gyre circulation and dissipates the vorticity flux
from wind stress, cannot apply to the Arctic Ocean. This is due to the fact that
(= df/dy where f is the Coriolis parameter) is nearly zero and to the lack of a
western boundary in the Arctic Ocean. Despite the rapid development of modeling
capability, a basic understanding of the dynamics that govern the basin scale
ocean circulation and its variability in the Arctic has yet to be developed.
Funds are provided to address this issue using process-oriented models. The
project objectives are to understand (1) which processes balance the surface
forcing in the ocean interior; (2) how and where the vorticity flux from the
curl of surface stress is dissipated so that a quasi-steady circulation can be
maintained; (3) how the Arctic Ocean responds to changes in the forcing field in
an environment where planetary Rossby waves are stagnant due to approaching
zero; (4) the role of boundary currents in establishing the basin-scale
circulation; and (5) the effects of bottom topography. Both wind-driven and
thermohaline circulation will be studied. The PI plans to use the simplest
possible, yet adequate, models to address each of these issues. The results,
however, will be tested in Ocean General Circulation Models (OGCMs) through
collaboration with a major Arctic Ocean modeling consortium. The PI and Dr. A.
Proshutinsky (also at WHOI), who leads the Arctic Ocean Model intercomparison
Project (AOMIP), which focuses on the development of 3-D OGCMs, have agreed to
work closely for testing the results from this process-oriented study in various
OGCMs that AOMIP is currently running. The results of a successful project will
help guide development, interpretation, and verification of predictive models of
Arctic Ocean circulation. Such models are necessary for the prediction of
climate change and pollutant transport pathways, amongst other applications.