* 0424141
* Identification of Anomaly in Structures Based on Locally Controlled Dynamic Inputs
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/2007
* USD 290,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CMS-0424141&lt;br/&gt;Chang, Fu-Kuo&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid and accurate detection of anomaly in
structures while in service is major a challenge in engineering. Recent advances
in sensor and smart materials technologies provide promising opportunities to
overcome current time-consuming and labor-intensive inspection methods. The key
to the success of the sensor-based technologies depends strongly on how the
sensor measurements can be correlated with the physical quantity in terms of
size and location of the anomaly. Although challenging, the mathematical
complexity of the sensor-based systems becomes significantly reduced if the
inputs to generate the data are well controlled. This leads to a fundamental
mathematical issue: Given limited sensor data resulting from controlled inputs,
identify local condition of an object.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, an
investigation is undertaken to develop a mathematical framework for detecting
anomaly in structures using distributed sensor measurements generated from
locally controlled dynamic excitations as well as appropriate algorithms to
identify the location and size of the anomaly based on the measurements. Both
analytical and experimental work will be conducted during the investigation. The
major tasks to be performed for the study include: Diagnostic Signal Generation,
Signal Interrogation and Interpretation, and Implementation and Verification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although simple coupon tests will be used to verify the
results, the mathematical framework is fundamental and shall allow engineers to
explore new mathematical formulations for data interpretation of any complex
systems. For instance, the framework could be applied to monitor fatigue cracks
in aircraft structures, to detect corrosion cracks for underground pipelines, to
provide early warning of incipient failure in spacecraft, or to interrogate the
integrity of bridges or buildings after major quakes. Furthermore, the
interrogation algorithms will provide useful tools for readily applying sensing
and monitoring techniques for a broad range of engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by CMS under the Math-Eng
Interfacing Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;