* 0424384
* U.S.-Pakistan Workshop: High Capacity Optical Networks and Enabling Technologies, Islamabad, Pakistan; December 2004
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,11/30/2006
* M. Yasin Raja, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/2006
* USD 32,000.00

0424384 Raja

Description: This project supports a US-Pakistan Workshop on "International
Workshop on "High Capacity Optical Networks and Enabling Technologies" to be
held in Islamabad, Pakistan. The workshop will be jointly organized by Dr. Yasin
Raja, Department of Physics and Optical Science, University of North Carolina,
Charlotte, North Carolina, Dr. Syed Zaidi, Institute of Information Technology
(NIIT), National University of Science and Technology, Rawalpindi, Pakistan and
Dr. Mohammad Afzal, Center for Information Technology, University of Arid
Agriculture (UAR), Rawalpindi, Pakistan. The scope of the workshop will
encompass certain areas of telecom sector including: the review of high-capacity
optical networks, network security and privacy, standards and routing protocols,
metro/edge networks, optical access and passive optical networks (PON), multi-
agent systems, optical wireless networks, wavelength and optical burst
switching, and broader implications thereof on higher education within the
telecom and IT sectors. The major objective of the workshop will be the
establishment of sustainable future collaborative research and education
initiatives among researchers and engineers from U.S. and Pakistani
institutions. Special organizational task group meetings will be held to
identify the areas of mutual interest. A binational committee will be
established with specific task assignments to follow up future progress and
programs. Twelve U.S. contributors/participants, and some ninety professors,
scientists, engineers, and graduate students from Pakistani institutions and
surrounding industry are expected to attend. The workshop proceedings will be
published.

Scope and broader impact: The workshop will help in setting research and
development priorities to meet the challenges due to the recent privatization
steps taken in Pakistani Telecommunication sector. The new openness of telecom
and information technology (IT) presents new opportunities for collaboration
between US and Pakistani scientists and engineers, and will eventually pave the
way for U.S. firms for extending global business to Pakistan, and for markets
within the South Asian region. The University of North Carolina at Charlotte and
the National University of Science and Technology have signed a cooperative
agreement for joint research program that will help NUST to establish new Ph.D.
program in the area of Telecom and Information Technology. The Higher Education
Commission of the Government of Pakistan is sponsoring the workshop within that
country. It is expected that future collaborative interactions between Pakistani
educational and industrial institutions and U.S. counterparts will result. U.S.
graduate students will be among the participants supported by this project.