* 0424586
* Workshop on Information, Silence, and Sanctuary
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* David Levy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 02/28/2005
* USD 35,500.00

This is funding to partially support a workshop to explore the problems of
information overload, the fragmentation of attention, and the general busyness
and speed up of everyday life. The goal of the meeting is to investigate this
imbalance, to begin to map its causes and conditions, and to explore remedial
actions. The workshop will be held in Seattle on May 10-12, 2004, and is
expected to attract approximately 50 participants from a number of disciplines
and walks of life, including the arts and humanities, technology, library and
information sciences, economics, education, and religion. Participants will be
selected to satisfy a number of criteria, including gender balance and
representation of under-represented groups. The workshop will begin with a
Public Forum on Information and the Quality of Life at Town Hall in downtown
Seattle on the evening of May 10, attended by the workshop invitees and open to
the general public at no charge. It will continue with two days of invitation-
only meetings on the University of Washington campus. Discussion topics will
include: the stress of overload; why are we so overloaded; silence and
sanctuary; the role of public institutions in achieving balance; and sanctuary
in, or from, cyberspace. There do not appear to have been any other recent
meetings on exactly this subject. Partial funding for the workshop is being
provided by the MacArthur Foundation, by the UW Simpson Center for the
Humanities, and by the Online Computer Library
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The PI's goal is to raise public
awareness of the workshop topics and to stimulate broad discussion of them. To
these ends, he will write a report summarizing the workshop presentations and
its major findings, and will make it available online. In addition, he has
secured agreement from the journal Ethics and Information Technology (Kluwer) to
publish a special issue devoted to the workshop's findings, that will include a
report on the workshop and papers produced by some of the participants. The PI
hopes to generate extensive press coverage of the workshop, and plans to
organize (in conjunction with the UW Libraries, the UW Henry Art Gallery, and
the Seattle Public Library) public meetings at local (Seattle) libraries and
museums on the workshop discussion topics, as well as panel(s) on these topics
at one or more upcoming ACM conferences.