* 0424342
* Active Measurement and System Identification
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Roger Brockett, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2007
* USD 175,096.00

&lt;br/&gt;The subject of active measurement is described here in the context of
a type of measurement&lt;br/&gt;processes that has become common in engineering
and physics, both at the macro scale&lt;br/&gt;and at the nano scale. Active
measurement, or active sensing as it may also be called, is&lt;br/&gt;often used
to extend the capabilities of sensors having limited dynamic range or the
need&lt;br/&gt;for a sequence of preparatory steps. We focus on a class of
problems of the type that arise&lt;br/&gt;in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy where the sample must be exposed to&lt;br/&gt;an excitation and the
signal-to-noise ratios are very unfavorable. In this setting it
often&lt;br/&gt;happens that the measurements must be repeated and averaged over
long periods of time&lt;br/&gt;if one is to get a useful result. When these
problems are conceptualized as problems of&lt;br/&gt;minimizing the error
variance, an unusual range of diffculties present themselves
reflecting&lt;br/&gt;the nonlinear nature of the problem. These are the subject
of this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: It is argued here that in a
number of areas the basic insights and&lt;br/&gt;mathematical algorithms needed
to obtain the most useful conclusions from an existing&lt;br/&gt;experimental
apparatus are not yet available. In some cases we can conceptualize
the&lt;br/&gt;problem by saying that in the case of stochastic processes,
further improvements in the&lt;br/&gt;estimation process depend on determining
how to best control the equation governing the&lt;br/&gt;error variance as it
shows up in the Kalman-Bucy fiter equations. It is argued here,
perhaps&lt;br/&gt;for the first time, that active control of this variance is
akin to controlling a certain type&lt;br/&gt;of nonlinear systems in that non
commutative effects are of critical importance. In this&lt;br/&gt;proposal we
explore this idea in the context of NMR problems and find that when used
in&lt;br/&gt;connection with a carefully designed mode selection process it is
possible to increase the&lt;br/&gt;signal to noise ratio significantly. We also
argue that these questions are best addressed in a&lt;br/&gt;somewhat broader
context and the proposal seeks to place them in their natural
generality.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The motivation for this work is firmly
rooted in real world con-&lt;br/&gt;siderations. For example, for years it has
been felt that the problem of determining the&lt;br/&gt;structure of individual
proteins is of fundamental importance in understanding a wide&lt;br/&gt;range of
diseases and the design of their treatments. NMR spectroscopy is the main
tool&lt;br/&gt;for determining protein structure but the current methods are
hampered by the fact that&lt;br/&gt;the evidence they provide is noisy and
indirect. The current methods for designing the&lt;br/&gt;NMR pulses and
processing the resulting data have been developed from experience
and&lt;br/&gt;insight, backed up by an excellent understanding of the basic
physics of nuclear spin. What&lt;br/&gt;is not well supported by theory is the
subsequent signal processing and the interplay be-&lt;br/&gt;tween pulse design
and signal processing. An important aspect of this work is to
address&lt;br/&gt;this problem and thus make the process of protein structure
determination faster and more&lt;br/&gt;accurate. We also point out that there
is under development a new nanometer measure-&lt;br/&gt;ment tool that combines
aspects of the atomic force microscope with NMR and which is&lt;br/&gt;may also
provide a useful window on key questions in protein structure
determination.&lt;br/&gt;1