* 0424085
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Casualties, Expectations of Victory, and Public Support for Military Operations
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Peter Feaver, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/28/2005
* USD 20,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project conducts 6 waves of polls (through Knowledge Networks)
over&lt;br/&gt;February-April to explore public support for military operations
in Iraq in the face of mounting U.S. casualties. The conventional wisdom holds
that casualties are highly corrosive of public support and that unless the Iraq
conflict is ended quickly, the Bush administration may find itself lacking the
public support needed to maintain its commitment to Iraq.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous scholarly analysis has suggested a different
conclusion: that public support is a function of public estimates of how
successful the operation is likely to be. If correct, however, this insight begs
an obvious question: how does the public assess the likelihood of success and
how does that assessment change with changing events on the ground in the actual
military operation? There is very little existing public opinion data on this
question, and none that is conducted in a controlled, time-series, that would
allow for testing the kind of dynamic relationships between events&lt;br/&gt;and
attitudes that the question, and the theory, posits. Senior military leaders
have&lt;br/&gt;identified the February-April time frame as the crucial window
for military operations in Iraq; polling, therefore, must begin immediately and
continue through this window of expected increased military operations and
expected casualties. The product will contribute to a major debate within the
academic community and also be high-impact policy-relevant findings that speak
directly to a foreign policy challenge of utmost importance: what are the limits
to American public support for the use of military
force?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project builds on a
steadily growing scholarly literature that&lt;br/&gt;has exposed significant
gaps in the conventional wisdom and generated new questions that have received
only scant attention in the past. Previous research has been hampered by the
need to rely on hypothetical scenarios that may only uncertainly approximate
actual public attitudes during real-life military operations. The ongoing
military operation in Iraq provides a window for collecting precisely the sorts
of data that longer-lead academic studies are unlikely to
generate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Policymakers have identified
doubts about the public's "stomach" for military operations as one of the
central uncertainties in American foreign policy today. The ongoing operation in
Iraq underscores that this is a matter for immediate, as well as for longer-term
interest at the highest levels of the U.S. government, and indeed capitols
around the world.&lt;br/&gt;