* 0424153
* RUI, GOALI: Multiple-Dye Luminescent  Solar Concentrators- Extending Lifetime and Absorption
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Bruce Wittmershaus, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 08/31/2008
* USD 179,468.00

&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal is to improve the performance of
luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) to where they become commercially viable.
A LSC is a thin, flat plate of highly fluorescent material that uses total
internal reflection to concentrate light at its edges where it is converted to
electricity by semiconductor solar cells. The main advantage of the LSC is its
cost. It is a cheap, non-directional, area collector of light focusing 74% of
the photons it absorbs down to a very small area of expensive semiconductor
material. Results from our previous grant illustrate that LSCs made with
multiple dyes that form an excitation energy transfer network convert
significantly more sunlight into electricity than a single-dye LSC. The dye
networks are constructed to maximize absorption and minimize losses associated
with the reabsorption of emission.&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this proposal is to
decrease photodegradation such that a LSC has at least 50% of its initial
maximum output after 5 years of field use Photodegradation is a major limit to
the commercialization of LSCs. The causes of photodegradation for different
fluorescent materials will be identified, such as, dependence on the wavelength
of excitation (particularly that of ultraviolet light), oxygen, temperature,
solvent used, and the state of the polymer. A variety of solutions will be tried
depending on the causes identified. Novel solutions that will be explored
include the use of fluorescent quantum dots and enhancing fluorescence quantum
yield and photostability through electrodynamics interactions between a
fluorescent material and metal. Work will also continue on developing and
testing new multiple-dye LSCs to further improve their performance through
increased absorption of sunlight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit- This
work will significantly enhance our understanding of the causes and solutions
for photodegradation of fluorescent materials not only for use in LSCs but also
in many other applications, such as, light-emitting diodes, solid dye lasers,
fluorescent probes and for dyes in general. The feasibility of application of
quantum dots and metal enhanced fluorescence will be experimentally tested.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts- Undergraduates will receive valuable research
training on an interdisciplinary project and actively participate in its
dissemination. We are proposing to broaden our base of collaborations during
this grant period. The society will benefit from advances in solar energy
collection.&lt;br/&gt;