* 0424475
* Symbolic Algebraic Geometry Techniques for Power System Steady State Operation and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Chikaodinaka Nwankpa, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2007
* USD 109,982.00

A reliable, continuous supply of electric energy is essential for the
functioning of today's complex societies. Power blackouts like the East-coast
blackout on August 14, 2004 demonstrate that despite advances in computing and
communication systems, modern deregulated power systems still experience wide-
spread cascading outages. One of the underlying causes for human and
software/algorithmic failure identified for this blackout is the point-by-point
description of a power system operating state where a change in system load and
system topology can not be analytically expressed but has to be obtained by
steady-state system simulation, the iterative load flow computation. It is the
objective of this project to shift the emphasis and general understanding of
steady state power system operation from a point by point evaluation based on
iterative techniques to a parametric and geometric-analytical understanding of
power system voltage behavior as a function of loading conditions. The PIs
propose to examine the duality of algebraic ideals and geometric varieties which
characterize the loci of the load flow solutions and the boundaries of the
secure operating regions. Since the involved algebraic operations are tedious
and quite evolved, symbolic computational tools will be used to automate some of
the mathematical deductions. In order to find the roots of polynomials that
define the varieties, the PIs propose to use cylindrical algebraic decomposition
techniques. In addition to developing new insight and new tools for the power
industry it is the PIs desire to inspire and educate a new generation of
engineers to venture into cross-disciplinary areas of Computational Algebra and
Power Engineering in order to solve problems more efficiently.