* 0424599
* Center for Microbial Oceanography:  Research and Education (C-MORE)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2006,07/31/2017
* Jonathan Zehr, University of Hawaii
* Cooperative Agreement
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2017
* USD 36,936,000.00

More than half the biomass on Earth is made up of microorganisms: bacteria,
archaea, protists, fungi, unicellular algae and viruses. They are the most
abundant and diverse forms of life on our planet and are the chief engineers of
the global carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus cycles. Paradoxically, microbes are
also the life forms about which we know the least. Startling advances in
environmental genomics and high performance computing are now enabling
researchers to decipher the genetic code of entire communities of
microorganisms. When coupled with advances in automated remote-controlled
submersible technologies, this will make possible the deployment of genomic
sensors to examine, with unprecedented resolving power, the properties and
activities of microorganisms on our planet. The Center of Microbial Oceanography
Research and Education (C-MORE) headquartered at the University of Hawaii (UH)
will bring together a multidisciplinary team of scientists and educators to
focus on the identities, roles and impacts of microorganisms in the world's
largest biome: the ocean. The center is to have four research foci: i) genomic,
physiological and other aspects of microbial diversity; ii) the role of
microbial metabolism in elemental cycling; iii) development and deployment of
novel sensors and instruments for remote automated sampling and processing; and
iv) computer simulation, modeling and forecasting of ecosystem processes.
Oceanographic, microbiological, genomic, geochemical, informatic and
computational methods will be the means through which these foci are integrated
with one another via team studies of the North Pacific subtropical gyre. The
result will be the first high resolution view of inter-dependent microbial
lifestyles and processes that govern the flow of energy and elements in the
ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C-MORE will integrate the four research themes and
their objectives with a varied and diverse portfolio of education and outreach
activities for students of all ages. The Center will push interdisciplinary
collaboration between faculty, students and postdoctoral scientists in an
accelerated fashion to train a new breed of microbial oceanographer, and will
help to train teachers and develop curricula at the undergraduate and secondary
education levels. Implementation of these activities is also designed to
increase the number of students and teachers engaged in quantitative sciences
and engineering, focusing on underrepresented groups in science, especially
Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center
will be led by a team of four marine microbial ecologists: David Karl, Sallie
Chisholm, Edward DeLong and Jonathan Zehr. Another fourteen scientists and
educators will be collaborators, covering biological, physical, geochemical and
engineering aspects of oceanography as well as genomic, physiological and
ecological aspects of microbiology. In addition to UH, co-PIs and collaborators
represent five other institutions (Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, Oregon State University, University of
California Santa Cruz and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The consolidated efforts of the Center will drive research
in microbial oceanography forward at a vastly accelerated rate. Automated remote
and in situ sampling and sensing platforms, coupled with mathematical modeling
will provide a template for future networks of microbial observing systems.
These will provide the sort of information that science and society require to
understand and manage our changing Earth system. &lt;br/&gt;