* 0424182
* FABRICATION OF MAGNETO-ELECTRONIC DEVICES BY ELECTROCHEMICAL TECHNIQUES AND THEIR ANALYSIS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Rainer Schad, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 08/31/2008
* USD 225,000.00

The performance of Spin-electronic devices critically depends on the electronic,
magnetic and structural properties at the interfaces. Successful fabrication of
such devices requires the application of versatile deposition techniques capable
to closely control nucleation and growth phenomena. A deposition technique with
excellent control of the deposition parameters is Electrochemical deposition
(ECD). Compared to other thin film preparation methods (sputtering, MBE), ECD
has several intriguing advantages.&lt;br/&gt;In our previous work funded by NSF
(ECS 0070236 - Fabrication and analysis of magneto-electronic devices by
electrochemical techniques) we have demonstrated (i) the ability of ECD to grow
epitaxial Ni or Fe on GaAs; (ii) the capability of electrodeposition technique
to synthesize sharp interfaces with little or no interdiffusion at the
interfaces; (iii) that electrochemical methods can be implemented for the
selective growth of metals on semiconductors. These methods are potentially
capable to provide nm-scale resolution.&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed renewal of
this research project, we plan to leverage the knowledge acquired on the
fabrication of metal/semiconductor structure to the fabrication of novel
structures which will provide prospective components for feasible
magnetoelectronic devices. In summary, we propose to:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Extend the
set of semiconductor substrates utilized to AlGaAs, Ge and InAs;&lt;br/&gt;(ii)
Develop methods for the protection of very thin magnetic layer, providing for
stable structures against environmental degradation;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Undertake
exploratory work towards the growth of semiconductor on top of ferromagnetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;Advances in these three research activities will put us in
the position to:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Study spin injection processes across FM/SC
interfaces;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Fabricate nanowires and nanocontacts for study of
ballistic magnetoresistance and fundamental transport
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the pure research
component, this project will provide the involved graduate student with expanded
training in her/his soft skills through frequent presentations in special
seminars and extended group meetings.&lt;br/&gt;