* 0424786
* Collaborative Research: Biocatalytic Filtration and Carbon Cycling in Permeable Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Carol Arnosti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 82,313.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0424967&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Permeable sands
cover approximately 70% of the continental shelves but it is not fully known how
organic matter that settles to the shelf sediment is processed in permeable
sands. In general, diagenetic processes are poorly understood in sands largely
because standard approaches developed for fine-grained sediments fail to
accurately mimic in situ conditions in sands. However, due to rapid porewater
transport, the dynamics of uptake, metabolism, and release of organic matter in
permeable sediments are fundamentally different from those in fine-grained,
relatively impermeable, marine sediments. Recent in-situ measurements using
innovative techniques suggest that shelf sands act as a large biocatalytic
filter that efficiently removes and rapidly degrades dissolved/particulate
organic matter from the water column, implying that shelf sands play a central
role in the cycling of organic matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from
Florida State University, along with colleagues from University of Virginia and
University of North Carolina, will generate a comprehensive dataset quantifying
advective solute and particle fluxes, and mineralization rates in permeable
shelf sediment subjected to current-induced pore water exchange. The data will
be integrated by a model of coupled transport and reaction in permeable shelf
sands, permitting improvement over existing diagenetic shelf sediment models,
and generating a tool with predictive ability for managers and policy makers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will foster understanding of the continental
shelf which is the most productive, economically most important, and at the same
time the most threatened oceanic environment. On the local level, project
results will be directly applicable to management and conservation efforts in
the Apalachicola Bay region of Florida, which is the designated study area. On
an international scale, the project will start a new research network in the
area of permeable shelf sediments that will be linked to an existing program for
the European Union.&lt;br/&gt;