* 0424602
* Science and Technology Center for Coastal Margin Observation and Prediction
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2006,06/30/2017
* Peter Zuber, Oregon Health & Science University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 37,030,440.00

The PI's propose a Science and Technology Center for Coastal Margin Observation
and Prediction. The mission of this Center is to study coastal margins using
integrated observation and prediction technologies as critical infrastructure
for research, education, and knowledge transfer. The STC will advance the
understanding of coastal margins in general and of the Pacific Northwest coastal
margin in particular by creating the scientific infrastructure necessary to
obtain reliable quantitative descriptions and analyses of integrated physical,
chemical, and biological variables in estuaries, freshwater plumes, and
continental shelves. The rationale for this Center is that coastal margins are
among the most densely populated and developed regions in the United States. As
interface systems between rivers and oceans, coastal margins sustain highly
productive ecosystems and resources, are sensitive to many scales of
variability, and play a key role in global elemental cycles. There is a critical
need for better understanding of coastal margins and the stresses placed on them
by natural events and human activities. This proposed STC is timely in the
emerging context of NSF and national initiatives on ocean-observing systems and
will provide the leadership, long-term commitment, and intellectual critical
mass of a STC is necessary to enable researchers to focus effectively on
transformative technological and scientific opportunities to solve major science
questions on coastal margins. STC research will be driven by grand challenges in
coastal margin understanding: How do climate and climate change impact coastal
margins? What roles do coastal margins play in global elemental cycles? How far
seaward do human activities impact ecosystems? Research will be organized into 3
overlapping themes: I. Coastal Margin Observatories, where the STC will generate
crucially needed, long-term physical, chemical, and biological information
through tightly integrated observations and predictions; II. Coastal Margin
Science, where environmental information products will be used to gain novel
understanding of ecosystem variability and connectivity, through the exploration
of 4 hypotheses addressing the variability of microbial communities, biological
productivity, and carbon fluxes with climate and water use; and III. Enabling
Technologies, where technological challenges to long-term observations and
simulations will be overcome by developing, evaluating, and enhancing
&lt;br/&gt;enabling technologies in: (a) modeling and simulation; (b) sensors
and platforms, and (c) information and visualization. A combination of long-term
core projects and annually funded seed, augmentation, and integrative projects
will allow the STC to maintain a balance between continuity and flexibility of
research efforts. &lt;br/&gt; To prepare students including females and
underrepresented minorities for careers in science, industry, and management,
the STC will offer multiple educational opportunities. The objective is to
foster a long-term educational pipeline by developing in K-12 students a
lifelong interest in science and technology, by creating opportunities for
college students to integrate research and industry experiences in their
studies, and by preparing graduate students for leadership in their careers.
&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge Transfer: The STC will engage a spectrum of stakeholders in
a multi-directional exchange of information. In particular, the STC will: (a) be
an intellectual magnet and a resource for the ocean-sciences community and for
such disciplines as information sciences and molecular biology to help shape
next-generation oceanography; (b) enable industries to work with researchers and
educators, as opposed to just serving as vendors and contractors; and (c) lend
expertise and scientific information to regional and federal agencies for
management of PNW coastal margin resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The STC will create a coastal margin observatory, as its primary
infrastructure for research, education, and knowledge transfer. This observing
system will be a configurable integration of heterogeneous modeling systems and
observation networks, designed to remove a fundamental barrier to coastal margin
science: the lack of long-term descriptions and analyses of physical, chemical,
and biological parameters. While other ocean-sciences observatories exist or are
planned (e.g., LEO-15, VENUS, MARS), this system will be unique in its
integration of river-to-ocean environments and in the multiplicity and level of
coordination of its components and enabling technologies, including new
approaches to sensing. The proposed science addresses challenging hypotheses and
relates regional ecosystem variability to climate and water use in PNW coastal
margins. The expectation of transformative understanding is high due to improved
capabilities of observation and prediction, and due to the proposed mechanistic,
molecular-level approaches to understand the structure, activity and response to
environmental stress of microbial communities. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Coastal margins have enormous economic and social importance, they are highly
vulnerable to change, and their complexity makes a balanced management of marine
resources and societal needs difficult: (a) Economic and social importance:
Coastal areas comprise less than 20% of the contiguous US, but support more than
50% of the US population. Over a trillion dollars of coastal infrastructure are
deployed in the US alone every year; (b) Vulnerability: Natural and man-made
hazards in coastal areas cost the US more than $2 billion annually. In addition,
reduction of wild salmon diversity in the PNW is a dramatic example of ecosystem
vulnerabilities that can only be defused by anticipating impacts decades before
their manifestation; and (c) Complexity: The complexity of coastal margins
presents enormous challenges for the sustainable management of one of the most
productive environments available to humans challenges that the proposed STC
will help society meet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;