* 0424087
* GOALI: Multiscale Modeling of Electro- and Magnetorheological Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2007
* John Ulicny, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 07/31/2007
* USD 140,000.00

ABSTRACT - 0424087

Electro- and magnetorheological (ER and MR) fluids are particulate suspensions
whose rheological properties are dramatically altered by electric and magnetic
fields, respectively. The applied fields also alter the suspension
microstructure, causing the formation of particulate columns oriented in the
field direction in quiescent suspensions, and the formation of concentrated
particulate stripes oriented in the flow direction in sheared suspensions. These
structural changes are intimately connected to the rheological phenomena. The
formation of particulate columns is known to cause the dramatic rheological
changes. The appearance of stripes is associated with the onset of a transient
rheological response, where the shear stress slowly increases as the stripes
coalesce, coarsen, and densify. ER and MR fluids are being exploited in the
development of such applications as shock absorbers, clutches, and brakes, with
MR applications recently reaching commercialization. Understanding and modeling
the transient structural and rheological behavior is crucial for the design,
optimization and control of ER and MR fluids and devices.

Particle-level simulations have been valuable for understanding the
relationships between particle properties, interactions, and macroscopic
behavior. However, these approaches are computationally expensive, and thus ill-
suited for modeling the behavior of an entire device. Other modeling strategies
must be developed to complement particle-level simulations and overcome their
inherent limitations. We have developed a continuum description of the structure
evolution in ER suspensions, as characterized by the time and position-dependent
particle volume fraction _(x; t). The particle flux is related to the particle
contribution to the stress via a momentum balance. Using this two-fluid
approach, one predicts the patterns observed experimentally-column formation in
quiescent suspensions, and stripe formation in sheared suspensions- without the
computational expense of following the motion of individual particles.

Although this continuum model can successfully reproduce certain features of
structure evolution, assumptions employed for the constitutive behavior limit
its predictive power. Most notably, assuming a form for the electrostatic stress
appropriate for an isotropic suspension precludes an estimate for the field-
induced shear stress and thus the associated rheological transients; and the
neglect of nonlocal polarization gives little insight into the long-time
transients. The main goal of the proposed work is to combine the strengths of
the two modeling approaches to obtain a multiscale description of ER/MR fluids
and devices, overcoming the limitations of our prior continuum modeling effort.
We will employ particle-level simulations (i.e., Stokesian dynamics simulations)
to determine the appropriate constitutive behavior for particle stress and
particle flux for use in the continuum model. Employing this constitutive
behavior will allow us to probe both the evolution of structure and shear
rheology from a continuum perspective. We will also extend a selfconsistent
field model of ER fluids to model nonlocal polarization contributions in the
continuum model, in order to describe the long-time transient phenomena. The
proposed work will yield a complete continuum description of the rheology and
mass transport in ER and MR fluids that can be used in the design, optimization
and control of ER and MR fluids and devices.

Simulation studies will be performed by Klingenberg, Morris, and students, with
continuing consultation with Ulicny at General Motors. Experiments for
verification will be performed at both UW and GM. GM will also provide
experimental results for clutch performance from measurements on a clutch test
rig at GM.

Intellectual Merit and Broader Impact. The proposed work will specifically
benefit the design, optimization and control of sheared ER and MR devices by
providing a models for both the rheology and mass transport. Such information is
necessary as particle transport appears to be ubiquitous in sheared ER and MR
fluids, and impacts the apparent rheology. More generally, the proposed work
will benefit suspension mechanics research as we further develop continuum
methods for describing the flow of suspensions.

The broader impact of this work includes an educational component through the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in the technical modeling
aspects of this work, as well as the experimental techniques. Results from this
work will be available to the scientific community through submission of
manuscripts to refereed journals, and presentations at scientific meetings.

