* 0424335
* A Feasibility Study for Wireless Data Communication Between Silicon Integrated Circuits Using Integrated Antennas
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Kenneth O, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 180,000.00

0424335 O

The goals of this proposed research are to understand fundamental challenges and
discover solutions for realizing wireless interconnection between integrated
circuits (IC's), which has the potential of providing the means for radically
reducing input/output (I/O) pin counts in IC's. Smaller pin counts reduce cost
and the areas for packaged IC's and external wire connections, thus reducing
footprints of systems using IC's. Since no physical wires besides those for
power and ground connections are present on a printed circuit (PC) board, there
will be greater flexibility to modify and upgrade IC's using wireless
interconnects while maintaining compatibility to existing PC boards. This will
also lower development cost and increase longevity of electronic systems. This
research will focus on two fundamental challenges: discovering low loss
propagation paths for inter-chip wireless interconnections and fabricating
necessary radio circuits. Since the digital complementary metal oxide silicon
(CMOS) integrated circuit technology is the most widely utilized and the lowest
cost, the feasibility study will utilize digital CMOS technologies.

Intellectual Merit: Intra-chip wireless interconnection has been demonstrated
and a clock distribution using them is near completion. This proposed research
seeks to take the wireless interconnects and study their merits for data
communication among integrated circuits. This proposed work is distinct from the
effort on intra-chip wireless interconnects for clock distribution in that the
system design and expected paths for signal propagation environment as well as
the types of circuits and their requirements for high data rate communication
are completely different. The issues for inter-chip wireless data communication
are also distinct from the traditional wireless communication. Besides the
extremely high data rate, the communication terminals for inter-chip wireless
interconnects are located in close proximity (typically a few centimeters or
less), and they are required to be fully integrated as radios on chip (ROC).
Major challenges for inter-chip wireless interconnects are expected to be
discovering signal propagation paths that are compatible with the required bit
error rate (less than 10 -20 ), high bandwidth efficiency to achieve the high
data rate, and fabrication of low power and high frequency circuits with
integrated antennas. Overcoming these challenges, besides helping to solve the
packaging problem will significantly advance knowledge for integrating antennas
to realize an ROC, high data rate wireless communication, and re-configurability
of electronic systems.

Broader Impact: The cost reduction and increase of longevity of electronic
systems make them more affordable. These will help to make the benefits of the
communication and integrated circuits technology enjoyed by the larger cross
section of the population. The increase of longevity also reduces the rate at
which electronic devices are discarded and help to more efficiently utilize the
natural resources and better preserve environments. Within 5 years, the
mainstream silicon technologies are expected to be sufficient for implementing
circuits operating at 50 GHz and higher. There will be insufficient numbers of
engineers and researchers with the necessary expertise to exploit the emerging
opportunities. This project will help to alleviate this problem by increasing
the pool of researchers who can work across the traditional boundaries of
communication systems and theory, integrated circuits and devices, RF/microwave
electronics, and electromagnetics through research and classroom teaching. A
link between the local high school with the largest number of African American
students and the Silicon Microwave Integrated Circuits Group at UF will be
established. Utilizing this link, African-American students will be paired with
graduate students working on the proposed research to help define and complete
science fair projects related to the proposed research. Participation of
undergraduate students from the underrepresented groups in the proposed research
will be actively sought. These students after graduation serving as role models
will help to increase participation of women and members of the underrepresented
groups in science and engineering throughout the nation. The concept of
integrating antennas on chip has received a great deal of attention of the
popular press. It appears to be a topic that could capture the imagination of
general public and that could be effective for increasing interests in science
and engineering by the public as well as for attracting more students into the
field.