* 0424066
* Growth and Inequality in Global City-Regions: A Comparative Study of Bangkok and Metro Manila
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Gavin Shatkin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2007
* USD 119,999.00

Abstract: Growth and Inequality in Global City-Regions: A Comparative Study of
Bangkok and Metro Manila&lt;br/&gt;Gavin Shatkin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economic
globalization has brought about dramatic spatial change in cities. Allen Scott
and other have pointed to the emergence of 'global city-regions' characterized
by the concentration of corporate headquarter and business service functions in
central cities and the sprawling of manufacturing and back office service
functions to the increasingly far-flung periphery of large cities. In global
city-regions in Asia, areas surrounding cities have witnessed rapid
urbanization, and central cities have experienced wholesale redevelopment. These
changes have transformed property markets, and redefined the relationship
between where people live and where they work. They have also raised the issue
of a gender mismatch in the location of economic opportunities, as opportunities
for low-skilled women workers are increasingly concentrated in manufacturing
industries on the urban fringe while those for men continue to be concentrated
in central cities. This project will examine the implications of these changes
for issues of social equity through a comparison of the Bangkok Metropolitan
Region (BMR) and the Metro Manila region. Specifically, it will address the
following questions: Is redevelopment leading to the exclusion of low-income
people from central city housing markets and their displacement to the urban
fringe? Are cities consequently becoming increasingly segregated? How far are
low-income people commuting, and with what implications for their quality of
life? How are household decisions about shelter and employment affected by
spatial change? Three methods will be employed. First, an analysis of data on
demographics, employment, investment, and other variables from 1970 to 2000
using Geographic Information Systems (GIS) will provide a detailed picture of
sociospatial change in the BMR and the Metro Manila region. Second, a sample
survey and in-depth interviews of household heads in low-income settlements will
provide insights into how the economic, social and environmental impacts of
urban development have affected household decisions regarding shelter and
employment. Finally, in-depth interviews with policy-makers and planners will
address their perceptions of the equity impacts of globalization, and how they
have responded to emerging issues of social equity in plans and policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project has both theoretical and practical
implications. While a growing literature has argued that patterns of
urbanization in the era of globalization are inherently inequitable, this
literature is based almost exclusively on the cases of Europe and the United
States. This research should enhance our understanding of the inherent
inequities in the process of global city-region formation, and the particular
issues confronting low-income communities in Asia. The project also has
implications for policy and planning in large cities in developing countries, as
an understanding of issues of displacement, social segregation, excessive
commuting, and access to economic opportunity and affordable shelter are
critical to the development of effective interventions in housing,
transportation, land use, and economic development. &lt;br/&gt;