* 0424032
* Student Paper Competition at the Conference of the International Association for Boundary Element Methods; May 24-26, 2004; Minneapolis, MN
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Glaucio Paulino, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/28/2005
* USD 10,900.00

Student Paper Competition at the Conference of the International Association for
Boundary Element Methods, 2004&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Prof. Glaucio H.
Paulino,&lt;br/&gt;Burton and Erma Lewis Faculty Scholar&lt;br/&gt;Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering,&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, Newmark Laboratory,&lt;br/&gt;205 North Mathews Avenue, Newmark
Laboratory, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA&lt;br/&gt;e-mail: paulino@uiuc.edu, url: http
://cee.uiuc.edu/paulino&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;The Boundary Element Method (BEM) has in recent years become an
established method in several important areas of engineering, especially in
mechanics and advanced materials modeling and simulation. The next Conference of
the International Association for Boundary Element Methods (IABEM'2004) will be
held at the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, from May 24-26, 2004. The
Conference promotes international cooperation between scientists and engineers
from different disciplines. In this Conference, a good number of graduate
students is supposed to participate, and the broadest outreach to the students
will be the Student Paper Competition! This program is open to any full time
student who is the lead author, with primary responsibility, of a paper at the
conference. Their work will be judged by a committee of judges who will provide
their assessment to the "Technical Program Committee" that originally accepted
the paper submission. Two major events will comprise the Student Paper
Competition: the Student Paper Session and the Awards Ceremony. In the "Student
Paper Session," each participant will give an oral presentation in the presence
of students, advisors, professors, judges, and other interested Conference
registrants. During the "Awards Ceremony," the First, Second, and third Prizes
will be announced, which may be shared. The Student paper competition will be a
major event in the IABEM Conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;