* 0424533
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Measurements of 5th Structure Function for Single Pion Electro-Production In the Delta(1232) Resonance Region
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Kyungseon Joo, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 08/31/2007
* USD 19,600.00

OISE-0424533&lt;br/&gt;Joo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award facilitates a three-
year international collaborative research project between Professor Kyungseon
Joo of the Physics Department of the University of Connecticut and Professor
Wooyoung Kim of the Physics Department of Kyungpook National University in
Korea. A graduate student and post-doctoral fellow working with Professor Joo
will participate in the collaborative research and travel to
Korea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
focus of Dr. Joo's research is in electromagnetic excitation of nucleon
resonances. This area of physics research is aimed at understanding the internal
structure and dynamics of the nucleon and addressing long-standing questions
about the relevant sub-nucleon degrees of freedom. This is one of the important
problems in hadron physics. There are only isolated energies where enough
information exists to make a completely model-dependant analysis. The particular
goal of this collaborative research is to determine the fifth structure function
(sigma-LT-prime) for single pion electron in the specific resonance region
"delta-1232." To accomplish this, Dr. Joo and his collaborator will make use of
the electron beam Large Acceptance Spectrometer of the Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility in Virginia, which is uniquely suited for study of nucleon
resonances physics. The measurements they obtain will provide important
information about the interference between resonant and non-resonant terms and
help to understand the structure of nucleon in the framework of strong Quantum
Chromodynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaboration strengthens the links between two very active research groups in
the&lt;br/&gt;U.S. and Korea that have complementary expertise. It also enhances
the training of young&lt;br/&gt;physicists in a frontier area of fundamental
physics, which is important to keep the field&lt;br/&gt;strong. A graduate
student and a postdoctoral fellow from the University of Connecticut gain
international research experience by visiting Professor Kim's research group in
Korea. The cost of this research is shared because Professor Kim's research is
supported by the Korean Science and Engineering Foundation
(KOSEF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;