* 0424101
* SGER:    Experimental Technique to Characterize Droplet Transport in Nanoscale Channels
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Jennifer Lukes, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 10/31/2006
* USD 84,936.00



Proposal Number: CTS-0424101 Principal Investigator: Jennifer Lukes Affiliation:
University of Pennsylvania Proposal Title: SGER: Experimental technique to
characterize droplet transport in nanoscale channels

The ability to characterize droplet flow through nanoscale fluidic channels will
enable tremendous advances in biotechnology and chemical analysis, particularly
in the areas of DNA sequencing, drug delivery, chemical separations, and single
molecule detection. The goal of this research program is develop a technique
capable of such detection. Based on the Coulter counter method widely used to
characterize the transport of micron-sized particles in the biological sciences,
and inspired by recent successes in characterizing transport of solid particles
through nanoscale channels, the proposed experiments are expected to demonstrate
the feasibility of detecting the transport of entrained liquid droplets through
nanochannels. The work to be performed includes fabricating microchip samples
with nanometer-scale channels, filling the channels with an emulsion, locally
heating the channel to induce thermocapillary transport of the entrained liquid
droplets, and performing time-resolved measurements of the nanochannel
electrical conductivity. These measurements will be used to determine the size
and velocity of the transported droplets. The novelty of the proposed
experiments is that the nanochannels themselves will act as droplet detectors.



