* 0424322
* Collaborative Research:     MEMS from Organized Mesoscale Architectures of Carbon Nanotubes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Ganpati Ramanath, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 176,000.00

The objective of this research is to harness mesoscale assemblies of oriented
CNTs to create a new class of MEMS devices for actuation and sensing
applications, with enhanced sensitivity and versatility. This will be achieved
by combining the unique skill-sets and expertise of the two PIs in oriented CNT
growth on Si-based substrates, microanalysis, electrochemical device
characterization (Ramanath), and MEMS fabrication, characterization of the
dynamics of their motion under electrical stimuli, and tribology (Turner). In
particular, we will fabricate test-device structures such as CNT-integrated
SiO2/Si comb-drives and cantilever structures, and measure their mechanical
responses to electrochemical and electrical stimuli. Additionally, adhesive,
damping, and tribological properties of the CNT-MEMS components will be
evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit and broader impact: This
work will enable the translation of the attractive mechanical properties of
individual CNTs into a completely new "break-through" technology of CNT-
mesostructrure-based microdevices and systems on Si-based MEMS platforms via
standard micro and nanofabrication. The success of any of the test-device
structures will pave the way for the realization of a new class of devices based
on one-dimensional nanostructures integrated with Si technology. This project
will provide a unique cross-disciplinary exposure to participating graduate
students in the two PIs' research groups at the interface of materials science
and applied mechanics, particularly in the areas of nanostructure synthesis,
microdevice fabrication, and testing. The newly emerging and exciting area of
MEMS integrated wth nanostructures will serve as a well-suited medium in our
outreach activities to attract bright high-school students to science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;