* 0424651
* Arabidopsis PABPs and Heat Stress Response
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Douglas Hamilton, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 08/31/2006
* USD 104,185.00

The long term goal of this project is to elucidate how the mutations affecting
certain poly(A) binding proteins (PABPs) in the model higher plant Arabidopsis
thaliana cause alterations in heat stress response and in plant thermotolerance.
The plant PABP multigene family is ancient, and its complexity is unparalleled
in the rest of eukaryotic world. Given their multiplicity and highly complex
tissue-specific expression, plant PABPs possess a broader potential to influence
growth and development than is apparent for other eukaryotic phyla. One
manifestation of this may be regulation of heat stress response by some of the
plant PABPs. The specific objective of the project is to elucidate the
significance of the contribution of posttranscriptional mechanisms to this
altered heat stress response regulation.

Heat is a ubiquitous stressor that impacts crop productivity. Therefore, this
line of study may have important implications for agricultural biotechnology. In
addition, this project is a collaboration between a research University
(University at Albany) and a small rural college (Hartwick College), and as such
will make a significant contribution to training and education, through engaging
undergraduate students at Hartwick College in collaborative research.
Furthermore, the educational component of this project includes developing plant
genetics laboratory exercise for the Guilderland High School.