* 0424639
* Natural History and Functional Evolutionary Studies of A-to-I pre-mRNA Editing-ABR
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Robert Reenan, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2007
* USD 450,000.00

Completed genome sequences have revealed that the gene number in organisms as
distinct as worms, flies, and humans, does not differ dramatically. Even the
same types of genes are present, in general. What may account for large
morphological and behavioral differences between animal species is variation in
how genes are expressed. Genes encoded in DNA must be made into working copies,
called RNA, which serve as the instructions for adding the various protein
building blocks (amino acids) into the growing protein chain during synthesis.
In most animal genes, the part of a gene containing the instructions for making
protein is broken up into pieces (exons) that must be spliced together to make a
final RNA messenger. The pieces that are removed between the exons are called
introns. In some cases, different exons can be shuffled together in the same
gene to make instructions for different proteins- one gene can encode hundreds
of proteins using this process. Another, more subtle approach, is called A-to-I
RNA editing. Here, an enzyme makes a highly selective chemical change to an RNA
message, changing the instructions as to the final identity of single amino
acids within a protein. These edited changes can profoundly alter the functions
of the edited versus unedited proteins. Curiously, almost all of the target
genes recoded by this process are genes involved in rapid electrical and
chemical signaling, in both flies and humans. Moreover, previous studies have
shown that a substantial amount of diversity exists in between organisms in
terms of the identity of gene targets for RNA editing and the specific sites
themselves. Interestingly, in most cases, the information directing the process
of RNA editing resides in introns, the part of a message that is not included in
the final RNA blueprint and the part that is often the most variable between
species. The research entailed in this project will involve the elucidation of
the differences between species in the process of RNA editing in order to
understand the biological role of this enigmatic process in nervous system
function. Further, the project will attempt to understand species-specific
differences in the enzymes that perform RNA editing, as well as the consequences
of RNA editing in a certain gene target involved in chemical signaling in the
brain. The basic nature of this research into gene expression in various species
lends itself well to the training of undergraduates, graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows.