* 0424969
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Emotion Management in the Workplace:  Performance and Consequences
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Karen Campbell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,476.00

This research is concerned with the performance of emotion management in the
workplace. The control and expression of emotions in interactions with others.
Emotion management is required in many types of work. For example, in encounters
with customers and clients, many workers must act cheerful and friendly,
regardless of their true feelings. In addition, within the workplace, workers
manage their emotions in order to act appropriately in interactions with
coworkers and superiors. However, by concealing their true feelings and
expressing false outward emotions, workers may suffer from psychological
distress. Previous research suggests that these consequences vary by the
worker=s status in the workplace hierarchy, occupation, self-concept, and
attitude toward the emotion management that she performs. The objectives of this
research are to identify the conditions under which workers perform emotion
management, the link between emotion management and psychological outcomes, how
workers of varying statuses are differentially affected by emotion management,
and the factors that affect the relationship between emotion management and
distress. These relationships will be tested using quantitative data from a mail
survey of a random sample of 2,500 Tennessee state workers. This sample presents
a unique opportunity to study the emotional experiences of workers from a wide
range of jobs and social statuses. The broader impacts of this research include
the following: This research will advance the sociology of emotions literature
by integrating theories and research on emotional expression and social status
with the research on emotion management in the workplace. By identifying the
conditions under which emotion management is associated with psychological
distress, policy makers can take steps to prevent more serious consequences such
as depression and worker burnout. Managers will be interested in the effects of
emotion management on worker well-being as they pertain to organizational
outcomes including worker productivity and turnover. By identifying factors that
lessen the impact of emotion management on psychological distress, this research
may inform educators and employee training programs on strategies to help
employees deal with the emotional requirements of a job. Finally, this project
will collect an original quantitative dataset that can be used in future
research.