* 0424411
* GOALI:     Compact Modeling of Silicon Carbide (SIC) Devices for Advanced Power Switching Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Chris Clarke, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 08/31/2008
* USD 222,000.00

This project will concentrate on compact circuit simulation models for silicon
carbide (SiC) devices that will be released for commercialization in the near
future. Namely, static-induction-transistor (SIT), JFET, BJT and IGBT devices
will be investigated. Specifically, the project objectives are to: (1)
Characterize SiC SIT, JFET, BJT, and IGBT power switches, (2) Design &amp;
develop models for the SIT, JFET, BJT, and IGBT, (3) Validate versus
measurements the SiC power device models, and (4) Validate SiC power device
models by demonstration in key power electronics
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power electronic designers need compact
models because they rely on computer simulation for insight into the details of
the operation of their circuits. The designer analyzes the robustness of designs
through a number of model-based studies such as dynamic thermal analysis, worst-
case analysis, and statistical variability in circuit performance due to
manufacturing tolerances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The original NSF GOALI on this
topic has already created significant impact within the power electronics and
modeling communities, as well as providing for solid foundations for
partnerships. During the duration of the original project, the SiC devices we
have modeled have already begun to appear on the commercial market. Nine
combined semesters of co-ops and internships for students have been realized,
including students working at NIST and NASA-Glenn. A total of six undergraduates
and seven students from underrepresented groups participated in research
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to continue the significant
achievements accomplished by the original award. Collaborators at Northrop
Grumman, NIST, NASA-Glenn, the Army Research Labs, and Caracal will provide
access to SiC devices, facilities, personnel expertise, and summer employment to
the UA researchers throughout the duration of the renewed
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this NSF GOALI proposal
include: (1) Developing state-of-the-art science in the field of silicon carbide
power electronics, (2) Providing research opportunities for underrepresented and
minority students, and (3) Disseminating into the public domain advanced power
device models for circuit designers.&lt;br/&gt;