* 0424546
* MII:    An Infrastructure for Wide-Area Large Scale Automated Information Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Jaime Seguel, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2010
* USD 991,770.00

This project is developing a new conceptual framework for the automated
processing of information arriving from physical sensors in a generalized wide-
area, large-scale distributed network infrastructure. The project is focusing on
water-related ecological and environmental applications, and it is addressing
issues such as scalability, modularity, signal representation, data coherence,
data integration, distributed query processing, scheduling, computer
performance, network performance, and usability. This new framework treats
signals as elements in prescribed sets and their associated structures. The
project is constructing a computing and information processing (CIP) environment
to deal with the algorithmic treatment of signal-based large scale content in
order to extract information relevant and important to a user. It is also
developing new theories and algorithms for computational signal processing to
gather, process, and represent data obtained from physical sensors, at one end,
as well as the development of new, non-traditional, concepts in software
applications for reconfigurable, multimode human-computer interfaces to render
information important to a user, at the other end. The project is also
developing new concepts in middleware integration, distributed query
optimization, distributed query processing, and distributed scheduling
algorithms to adapt to an ever changing network infrastructure and provide a
pathway between a physical world sensory reality with its associated physical
sensors, and a user with network and database infrastructure applications. This
project is tailoring its work for strategic environmental and ecological
applications in the identification, monitoring, assessment, and management of
hydrological events in tropical areas. The project will further expand the
department's already strong efforts to increase the number of Hispanic and
female scientists and engineers.