* 0424667
* Workshop:     Innovations in Teaching Decision Support Systems Development; August 1-7, 2004;  Jacksonville, FL
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Ravindra Ahuja, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 06/30/2005
* USD 25,000.00

At the University of Florida, extensive course material is being developed to
impart decision support system development skills to undergraduate and graduate
students in industrial engineering and operations research (IE/OR) and business
school students. Decision support systems (DSS) combine databases, spreadsheets,
models, analysis, optimization, simulation, and allow user interactability with
graphical user interfaces and are being widely used in industries these days.
Several faculty members at other universities have expressed the desire to learn
this course material and offer these courses in their departments. To meet this
need, the following two three-day instructor-training workshops are being
offered: (i) Developing Spreadsheet-Based Decision Support Systems; (ii)
Developing Web-Enabled Decision Support Systems from August 1 to August 7, 2004.
The workshop website www.ise.ufl.edu/dss provides more details about these
workshops. These workshops will teach the subject material of two courses and
will also provide suggestions on how to teach these courses successfully.
Several faculty members and senior doctoral students beginning academic careers
are expected to attend these workshops and this grant will cover part of their
expenses.

These workshops are expected to be attended by over 100 participants and will
facilitate the development of several decision support systems development
courses at many universities. It is also expected that these courses will become
required courses for undergraduate students. The skills imparted by these
courses will give them sufficient background to develop spreadsheet or database
based and web-enabled decision support systems. As organizations become larger
and more complex in the years to come, decision support systems will gain
widespread popularity, and knowing how to develop such systems will make IE/OR
and business school students active participants in the information revolution
transforming our society.