* 0424482
* Dissertation Research:  Compressed Modernity?: American Expertise and South Korean State Science, 1945-1976
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Elizabeth Lunbeck, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 11,350.00

This Science and Technology Dissertation Improvement Grant considers the
transformation of the physical sciences in an international context during the
Cold War, using Korea as an historical case study. In the aftermath of the
Korean War (1950-1953), according to newspaper sources, American investment in
South Korea (or ROK, the Republic of Korea) represented the single largest
United States aid project anywhere in the world. Moreover, much of the aid
conveyed was mobilized under the rubric of science whether in the form of
visiting researchers, instruments, or the introduction of new methods and
materials constituting a vast program of technical cooperation undertaken in
support of the rebuilding nation. Starting from a developmental model, relief
efforts concentrated initially on promoting an agricultural / biomedical base,
and by the late 1960.s, South Korean state institutions were beginning to pursue
areas of inquiry in technical fields, transforming their results into new
industrial applications. In the Korean case, the project asks what factors
contributed to the rapid shift from an agricultural / biomedical base to new
forms of engineering and technology within two decades. Moreover, given this
transition in outlook, what forms did the new areas of priority, including
materials science, electronics, chemical engineering and mechanical engineering
by the late 1960's take in their new location? How was scientific activity in
Korea transformed by groups of local actors, rather than simply conveyed or
transferred to the site by American scientists? To analyze the introduction of
new practices, the project will trace the historical origins of the two major
institutions critical to the nation's rapid technological development: Seoul
National University (1946- ) and KIST (1966- ), or Korea Institute of Science
and Technology. The former was created by American occupation authorities in
1946 from the facilities of Keijo Imperial University (1928-1945), and was
modeled on the land-grant university. KIST, on the other hand, was funded partly
by USAID, and represented an attempt to promote the development of a local
scientific infrastructure by facilitating technology transfer. This effort was
followed soon thereafter by the creation of KAIS (Korea Advanced Institute of
Science) in 1971, a graduate institution devoted primarily to training in the
physical sciences. The project begins with the history of recent technology,
focusing specifically on the introduction and integration of new scientific
approaches as part of a comprehensive effort to transform South Korea at three
points in time: 1) in the aftermath of World War II (1945-1948), 2) following
the Korean War (1954-1962), 3) and in the early 1960.s (1961-1976), after ROK
President Park had assumed power. Though ostensibly a narrative of transfer, the
project ultimately places the physical sciences in the context of the three
significant bodies of literature: 1) the literature on Science and Empire, 2) as
well as science education, and 3) recent work on the science city. (e.g.,
Tsukuba-si in Japan, or Novosibirsk in the former Soviet Union). Nations which
concentrate on immediate pragmatic goals such as industrial development often
have to adopt a very different style of practice, placing scientific activity in
dialogue with questions of power and national interest. NSF funding will support
trips to archives in the two Korean institutions cited above.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;