* 0424909
* SGER:     Participatory Democracy and Information Technology:     The Use of The Internet in American Elections.
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Bonnie Nardi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 06/30/2006
* USD 48,411.00

Rates of voter participation have declined dramatically in the United States to
the point where only half the electorate voted in the last presidential
election. Recent events suggest that the use of the Internet may reverse this
trend. While technology alone cannot reinvigorate democracy, as a tool in the
hands of committed people, it is poised to make a significant difference in
engaging Americans in the political process. In 2003, the Internet was used
extensively in Howard Dean's campaign for the Democratic presidential
nomination; thousands of enthusiastic supporters conducted a variety of campaign
activities via the Dean website and millions of dollars were raised. The
research will contribute to assessing the impact of e-democracy on the larger
political arena. Internet tools including email, blogging, chat, electronic
fundraising, specialized websites for campaign organizing, and campaign archives
will be analyzed to learn how they were used to engage voters and support the
campaign. Using grounded theory, the research will utilize audiotaped interviews
and observations of key campaign personnel and supporters as well as descriptive
statistics on use of each of the tools. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
new technical tools can shape democracy is a critical question for the future of
representative democracy. The United States came a hair's breadth from electing
a president with less than half the electorate participating. New means of
communicating with voters, and encouraging their participation are needed. Such
tools appear to be emerging as part of the Internet landscape. With an extensive
background in the study of computer-mediated communication, the PI will be able
to make a significant contribution to understanding the broader social impacts
of Internet tools in reaching out to voters and engaging wider democratic
&lt;br/&gt;participation. &lt;br/&gt;