* 0424071
* GEORAMAN 2004: 6th International Conference on Raman Spectroscopy Applied to the Earth &amp; Planetary Sciences, Honolulu, HI
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Edward Scott, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 04/30/2005
* USD 10,000.00

This award will partially support the GEORAMAN 2004 Conference: the Sixth
International Conference on Raman Spectroscopy Applied to Earth and Planetary
Science. The conference will take place from June 6-11, 2004 at the East-West
Center located on the Manoa campus of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii
with an optional volcano field trip on June 12th to the Big Island. The emphasis
of this multidisciplinary conference is on the state-of-the-art developments on
such topics as micro- Raman spectroscopic analysis of rocks and minerals at
ambient and high pressures and temperatures, fluid inclusions, field
applications of Raman spectroscopy, etc. It is intended to highlight advance
instrumentation and its connections with interdisciplinary research areas, and
brings researchers and graduate students together for in-depth discussions on
all aspects of Raman spectroscopic analysis in earth and planetary science. The
fields of nano-Raman and remote Raman analysis are recently established and are
still fast growing areas of Raman spectroscopic analysis. New developments with
a very broad spectrum of applications, such as multi-channel near-IR Raman
spectroscopy, UV resonance Raman spectroscopy, and x-ray Raman spectroscopy,
have found their important role in understanding structures and vibrational
properties of earth and extra-terrestrial materials, biominerals, and in
identifying minerals using Raman fingerprints in a host of environments
including hydrothermal, ambient and high temperature and pressure and ancient
arts and artifacts. This forum for inter-disciplinary research is expected to
continue for the foreseeable future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds
will be used to rent conference equipment, publish the proceedings, and help
support the attendance of graduate students, young scientists and invited
speakers. A key broader impact of this conference is providing common links and
tools to other areas of Earth and space sciences, natural and life sciences, and
engineering. The GEORAMAN conference will also provide an excellent opportunity
for graduate and undergraduate students, young scientists and engineers, experts
and non-Raman specialists to learn about the latest development in nano-, micro-
and remote Raman techniques, and wide variety of applications including areas of
interest in Earth, planetary and environmental science.&lt;br/&gt;