* 0424767
* Collaborative Research:    Causes and Consequences of Tree Colonization Patterns in Wet Tropical Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Robin Chazdon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2007
* USD 19,374.00

In many tropical regions world-wide, forests are regrowing after abandoned
agriculture or logging, but this process is poorly understood. This three-year
study will examine the process by which canopy trees recolonize abandoned sites
in wet, tropical forests that were initially cleared for agricultural use in the
Atlantic lowlands of Costa Rica. To determine why certain species arrive and
establish at different times during the forest recovery process, the
investigators will compare: "young" sites, which have recently developed a
closed forest canopy (5-10 years after abandonment); "intermediate" sites, which
have a well-developed forest structure (19-32 yrs after abandonment); and
"mature" sites, which have remained intact. Seeds of 12 canopy tree species will
be planted to examine how different factors affect seedling survival across
different stages of forest development. These factors include access to seed-
eating animals, competition with existing seedlings, and the amount of light
available near the forest floor. In addition, the investigators will establish
and monitor plots in the three forest types and then census and map all canopy
trees each year. In hundreds of mapped smaller plots, all seedlings of canopy
tree species will be counted and tagged. The dispersion of seedlings relative to
the locations of mature trees of the same species will be compared among tree
species that exhibit different patterns of recolonization. To evaluate the role
of light in the forest recovery process, the investigators will assess light
levels for monitored seedlings and determine the relative importance of light
and proximity to fruiting adults in explaining seedling dispersion patterns.
Throughout the study, new arrivals, deaths, growth, and size distributions of
canopy species will be monitored in ten one-ha plots. This research will help to
guide forest recovery efforts in tropical regions, and provide training in the
methods of forest mapping, monitoring, and data analysis.