* 0424778
* Rebuilding Trust in Beef: The Case of the New Science-Based Food Safety Regime in Japan
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Keith Schillo, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 07/31/2007
* USD 147,697.00

In the last two decades, a series of food scares and crises (e.g., bovine
spongiform encephalopathy, E. coli O157:H7, avian influenza, foot-and-mouth
disease) have provoked national and international authorities to reform the
institutional structures and procedures of the existing food safety regime. In
such reform efforts, the reevaluation of the role of science in food production
and circulation has become a critical component by raising such questions as:
What constitutes safe food? How should the safety of a particular food product
be defined? How should practices and procedures of farming, food processing,
retailing and consumption be changed to ensure the safety of food supplies? Who
should be responsible for what to maintain public trust in the food system? The
answers to these questions are closely linked to our ethics surrounding the
basic relationships between nature and society: How should animals and plants be
raised, processed, marketed and consumed as food? What would we consider as
ethical goals in food production and circulation? (Cuomo 2003:2905) In short,
how should science be used in ways ethically just to those whose lives are
affected by the reform? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed three-year study
examines Japan's new food safety regime, which began in June 2003. Three ethical
issues will be analyzed, including: (a) distributive justice; (b) democratic
participation; and (c) animal welfare. Three research questions will be asked:
(1) whose science and whose knowledge about food and food safety are included in
(and excluded from) the new regime in Japan? (2) Does the dominant discourse in
food safety and the science for food safety within the new regime cause harm?
(3) If so, to whom? What counts as safe food is the outcome of negotiations
among participants in the processes of making decisions about food through three
interrelated types of networks in the food system, including: (a) research
endeavors; (b) governance; and (c) economic circulation. These three networks
are the sites in which moral and ethical concerns about food production are
raised and contested. Thus, the notion of what constitutes safe food to eat is
mutually related to the moral values of what is a good food system to bring food
from farm gates to dinner tables, good governance to ensure public trust in food
supplies and good science to identify, monitor and control potential
risks/hazards of food.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate the power dynamic that
links the negotiations, access and outcomes of the new science-based food safety
regime in Japan, this study will use the commodity chain (or system) analysis
(e.g., Friedland 1984;2001; Gereffi and Korzeniewicz 1994) as the methodological
framework and follow beef from farm gates to dinner tables and from research
laboratories to human bodies. Among beef safety issues, BSE and cattle cloning
issues will be used as the entry points of our inquiry to the power/knowledge
interplay in the new regime. Four interrelated methods will be used in this
study, including: (1) content analysis of publications on beef safety; (2)
discourse analysis of open-door meetings on beef safety; (3) interviews with
representatives of the key corporate actors in the beef chain; and (4) a case
study of the beef chain in the Osaka Prefecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
broader impacts of this research include: (a) contributions to the public debate
over food safety; (b) policy recommendations for the key actors in the Japanese
and U.S. food systems to foster democracy and accountability in the food
regulatory governance; and (c) training programs for agricultural scientists to
improve their capacities to communicate with non-traditional stakeholders (e.g.,
consumers, "concerned citizens") and reflect on the moral and ethical
consequences of their research practices. &lt;br/&gt;