* 0424898
* Collaborative Research: Calcium/Calmodulin-mediated Transcriptional Networks in Arabidopsis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Tianbao Yang, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 08/31/2008
* USD 617,831.00

This research pertains to the determination of gene function of the
calcium/calmodulin-mediated transcriptional networks involved in stress
signaling in Arabidopsis. The calcium messenger system plays a critical role in
the perception and transduction of external and internal stimuli. Calmodulin
(CaM), a primary intracellular calcium receptor, transduces calcium signals by
binding to and altering the activity of the target proteins. Genome-wide
screening with CaM has revealed that Arabidopsis has at least 12 signal-
responsive CaM-binding transcription factors (CaMBTFs). The goal of this
research is to study the in planta functional significance of the CaMBTFs using
a collaborative approach involving scientists from Washington State University,
Purdue University and Colorado State University. These investigators share a
common interest in studying calcium/CaM-mediated signaling and its role in plant
response to biotic and abiotic stresses. It is hypothesized that calcium/CaM
plays an important role in plant response to biotic and abiotic stresses by
regulating CaMBTFs. Specific goals are: (1) The functional significance of
CaMBTFs using loss-of-function genetic approaches; (2) The functional analysis
of CaMBTFs using gain-of-function as well as site-directed mutants in the
calmodulin-binding domain; and (3) Identify the cis-elements and downstream
target genes. A better understanding of the function(s) of these CaMBTFs will
increase our knowledge of how plants respond to biotic and abiotic stresses, and
help in the production of improved crop plants. Another aspect of this project
includes integrating these findings into the broader educational arena. Apart
from training undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs, this project will
also involve high school science teachers and their students. The project data
will be publicly available and the mutant seeds will be deposited at the
Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center.