* 0424771
* Collaborative Proposal:  Effects of Mineral Ballast and Particle Sinking Velocity on Organic Carbon Export and Remineralization
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2005,08/31/2006
* Bruce Frost, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-
0424845&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sinking particulate matter is the major
vehicle for exporting carbon from the sea surface to the ocean interior. During
its transit towards the sea floor, most (usually &gt;90%) of particulate organic
carbon (POC) is returned to inorganic form and redistributed in the water
column. This redistribution determines the depth profile of dissolved CO2,
including its concentration in the surface mixed layer, and hence the rate at
which the ocean can absorb CO2 from the atmosphere. Recent modeling studies have
shed new light on the mechanisms that are responsible for the shapes of POC
profiles. It appears that the presence of mineral ballasts (silicates,
carbonates, and dust) may account for most of the variability in POC delivery to
the sea floor. The ability to predict the formation and subsequent dissolution
of ballasts as particles descend may therefore be critical to predicting
quantitatively and mechanistically the global implications of carbon fixation
for global climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, U.S.
researchers at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, the Skidaway
Institute of Oceanography, and the University of Washington will continue their
work with French and Spanish colleagues on a multi-tracer study of different
ballast types, along with their associated organic matter and radioisotopes. The
research strategy brings together the power of several disciplines: (i) organic
geochemistry for characterizing organic matter in protected and unprotected
forms and determining its degradation state; (ii) radiochemistry for assessing
processes and time-scales involved in particle dynamics and transport; (iii)
zooplankton ecology for assessing radioisotope partitioning and organic
biomarker alteration; (iv) microbiology for its role in organic matter
decomposition, and (v) modeling and statistical analysis to provide a process-
based model of flux from the photic zone to the sea floor. The research team now
expects to resolve changes in flux, organic matter and mineral ballast
composition, and remineralization length scale through the mid-water depth
"twilight zone" of the Mediterranean Sea and possibly the Atlantic Ocean near
the Canary Islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Our project should
contribute to a better mechanistic understanding of the global carbon cycle. If
a more sophisticated understanding of the ocean's response to increased levels
of carbon dioxide can be developed, then more reasonable choices between
political alternatives are possible. The project also features a substantial
component for training of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in the
marine sciences. Additionally, the research effort will foster international
cooperation, since it is highly dependent on collaborative linkages between
American oceanographers and colleagues at the IAEA Marine Environment Laboratory
(Monaco), the CNRS Laboratory of Marine Microbiology (Marseille), and the
Autonomous University of Barcelona.&lt;br/&gt;