* 0424396
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interactive effects of Market Integration and Seasonality upon Energetics and Ovarian Function in a Lowland Bolivian Amerindian Population
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,07/31/2006
* William Leonard, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 07/31/2006
* USD 9,999.00

In Latin America, changing socio-political systems, economic, and ecological
circumstances are influencing the transition from more traditional subsistence-
level lifestyles to more "modern" ones that are characterized by greater
integration into the global market economy. This study will investigate how
ecological factors and market integration influence energy balance and
reproductive function in an indigenous lowland Bolivian population. This will
allow a better understanding of the effects of culture change and the
integration of traditional groups into the larger market economy. The specific
objectives of this study are as follows: 1) explore the impact of market
integration on seasonal changes in energetics through measures of nutritional
status, dietary composition, physical activity levels, and leptin (an energetic
hormone) levels among the Tsimane, 2) examine the changing rates of fertility
and fecundity (reproductive capacity) in response to seasonally varying
ecological conditions among Tsimane women and 3) evaluate the role of leptin as
a mechanism linking reproductive function to various energetic conditions. To
pursue these objectives, fieldwork will be conducted for one year, in order to
capture seasonal variation, among the Tsimane, an indigenous lowland South
American population currently undergoing varying levels of market integration.
The following data will be collected to address the goals of the research
project: demographic data, ethnographic data, socio-economic data,
anthropometrics (height, weight, body composition), basal metabolic rate, total
energy expenditure, dietary intake, leptin levels, and ovarian steroid levels
(estrogen and progesterone). &lt;br/&gt;The scientific merit of this proposal is
that it examines questions that cross multiple fields. This project will provide
a clear picture of how culture change and market integration affect indigenous
people. This research will also contribute to the fields of demography and
reproductive science by helping us to better understand the influences of
ecological and hormonal factors on measures of reproductive health and fertility
in non-westernized populations. In particular, the examination of the hormone
leptin adds to our limited understanding of the hormone across various
physiological and ecological conditions. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project have significance across many levels. A greater understanding of the
effects of market integration could potentially lead to a decrease in the
disruptive effect such integration may have upon indigenous groups worldwide. A
greater understanding of energetics and changing adiposity levels could have
wide-ranging effects, considering the ever increasing rate of obesity not only
in developed countries, but developing areas as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;