* 0424647
* Red Sea Outflow Experiment: Gulf of Aden Data Analysis
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Amy Bower, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2008
* USD 450,000.00

Intellectual Merit: In 2001, physical oceanographers conducted the Red Sea
Outflow Experiment (REDSOX), the first comprehensive field study of the
hydrography and circulation of both the descending Red Sea outflow plume and the
equilibrated Red Sea Outflow Water (RSOW) in the Gulf of Aden. Two research
cruises were carried out during the seasons of maximum (winter) and minimum
(summer) outflow transport. Resulting from these cruises, and relevant to the
proposed research, are over 200 hydrographic and direct velocity profiles
collected between the Strait of Bab el Mandeb and the mouth of the Gulf of Aden
on both cruises, and trajectories from 44 acoustically-tracked subsurface RAFOS
floats released at the depth of the RSOW salinity maximum. Remote sensing
observations were also collected to complement and extend the in situ
observations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The major result to date from the gulf
study is that large, energetic, deep-reaching mesoscale eddies, and not, as
originally hypothesized, boundary undercurrents, dictate the spreading pathways
and rates of RSOW through the Gulf of Aden. While these eddies had been detected
in satellite altimetry prior to REDSOX, there had been no observations of their
subsurface structure. Both cyclones and anticyclones were observed, with
diameters of 100-250 km and speeds of 10-30 cm/s at the RSOW level. The overall
goal in this study is to go beyond these highlights and conduct an in-depth
analysis of the large and multi-dimensional REDSOX data set. This will result in
the first description of the physical mechanisms governing the export of RSOW
through the Gulf of Aden and into the western Indian Ocean. The final analysis
will focus on the following three objectives: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. To
describe the kinematics and dynamics of eddies observed in the Gulf of Aden,
their generation mechanisms, and their role in modulating the dispersal and
mixing of RSOW &lt;br/&gt;2. To document the hydrographic evolution of RSOW as
it transits the Gulf of Aden, due to both isopycnal and diapycnal mixing
processes. &lt;br/&gt;3. To determine the Lagrangian statistical properties of
the circulation in the Gulf of Aden, and compare with the Mediterranean outflow
region. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed analysis is relevant
from a global viewpoint in that it addresses the general question of how water
masses formed by air-sea exchange in marginal seas are transported into the open
ocean. Both PIs make frequent presentations on oceanography for public audiences
at, for example, museums and schools, contributing to the scientific literacy of
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;