* 0424539
* MII Planning Proposal: Center for Perceptual Robotics at the City College of New York
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Mohammad Karim, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 11/30/2005
* USD 49,938.00

&lt;br/&gt;CNS-0424539&lt;br/&gt;MII Planning Proposal: Center for perceptual
robotics at the City College of New York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
planning for the establishment of the Perceptual Robotics Center at the City
College of New York. The aims are to make CCNY a center of excellence in
cutting-edge research and a national urban model for minority education in the
fields of robotics and computer vision. The planning tasks include: 1) fostering
collaborative research in perceptual robotics among faculty members; 2)
introducing new courses and outreach activities to attract and retain minority
undergraduates and to prepare them for graduate education; 3) studying methods
to enhance faculty involvement in mentoring activities; 4) developing an
evaluation plan with research achievement metrics and educational effectiveness
metrics; and 5) organizing an advisory committee. The project includes
cooperation with the NYC-LSAMP (Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation) program and New York Academy of Sciences Summer Research Training
Program (SRTP). In particular, the center will serve as a research-training site
for high school interns in the SRTP program and will provide mentored research
experiences to LSAMP scholars. The planning project supports visits to leading
research institutions as well as institutions with successful MII implementation
models. Other planning activities include the launch of a robotics and computer
vision lecture series at CCNY, the reform of senior capstone design courses, the
initiation of a student robotics club, and the participation of students in
international robotics design competitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;