* 0424160
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Application of the Facial Action Coding System to Nonhuman Anthropoids
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Richard Smith, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 07/31/2006
* USD 9,081.00

Inferring the intentions and emotions of others from facial expressions is an
integral part of social interaction in anthropoid primates (monkeys, apes and
humans). However, the adaptive factors responsible for the elaboration of facial
expression are unknown. This is due to a lack of quantitative comparative data,
which is necessary for the identification of shared adaptive trends.

A comparative variable of direct relevance to facial expression is facial
mobility, or the number of different facial movements an individual is capable
of performing. The goal of this study is to develop a new observational method
for quantifying facial mobility in nonhuman anthropoids based on the Facial
Action Coding System (FACS). FACS is the main method used in psychology today to
describe the constituent elements of human facial displays with regard to their
muscular basis. The method differentiates "action units" that correspond to the
activity of one or more muscles of facial expression. Standardized criteria are
used to score the presence of action units from video recordings of facial
movements. Since anthropoid facial muscles derive from the same developmental
precursors and humans exhibit the greatest differentiation of this muscle group,
FACS represents the entire range of possible movements for anthropoids. Thus,
facial mobility may be quantified for an individual as the number of different
action units exhibited. FACS will be used to estimate facial mobility for up to
75 individuals representing 15 species of anthropoids from zoos in North
America. Focal animal samples will be attained using a digital video camcorder.
Individuals will be recorded for 10 minutes per sample and action units will be
scored from slow-motion and stop-frame playback. Focal sampling will continue
for each individual until the number of previously unobserved action units
reaches an asymptote of zero. The resulting dataset will facilitate the testing
of adaptive hypotheses for the evolution of facial expression, opening new
avenues of research into anthropoid behavior and communication.

The broader impacts of this study include the creation of an online database of
video and still-frame examples of anthropoid facial behaviors. This resource
will help educate the public about the links between human and nonhuman primate
emotional expression, firmly placing this important aspect of human social
behavior within the context of evolution.