* 0424063
* LivePhoto Physics:  Digital Videos for Lectures and Assignments
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Robert Teese, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2007
* USD 451,061.00

Physics (13) The LivePhoto Physics project is developing a collection of digital
video &lt;br/&gt;analysis materials for introductory physics courses, using
research-based development&lt;br/&gt;methods that were refined through projects
such as Tools for Scientific Thinking&lt;br/&gt;and Workshop Physics. These
materials include videos, lecture demonstration&lt;br/&gt;sequences, homework
assignments, instructor notes, and software. In digital
video&lt;br/&gt;analysis, students use computers as laboratory instruments to
make measurements&lt;br/&gt;on video images of real events. These techniques are
being used increasingly in&lt;br/&gt;physics courses, and there is evidence that
they are effective in teaching physics&lt;br/&gt;concepts. In spite of the
wealth of mass-media and educational videos available that&lt;br/&gt;can be used
in laboratories or student projects, very few existing videos are ideal
for&lt;br/&gt;analysis by students. The LivePhoto Physics project
is&lt;br/&gt;meeting this need by producing a collection of digital videos that
span many of the&lt;br/&gt;topics covered in a one-year physics course,
including videos made with high-&lt;br/&gt;speed/slow-motion equipment that is
not available at most teaching facilities. An&lt;br/&gt;innovative aspect of the
project is that the topic selection is being guided by the&lt;br/&gt;results of
physics education research. Written curricular materials using the
videos&lt;br/&gt;in Interactive Lecture Demonstrations, distance-learning
exercises and extended&lt;br/&gt;homework problem sets are being produced and
classroom tested in a three-year&lt;br/&gt;research-based development cycle.
Field testing is taking place at two-year colleges&lt;br/&gt;and four-year
colleges/universities with diverse student audiences.
Computer&lt;br/&gt;software that extends the display and visualization
capabilities of digital video&lt;br/&gt;analysis is being developed during the
project. The final set of videos, curricular&lt;br/&gt;materials and software
will be published in the form of a CD. The LivePhoto&lt;br/&gt;Physics project
is addressing the need for faculty development and the integration
of&lt;br/&gt;technology in education by sponsoring six workshops on the use of
digital video&lt;br/&gt;analysis in physics
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;