* 0424494
* Mossbauer Spectroscopy of Nitrogenase Components
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Eckard Munck, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2009
* USD 770,000.00

In this project, jointly funded by Molecular Biophysics in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, 57Fe Mossbauer
spectroscopy, Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) and density functional
theory will be used to study the active sites of iron-containing proteins and
synthetic model complexes. Although [2Fe-2S] proteins have been investigated for
more than 30 years, many issues regarding their electronic structure have
remained unanswered. These include corrections to the observed EPR g-values and
57Fe magnetic hyperfine interactions. Moreover, as shown recently in this
laboratory antisymmetric exchange can have a profound influence on the
spectroscopic signatures of these proteins. This project will address these
questions for a variety of [2Fe-2S] ferredoxins, including Rieske proteins.
Attempts will be made to reconstitute the iron-sulfur centers with gallium and
iron to obtain ferredoxins containing [GaFe-2S] clusters; such ferredoxins would
allow determination of many parameters currently not directly accessible. Iron
complexes involving diketiminates have properties resembling features of the
cofactor of the biological nitrogen fixation system. Thus, diketiminate iron
complexes have been shown to contain activated dinitrogen, and theoretical
studies have shown that electronic properties of the diketiminate ligand are
quite similar to those of sulfido groups found in the biological system. A
series of structurally characterized diketiminate complexes containing iron in
oxidation states ranging from Fe(III) to Fe(0) will be studied. In the
biological system, dinitrogen and hydrogen are thought to bind to trigonal-
pyramidal iron sites of the iron-molybdenum cofactor, and therefore studies of
existing diketiminate complexes with bound nitrogen, hydride and ammonia will be
carried out. Research on the A-clusters of CoA synthase/carbon monoxide
dehydrogenase will also be continued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
lead to a more fundamental understanding of the magnetic properties and
electronic structure of iron-sulfur clusters and synthetic complexes relevant
for nitrogen fixation. The PI's prior research has led to the discovery of new
iron sulfur clusters and cluster assemblies, pioneering Mossbauer studies of
whole cells, and the introduction of double exchange into the chemical
literature. This research is at the interface of chemistry, physics,
biochemistry, and biology and thus offers a unique opportunity for students to
develop an interdisciplinary perspective in research. &lt;br/&gt;