* 0424829
* Steps in Grammatical Turnover-Shift
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2004,11/30/2005
* Carol Myers-Scotton, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 11/30/2005
* USD 77,422.00

Abstract Myers-Scotton BCS-0424829&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steps in Grammatical
Turnover-Shift&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support,
Dr. Carol Myers-Scotton will study Xhosa-English bilinguals in South Africa. The
goal of this project is to study the extent to which the transition from one
language to another as a speaker's main language is systematic in the sense that
the steps in language shift can be predicted. The current linguistic makeup of
the United States includes many immigrants who are not native speakers of
English, but who must develop working fluency in English in order to hold
meaningful jobs in the U.S. This project will advance the understanding of
bilingualism and the learning of English in ways that are useful for educators
who serve communities with recent immigrants. The project team will gather data
on language use among Xhosa speakers who have migrated to urban, industrialized
areas far from their homes. The dramatic political and social changes in South
Africa make it an excellent choice for examining the steps in language shift.
The very complex linguistic situation (there are now 11 official languages,
including nine Bantu languages plus Afrikaans and English) makes the shift to
English a neutral and widely useful choice for the indigenous populations. If
the patterns of shift observed in South Africa have a universal basis, the
analysis of the grammatical aspects of data gathered in this project can be
generalized to the bilingual climate in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project hopes to support the hypothesis that
bilingual speech has a specific, predictable organization. The claim is that
when immigrants are in the process of developing fluency in English, their
speech shows two types of grammatical structures. First, they use two languages
in the same sentence (their native language and English), a phenomenon known as
code-switching. Their bilingual speech also shows how the grammar of one
language is influenced by the grammar of the other language; this is called
convergence. The project expects to identify specific grammatical steps
involving code-switching and convergence as speakers become more proficient in a
second language (e.g. English). Knowing about these steps can be useful to U.S.
educators because the steps will point to the best type of teaching tools to use
in teaching English to immigrant children and adults alike. Evidence that
specific steps exist also would be a useful tool for foreign language
instructors in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;