* 0424076
* Analysis of the Vema Fracture Zone Exploratory Measurements [VEX] Datasets
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Michael McCartney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2007
* USD 515,535.00

0424076&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project will analyze
observations collected during the field phase of the Vema Fracture Zone
Exploratory (VEX) Measurement program carried out in 2001-2003. The Vema
Fracture Zone (VFZ) is an abyssal passage through the Mid-Atlantic Ridge near 11
degrees N, connecting the Guiana and Gambia Basins and permitting eastward flow
of Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) and North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW). The VEX
measurements were directed towards determination of the intensity and structure
of the flow in the VFZ, the source pathways delivering waters to the VFZ, and
the strength of the vertical mixing within the fracture zone. In the field phase
of the project, 95 hydrographic stations were sampled and six moorings with a
total of 18 current meters and three moored profilers were deployed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The completed analysis and synthesis of the VEX data will
provide a greatly improved picture of the abyssal flow through a low-latitude
fracture zone linking two of the North Atlantic abyssal basins. This will
advance our understanding of the deep component of the meridional overturning
circulation, particularly through the recognition that much of the total
diapycnal flow occurs in the restricted areas of fracture zones and steep
topography. The description of the VFZ flow will also aid in validating the
representation of flow through narrow passages in large-scale numerical
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The moored profilers
deployed during VEX for the first time outside their test and developmental
phase, are novel instruments profiling current velocities, temperature,
salinity, and pressure. Demonstrating the utility of simultaneous time series of
velocity and CTD profiles for improved estimation of transports and mixing will
benefit future moored profiler deployments. The analysis of the VEX data forms
one component of the joint GAGE/VEX program. The funds requested will provide
the opportunity for a young scientist to advance her skills in analyzing
oceanographic processes using data from a variety of instrument sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;