* 0424837
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Implementation in Abstinence-Only Sex Education
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Lynne Haney, New York University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 08/31/2005
* USD 7,483.00

This project analyzes abstinence-only education from the federal to the local
level, with a primary focus on the implementation activities of local
organizations. This federal program aims to prevent teen pregnancy by focusing
exclusively on sexual abstinence until marriage. In addition to a discourse
analysis of the federal policy and legislative debates and a quantitative
analysis of the statewide programs, ethnographic analysis will examine two local
programs in the outer-boroughs of New York City, including a nonprofit
organization and a faith-based charity group. The research considers the impact
of devolution on the implementation of social policy. Looking specifically at
agendas on gender and sexuality, how are these agendas transformed as they move
from the federal to the local level? What factors explain divergence in program
implementation? The government is increasingly relying on nonprofits and faith-
based organizations to deliver direct services, but to what effect? This
question gains immediacy, as the federal government actively seeks an expanded
role for the faith-based community in social service provision, from abstinence
programs to job training. This research argues that there has been a fundamental
shift in the scale of government, from the federal to the local through the
processes of devolution. This has occasioned a shift in the means of governance,
increasingly done through community self-regulation and community actors such as
nonprofit and faith-based organizations. These trends affect an array of social
programs and impact society more broadly. Abstinence-only education is part of
an overall shift in the federal agenda towards family values social programming,
including responsible fatherhood and marriage promotion programs. The abstinence
program has grown by 1,500% over the last decade. We have little idea what
constitutes an abstinence program in practice, nor if successful abstinence
programs are replicable. As a new generation of youth grows up under an
abstinence agenda, we need to know what kinds of messages are being transmitted
through these programs and how these messages are incorporated in the
understandings of youth about themselves, their sexuality, and the appropriate
role of men and women in U.S. society. Thus the broader impacts of this project
stem from its contribution to academic, policymaker and practitioner
understandings of the specific activities of abstinence programs and the types
of organizations involved in youth education and sexuality-related programs.
This study has social policy relevance outside of academic debates as it
examines the intersection of two major trends in direct service provision: an
explicit emphasis on moral values in social programs and the role of faith-based
and nonprofit organizations in service delivery.