* 0424625
* BE MUSES: Towards Self-Sustaining High-Rise Buildings: Framework for an Analysis of Materials, Energy, Economic and Social Issues
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Clinton Andrews, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2007
* USD 114,964.00

This BE:MUSES planning grant will support activities directed at advancing
research on green or sustainable construction. Sustainable building practices
are intended to reduce resource consumption, energy consumption, life-cycle
costs and production of pollutants and wastes, while improving human
productivity. Ideally, self-sustaining buildings produce their own energy and
engender safe, regenerative, closed-loop construction and operational materials
flow. The primary objective of this planning project is to develop a preliminary
framework for the analysis of a large, self-sustaining, high-rise building with
a focus on the building's utilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
achieve its objectives by assembling an experienced, interdisciplinary team
around the core team of a civil engineer, an urban planner and an architect,
conducting a trade-off analysis with focus on the utility infrastructure for a
speculative, self-sustaining, high-rise building, conducting a small,
interdisciplinary workshop to review the trade-off analysis and discuss the
inclusion of economic and policy aspects, and submitting a full proposal.
Findings will be disseminated to practitioners via a web site and presentations
and used as case studies in urban planning and waste management classes.
&lt;br/&gt;Building design choices have important environmental impacts and also
dramatically affect users' quality of life. This project will establish an
analytical framework for assessing how self-sustaining, high-rise buildings that
can generate much of their own electricity and recycle much of their own water
can contribute to reduced material and energy use. The project will develop
methods to assess under what circumstances there would be sufficient return to
justify such investments in self-sufficiency. This project will improve the
intellectual basis for building design and for public policymaking that
influences self-sustaining building practices.&lt;br/&gt;This planning award
will be co-managed and co-funded by CMS and SBE.&lt;br/&gt;