* 0424092
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining the Energetics Hypothesis for the Origin of Hominid Bipedalism
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,03/31/2006
* Peter Rodman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 03/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

This research addresses a hypothesis concerning the nature of the shift to
bipedal locomotion in our earliest hominid ancestors. To address the origin of
bipedalism is to address one of the most fundamental questions about what it
means to be human. Though debate exists about whether bipedalism serves to
define the human family, Hominidae, it is clear that becoming bipedal was the
critical first step in the emergence of the human form, preceding all other
major morphological adaptations. Understanding what it means to be human from a
biological and evolutionary standpoint begins with understanding the functions
of bipedalism.

This study is a two-phase project designed to examine the hypothesis that the
shift to bipedalism among our Miocene ancestors was due to energy savings
associated with bipedal locomotion. The project addresses two primary questions.
First, to what extent do energy costs during bipedal locomotion differ from
energy costs during quadrupedal locomotion in chimpanzees? Answering this
question will consist of measuring energy expenditure in a diverse set of adult
chimpanzees of both sexes during bipedal and quadrupedal locomotion on a
treadmill. Second, have current methods of measuring day journey length in free-
ranging populations of chimpanzees systematically underestimated the actual
daily travel distance of these animals? This will be addressed in a 6-month
field study of day journey length in a habituated population of free-ranging
chimpanzees at the Ngogo site in Kibale National Park, Uganda, Africa. Four
methods of measuring day journey length will be employed and compared to
measurements obtained through pace counting in order to obtain a defendable
measure of day journey length for free-ranging chimpanzees and to determine to
what extent current methods underestimate actual daily travel distance. The
broader impacts of this research are as follows. This project will provide
undergraduate student assistants with the opportunity for experience,
participation and training in the methods of scientific research at the graduate
level. Undergraduate assistants will be recruited from the student membership of
the Mentorships for Undergraduate Researchers in Agriculture, Letters and
Science (MURALS) program at the University of California. MURALS provides
funding for under-represented and minority students interested in gaining
experience doing graduate-level research while still at the undergraduate level.
This research will establish important collaborative partnerships between the
School of Veterinary Medicine and the Department of Anthropology at the
University of California, Davis, laying the groundwork for future
interdisciplinary studies. This project will also establish an important
partnership between the University of California and People and Chimps Together
(PACT), a non-profit organization dedicated to the care of chimpanzees retired
from medical research and from work in the entertainment industry. This project
will assist PACT in furthering the creation of an educational facility to
introduce the public to the behavior and conservation needs of chimpanzees. The
benefits of this research to society at large include potential contributions to
several areas of modern health care including sports medicine, veterinary
medicine and the emerging field of evolutionary medicine. Moreover, the desire
to understand our origins is ubiquitous in human society. This research will
provide a deeper understanding of those origins.

