* 0424951
* Collaborative Research: Workshop on Construction and the Environment:Research Foci for a Sustainable Future
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Christine Fiori, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/28/2007
* USD 8,765.00

The construction industry is a significant contributor to the economy of the
United States. By most estimates it generates about $879 billion dollars in
annual revenue (NIST 1998, US Census Bureau 2000) and directly employs
approximately 7 million people (US Census Bureau 2002, US Department of Labor
2002). The construction industry creates the physical infrastructure for the
nation that forms the foundation of the economic activity and other essential
activities in our lives. By some estimates, the structures produced by the
construction industry represent over 62% of the nation's wealth (NIST 1999, NIBS
1996). Therefore, continuing improvements in the efficiency and productivity of
the United States construction industry can have significant impact on the
national economy. However, the deleterious impact construction has on the
surrounding environment is well documented (e.g., Tan and Thirumurthi 1978;
Shields and Sanders 1986; Barrett, et al. 1995 and Hendrickson and Horvath
2000). Research must be conducted to develop new means to minimize these
impacts. &lt;br/&gt;This workshop will unite construction and environmental
groups in academia and connect them with industrial and regulatory input to
develop a 'construction and the environment' research plan for the future. The
two-day workshop will allow for the interaction of concerned professionals over
the key topics facing the construction industry as it focuses on environmental
protection and future sustainability issues. The workshop will produce clear
recommendations for future research in the area to include suggested timelines
and prioritization of these research efforts. The report generated by this
workshop will not only aid the National Science Foundation in its research
agenda, it will also serve as a tool for other organizations interested in
promoting new research in these areas. &lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The
workshop lays the foundation for a new research agenda focused on construction
and the environment that can be implemented by the National Science Foundation.
The shaping of the research priorities for the future is critical to advance the
current state of practice in environmentally sensitive construction. The
workshop will provide the basis for further research and education into such
areas as the study of innovative on-site storm water management and construction
utilizing improved eco-materials that are currently unavailable. The workshop
committee is composed of a diverse set of academics uniquely qualified for this
particular research. All of the committee members have a civil engineering
background with extensive experience in either the environmental disciplines or
construction related practices. Additionally, workshop participants will
encompass a wide range of intellectual expertise including the regulatory and
implementation viewpoint of the issue.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: In addition to
direct benefits to both the environment and the construction industry, the
workshop will aid in developing an understanding of barriers to realizing the
benefits of such collaborations and the diffusion of the ideas generated into
diverse industry sectors. Also valuable insights in balancing research and
educational activities will be developed. The workshop will result in providing
direct benefits to approximately 20 industry professionals from across the
country, graduate and undergraduate students. The research plan produced by this
workshop will also have profound effects on the research community for the next
decade. One of the thrusts of the worship will be to synthesize the research
agenda with an education effort. This will assure the availability of a
workforce ready to embrace environmental issues in the construction industry and
become "champions" of environmentally sound construction. As the field matures,
information disseminated from these research programs will work its way into
classrooms and texts, leading to an engineering workforce educated in this field
and more sensitive to issues related to construction and the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;