* 0424262
* DDI--Cranial variation in Homo erectus
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Eric Delson, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 07/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Homo erectus traditionally includes fossils dating between 1-2 million years ago
from sites in China, Indonesia, and East Africa. The discovery of new specimens
from Africa and Europe has refocused scientific attention on this species,
highlighting important gaps in our knowledge of the unity of this species, the
attribution of particular specimens to this species, and its relation to later
species, including our own. This study is a rigorous statistical examination of
cranial shape using the techniques of three-dimensional (3D) geometric
morphometrics. Coordinate landmark data will be collected with a Microscribe
mechanical digitizer and analyzed with an array of statistical techniques.
Questions that this study will address include: How is cranial shape variation
in Homo erectus related to overall body size, geography, and time? Do large and
small Homo erectus individuals have similar cranial shapes? Do Homo erectus
individuals from Africa and Asia have similar cranial shape? If there are
geographic differences in cranial shape, do these differences gradually increase
with distance, or is there a sharp discontinuity? How similar are earlier and
later Homo erectus in cranial shape? Over time, does cranial shape change
gradually or abruptly? The answers to these questions resulting from this study
will help us to better understand the place of Homo erectus in human history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the answers to these questions are directly
related to the taxonomic placement of this set of fossils. Some authors have
included them all in Homo sapiens, other in the single species Homo erectus and
still others have recognized multiple species within this group. Following
Mayr's biological species concept, and using models of expected variation within
and between species based on modern humans, chimpanzees and Old World monkeys
(as well as fossil Theropithecus baboons and Paranthropus), this study will
explicity evaluate the systematic placement of these Early-Middle Pleistocene
fossil humans. The results of this research will be applicable to other
systematic, taxonomic and paleontological studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this study include promotion of women in science, fostering
of international collaboration, an enhanced database of geometric morphometric
data, and the international transfer of geometric morphometric techniques. This
study constitutes the co-PI's doctoral dissertation research; completion of this
research and her doctorate will increase female representation in the sciences.
This study promotes international ties and collaboration, increasingly necessary
in the contemporary paleoanthropological research, which is increasingly
conducted by multi-national teams. The NYCEP Geometric Morphometrics group
databases all data collected by members of the group for future re-analysis and
study; the data collected in this study will be added to that database. Finally,
while geometric morphometric techniques are enjoying more widespread use, they
are still relatively new. The co-PI will demonstrate their use during her
international travels and thereby increase global scientific knowledge and build
infrastructure. The results of work in human paleontology are of broad public
interest and will be widely disseminated in both technical and popular
publications.&lt;br/&gt;