* 0424307
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  More than just birth weight: a longitudinal study of the reproductive ecology of infant growth and development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Michelle Lampl, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 10,000.00

Recent epidemiological studies have highlighted the importance of fetal and
infant development for lifelong physiology and health. While infant growth rates
have been theorized to act in a programmatic manner determining future
physiological function and adult chronic disease risk, intensive longitudinal
investigations of infant somatic growth are rare and the relationship between
somatic growth and the hormonal development underlying this growth are not well
understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indeed, infancy is a sensitive period during
which the tempo of growth and development is shaped in response to salient
environmental variables. This shaping is mediated by the endocrine system, but
the underlying mechanisms remain largely unexplored. This project examines the
relationship between endocrine development and somatic growth during the first
six months of life, a time previously documented to be an important
developmental window for lifelong health and well-being, using novel methods of
non-invasive hormonal collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
evaluate: (1) the longitudinal patterns and relationship between sex steroids
and somatic hormone levels; (2) the relationship between infant hormonal levels
and postnatal body growth; and (3) the effects of environmental factors, such as
feeding, illness and maternal characteristics on variations in sex steroids. To
address these aims, weekly hormonal, twice weekly anthropometric and daily
biobehavioral data will be collected on 36 healthy infants in Atlanta,
Georgia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides the first longitudinal
documentation of infant sex steroid levels between birth and six months of age,
contributing a major missing dataset in human growth. The intensive nature of
the study permits investigation of the mechanisms by which body growth during
infancy may contribute to adult reproductive function and health. Simultaneous
somatic and endocrine measures during infancy will allow testing of the
theoretical predictions of life history theory and reproductive ecology
regarding the effects of local ecologies in shaping endocrine responses during
development. These data expand the current realm of life history theory by
examining the translation of the laws of life history theory, such as energy
allocation and phenotypic plasticity, into the physiology of the normally
growing infant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a practical level, the results of this
study will contribute to public health interventions aimed at improving infant
growth in both developed and developing nations. The novel collection and
extraction methods being used in this study for longitudinal investigation of
hormonal development may have larger scale public health and clinical
applications for the study of infant and child growth. Additionally, the non-
invasive, and potentially field stable protocol, may allow researchers to extend
mechanistic studies of infant growth and development to other non-Western
populations, allowing elucidation of the mechanisms altering rates of growth in
these populations. This mechanistic focus is critical amidst the rising
incidence of infant and childhood obesity in the United States and worldwide and
the growing concern over whether childhood obesity contributes to early
maturation, increased adult morbidity, and the risk of developing reproductive
cancers.&lt;br/&gt;