* 0424015
* Identity and Ideology:  Cognitive Foundations and Policy Implications
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Roland Benabou, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 135,849.00

Identity and Ideology: Cognitive Foundations and Policy
Implications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address important problems
in political economy and public economics from a new&lt;br/&gt;perspective that
aims to incorporate into policy analyses a better understanding of people's
actual motives,&lt;br/&gt;cognitive processes and behavior. In particular, a
central emphasis will be placed on the motivated,&lt;br/&gt;endogenous nature of
individuals' self-views (identities) and world views
(ideologies).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A first line of research will center on
people's beliefs concerning the primacy of self-reliance
versus&lt;br/&gt;societal forces as determinants of individual wealth or
poverty, and the corresponding desirability of laissezfaire versus welfare-state
policies. A joint theory of ideology and policy will be developed to account for
the striking attitudinal di.erences observed across countries, and shed light on
the related question of when expectations of high mobility (e.g., the American
Dream) will dampen the poor's demand for redistribution. Notably, both
experiments and ethnographic studies document individuals' struggle with the
cognitive dissonance often required to maintain (and pass on to one's children)
the view that hard work and good deeds will ultimately bring a better life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will build a model using tools from economic
theory. The model will attempt to explain why people feel such a need to believe
in a "just world"; why this need, and therefore the prevalence of the belief,
may vary considerably across countries, and exhibit history-dependence; and how
this affects redistributive policies, societies' response to technical change,
and the stigma borne by the poor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of the
project will deal with the interaction between incentives and social or
selfperceptions&lt;br/&gt;in determining contributions to public goods. Indeed,
a growing body of evidence shows&lt;br/&gt;that people are often less likely to
behave in a prosocial manner when faced with (moderate) rewards
or&lt;br/&gt;fines than when there is no explicit incentive. At the same time,
when given the opportunity to remain&lt;br/&gt;ignorant of how their actions
a.ect others, people often choose not to know, and revert to selfish
choices.&lt;br/&gt;These paradoxes will be addressed with a theory of prosocial
behavior that combines genuinely altruistic&lt;br/&gt;preferences with social or
self-signaling motives. Incentives a.ect the honor and stigma from
alternative&lt;br/&gt;choices, potentially causing a "crowding out" of voluntary
participation. The model will also identify&lt;br/&gt;factors conducive to
multiple norms of behavior, show how people can suffer from an increase in
their&lt;br/&gt;bargaining power, and explain how disclosing one's good deeds
may backfire. Finally, competition among&lt;br/&gt;sponsors of public-goods
contributions (charitable or religious organizations, NGOs') will be
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;The third part of the project will develop a cognitive
theory of why (and how) people invest themselves&lt;br/&gt;in a personal,
professional, social or cultural identity. The starting point will be the
recognition that&lt;br/&gt;individuals often do not know their own preferences
and motives very well, and tend instead to infer&lt;br/&gt;them from their own
actions. The model will first explain the phenomenon of escalating
commitments&lt;br/&gt;and excessive specialization (e.g., work v.s. family). It
will also allow the study of identity conflicts,&lt;br/&gt;media feedback and
group stereotypes. Another important application will focus on resistance to
economic&lt;br/&gt;reforms, arising from the fact that people may prefer forms
of redistribution that are ineffcient (farm price&lt;br/&gt;supports or industry
protection rather than transfers, buyouts and retraining) but allow them to
maintain&lt;br/&gt;valuable self-images. Redistributive mechanisms that take
dignity concerns into account without inducing&lt;br/&gt;excessive distortions
will also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will bring to bear
on some classical questions in public economics&lt;br/&gt;and political economy
a number of important findings from both psychology and sociology. It will
also&lt;br/&gt;take up several novel questions related to the formation and
persistence of people's identities and ideologies.&lt;br/&gt;Conversely, the
tools of economic formalization will provide a clearer understanding, more
explicit&lt;br/&gt;predictions, new testable implications and a welfare analysis
of these often loosely defined concepts, thus&lt;br/&gt;generating cross-
disciplinary fertilization and challenges in the reverse direction as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The benefits of the proposed research to society
will include a better understanding&lt;br/&gt;of voter attitudes towards poverty
and redistribution, of the efficacy of public and private incentives
in&lt;br/&gt;promoting socially desirable behaviors, of the notions of identity
or dignity and the ways in which they&lt;br/&gt;may conflict with economic or
social reforms.