* 0424717
* Collaborative Research:  Internal Waves across the Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Matthew Alford, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2009
* USD 940,463.00

0424717&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The wind and the
tides input the overwhelming majority of the energy into the internal-wave
field, whose breaking is the primary driver of turbulent mixing in the ocean. It
has recently become clear that much of the input energy takes the form of low-
mode internal waves, which can propagate far (&gt; 1000 km). It follows that, in
principle, the global magnitude and distribution of turbulent mixing depends
primarily on the sources and subsequent evolution of the propagating, low-mode
internal waves. New interpretation of historical moorings, new observations from
the Hawaii Ocean Mixing Experiment, and new numerical modeling results suggest
that long-range wave propagation is strongly modulated and, at times, completely
disrupted, by interactions with other internal waves, topography, and the
mesoscale background. This project seeks to better understand the processes that
govern long-range internal-wave propagation, with an ultimate long-range goal of
determining the global distribution, magnitude and time-dependence of internal-
wave driven mixing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate three
principal activities:&lt;br/&gt;o Observational Study of Long-range Propagation.
A line of six Moored Profilers extending northward from Hawaii, spanning
26N-37N, will measure velocity and density from 100-2600 m down to 2-m scales,
for 50 days. Ship-based sensors will measure upper-ocean shear and density along
this track, obtaining 2 broad snapshots and three spring-tide 5-day time series
at three latitudes. Energy, energy flux, and dissipation rate (from overturning
scales) will be computed at all measurement locations. This experiment will
enable a coherent picture of the long-range propagation of the tide over about
1200 km. &lt;br/&gt;o Numerical simulations. A series of hypothesis-driven,
controlled numerical experiments will be conducted to optimally design the
observations, and to investigate dynamical processes that can drain energy from
a propagating internal tide.&lt;br/&gt;o Historical Data Analysis of moored
records and upper-ocean shear from ship-based instruments will be done to
characterize the spatial dependence of internal-wave shear, ray slopes, energy
and flux, and to provide large-scale observational context for the above
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This work has four
vital implications for the broader community. First, a dynamical understanding
of the resultant geography of mixing is required for accurate understanding and
modeling of the large-scale circulation in past, present and future climates.
The combination of observations and process-oriented modeling will contribute to
the knowledge required to construct physically motivated mixing
parameterizations that are dynamically coupled to the large-scale circulation.
Second, satellite altimetry has been increasingly seen as an important community
resource for monitoring global internal-wave fields. Careful comparison of
altimetric results and subsurface observations will help interpretation of
altimetric data. Third, the 50-day, 1200-km array is a prototype observing
system for long-term monitoring not only of the internal tide and associated
turbulence, but of many other mesoscale phenomena. Fourth, the proposed work
will contribute to education by providing support and mentoring for two post-
docs, and at-sea experience for several graduate students. Results will be
shared at national and international workshops and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;