* 0424789
* Metal-sulfide speciation and cluster formation at deep-sea hydrothermal vents
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* George Luther, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 06/30/2006
* USD 117,853.00

Abstract (0424789) - Luther&lt;br/&gt;This project for the Ridge 2000
Postdoctoral Fellowship is an investigation of zinc (Zn),&lt;br/&gt;iron (Fe),
and sulfide speciation at hydrothermal vents and the mechanisms of metal-sulfide
cluster formation at these extreme environments. The approach is based on
previous observations at hydrothermal vents of the East Pacific Rise that
biological community structure is a function of sulfide and Fe speciation.
Sulfide speciation is expected to influence the distribution of organisms at
other hydrothermal vent locations such as the Lau Basin. High concentrations of
Zn have been measured in vent fluid at the East Lau Spreading Center of the Lau
Basin. Because Zn binds to sulfide faster than Fe, Zn is expected to play a key
role in sulfide speciation at vents in the Lau Basin. &lt;br/&gt; In waters
surrounding hydrothermal vents, metals such as Fe and Zn can form clusters with
sulfide. These soluble clusters are multinuclear complexes that are stable at
concentrations of micromolar or lower. They are likely to serve as building
blocks for particles and minerals. Because FeS cluster have been measured at
East Pacific Rise vents, ZnS clusters are expected to form at Lau Basin vent
habitats. ZnS clusters are particularly stable in aquatic environments; however,
much remains unknown concerning the mechanisms of ZnS cluster formation, cluster
structure and stability at vent locations.&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis to be tested
is chemosynthetic organisms do not thrive near diffuse flow&lt;br/&gt;vent
waters where metal-sulfide clusters dominate sulfide speciation. In order to
better&lt;br/&gt;understand metal-sulfide speciation and biological communities
at vent habitats, this project will focus on the following objectives: (1)
comparison of sulfide and metal speciation in vent diffuse flow regions at the
two vent locations; (2) correlation between Zn-sulfide speciation and vent
community structure at the Lau Basin site, and (3) assessment of physicochemical
conditions that determine ZnS cluster structure, stability and reactivity at
vent locations.&lt;br/&gt; These objectives will be achieved through a
combination of field and laboratory studies. Field studies will focus on vents
in the area between 9 degrees 49' and 9 degrees 51'N at the East Pacific Rise
and vents at the Valu Fa Ridge in the Lau Basin. Sulfide and metal speciation
will be measured by previously established in-situ voltammetric methods. To
complement field observations, a series of laboratory studies will attempt to
elucidate the mechanism of ZnS cluster formation and cluster structure at these
vent habitats. Additional studies are proposed to investigate the reactivity of
ZnS clusters with other competing metals and with natural organic matter.
&lt;br/&gt; This research will have broader impacts by fostering
interdisciplinary research and&lt;br/&gt;Collaborations. The fellowship will
provide a unique opportunity to a postdoctoral fellow who is new to ridge crest
science but has research experience in metal-sulfide geochemistry. This research
will also contribute to fundamental knowledge of metal and sulfide chemistry in
other aquatic systems. Outcomes of this research are expected to have
implications for trace metal sulfide biogeochemistry in a variety of aquatic
environments ranging from marine sediments to municipal
wastewater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;