* 0424772
* The Rate and Direction of Agricultural Research at US Land Grant Universities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Jeremy Foltz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 08/31/2007
* USD 151,246.00

The overall goal of this research is to develop an improved understanding of
university resource allocation in agricultural research by examining the ethics
and values associated with research outputs (articles, patents, and doctorates),
potential changes in the direction of and audience for scientific researchers
(e.g., basic vs applied, firms for licensing vs broader public dissemination),
and the observable quality of the research (in terms of citations, licensing
revenues, or other measures). The project will examine the resource allocation
process at the university level as well as at the level of individual
researchers within the agricultural and life science colleges of U.S. Land Grant
universities (LGU).

At the university level, the project is built on a 20-year panel database on
university research inputs, outputs, and patent revenues that two of the
principal investigators (Barham and Foltz) have developed over the past 4 years.
At the individual level, the project will undertake a major survey of university
researchers at LGUs asking them detailed questions about their research
direction, outputs, grant sources, stakeholders, and attitudes. This survey of
scientists follows up on a previous survey done by another of the principal
investigators in the mid-1990s (Buttel) as well as an earlier effort by Lacy and
Busch in 1979.

The research methods in this project advance the literature on academic
patenting in a number of important ways. First, the theoretical framework,
"motivation crowding," provides a novel framework for understanding how monetary
incentives affect scientists' ethics, values, and research choices and the
framework's use advances the theory by providing an empirical test of its
propositions. Second, by building on past data collection efforts, this work
will have both cross-section and time-series information that can advance our
understanding of scientist ethics, values, and research choices. Third, this
work will be able to integrate the scientist data with university level
information across time and universities. Fourth, by having an interdisciplinary
research team, this project will be able to combine the ethics and values
concerns of sociology with the data and theory driven analytic tools of
economists.

This project investigates a series of regulatory and legal changes that appear
to be having a major impact on the way in which research is done at agricultural
colleges in LGUs. The incentives created by university patenting are changing
the ethics and values of scientists, the types of projects they choose, the
outlets for their research, and how that research gets disseminated to the
public (e.g., patents or open publications). Given the central role of public
sector research to generating new agricultural technologies over the last
century, these changes in LGU research focus and scientist values may have
significant impacts on the long-term sustainability of US agriculture
(Goldberger and Buttel, 2001).

A deeper understanding of resource allocation and outcomes in university
research can contribute toward the design of better policies and incentive
structures to promote agricultural and life science research at LGUs, including
efficiency and equity outcomes. Findings from this study will be presented to
key decision makers at Land Grant universities, in state legislatures, and to
interdisciplinary audiences.