* 0424666
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Woodstock: Understanding Subsistence, Settlement, and Socio-Political Change in the Late Woodland Southeast
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* David Hally, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,955.00

The dramatic cultural changes experienced by the native inhabitants of the
Southeastern United States at the end of the Late Woodland period and the
beginning of the Mississippian period around A.D. 1000 represent a major step in
the development of cultural complexity in the region. At that time, Late
Woodland tribes, characterized by decentralized political systems and a social
status hierarchy based on personal achievement, changed to chiefdoms typified by
centralized political systems (a central authority controlling multiple
communities) and a hierarchical social organization in which elite status was
inherited at birth. The causes and processes by which these changes took place
have been debated by archaeologists for years and are probably applicable to
similar types of culture change in other parts of the world.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will consider the geographical clustering of settlements around
administrative centers with earthen mounds, a pattern that is characteristic of
the Mississippian period and indicative of political centralization. Under the
supervision of Dr. David J. Hally, Julie Markin will search for evidence of site
clustering in northern Georgia during the Late Woodland period and transitional
Woodstock phase (A.D. 800-1000) in the State's archaeological database of 40,000
sites. Determination of site clustering during the Late Woodland period and/or
Woodstock phase may indicate that the significant change enabling the rise of
Mississippian chiefdoms was the development of centralized political
institutions within existing tribes, eliminating the argument that chiefdoms
arose through the coercion or conquest of neighboring tribes.&lt;br/&gt;As
changes in subsistence affect not only dietary adaptations, but also social and
political complexity, identification of changes in food production strategies is
also important for understanding the rise of Mississippian culture. To this end,
Markin will also analyze botanical collections and pottery vessel forms from
Woodstock phase sites across northern Georgia to determine whether intensive
maize agriculture developed at that time or later in the Mississippian
period.&lt;br/&gt;The importance of this project is twofold. First, it will
provide a foundation for understanding the political changes that led to the
development of Mississippian chiefdoms in general and the rise of political
complexity in chiefdom type societies around the world. Second, in addition to
the impacts it will have in the academic community, this research is important
for the opportunities it will provide for amateurs and undergraduates to learn
about archaeology through public outreach projects. To this point, Markin has
directed two undergraduate field schools and 1300 volunteer hours of excavation
and survey at Woodstock phase sites. Volunteers and undergraduates will continue
to be included in this project.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this research will be
accessible to academic and non-academic communities through public presentations
(professional conferences, school programs, non-profit archaeological volunteer
societies) and publication of the data to further develop the database from
which archaeologists can understand the many changes that occurred during this
period of transition.&lt;br/&gt;