* 0425721
* Iron in the Equatorial Undercurrent:  Data and Models
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Joseph Resing, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/28/2009
* USD 768,935.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0425721&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the principle new
findings from the US JGOFS EqPac Process study in the central equatorial Pacific
was that iron in the equatorial undercurrent (EUC) is the most important source
of iron for driving biological new production and thus carbon cycling in this
region. It has been hypothesized that the source of the iron is from terriginous
sources in the vicinity of New Guinea. If that is the case, what is happening
downstream from New Guinea? How far eastward can a New Guinea iron source be
traced? There is a critical lack of data from this region that is needed to test
this source hypothesis. This is a major lingering question that needs to be
answered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project an international team of US and
French ocean scientists, under the leadership of a marine geochemist at the
University of Washington, will determine the distributions of iron, manganese,
aluminum and neodymium in a zonal section along the equatorial Pacific. They
will be seeking answers to four major questions: 1. Is there really a maximum of
iron in the equatorial undercurrent? 2. What is its zonal gradient? 3. What is
its origin? 4. How do the distributions constrain model derived fluxes?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use a 4-year integrated field, analytical
and modeling approach. They will conduct a zonal cruise along the equator from
143'E to 140'W to measure dissolved, colloidal and total acid soluble Fe, Mn and
Al. Laboratory studies will be carried out to measure dissolved and particulate
neodymium isotopes and particulate Fe, Mn and Al. A coupled dynamical-
biogeochemical model will be run to predict iron distributions before the
cruise. They will also the model approach to estimate the relative importance of
physical versus biogeochemical fluxes in the central (cold tongue) and western
(warm pool) equatorial Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
science are that because iron has been shown to be an element limiting carbon
cycling in this region, understanding its source will lead to greater
understanding of past and future changes in biological productivity and carbon
fluxes and provide a basis for predicting the response to climate change. New
observations are required so that iron can be effectively incorporated into
models of carbon cycling in this region. This project will feature major
international collaboration with several foreign scientists from different
disciplines. This will include scientists from Noumea, New Caledonia (biological
analyses), Paris, France (modeling) and Toulouse, France (Nd analyses). It will
also include training of graduate students in a wide range of state-of-the-art
analytical and modeling techniques and interdisciplinary oceanography.
&lt;br/&gt;