* 0425398
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Culture, Symbolic Interaction, and the Cancer Survivor
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Jane McLeod, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 7,500.00

Because of the invasive, painful, and often disfiguring treatments for cancer
and the uncertainty and fear of recurrence, it is unlikely that survivors simply
return to their old lives following cancer treatment. The disruptive nature of
serious illnesses such as cancer provides a unique opportunity to examine the
process of self-construction. Intuitively, it makes sense that messages about
cancer survivorship (embodied in other persons with cancer, conveyed in
conversations with friends about cancer, or seen at a cancer fundraising run)
will influence the process of making sense of cancer. However, empirically, we
do not know how the public meanings of cancer shape the experiences of
survivors. Furthermore, because many social representations of cancer target a
particular form of cancer, we might expect that survivors of different cancers
will be impacted by cultural meanings in unique ways. This project combines the
symbolic interactionist perspective rooted in the writings of Mead with insights
from cultural sociology to understanding the construction of self among two
groups of cancer survivors. Three research questions will be addressed: 1) How
do cultural representations of cancer impact the self of the cancer survivor? 2)
How does social interaction impact the self of the cancer survivor? 3) How does
type of cancer shape the relationship between self, culture, and social
interaction? Data will consist of in-depth interviews with sixty women who have
completed treatment for breast or colorectal cancer three to twelve months prior
to the interview. Respondents will be recruited using systematic sampling
methods at two cancer treatment centers in an urban community and at a small
town cancer support organization. Interview transcripts will be analyzed using
ATLAS.ti, a qualitative data analysis software program. The findings from this
dissertation research will contribute to a burgeoning literature spanning
cultural sociology and social psychology that addresses the links between
culture and the self. Furthermore, this research will refine the chronic illness
literature by drawing upon insights from cultural sociology to further consider
the role of culture in the illness experience and will enhance our understanding
of a unique and virtually unstudied subset of chronic illness sufferers. The
broader impacts of this project include the following. This research will be
useful to researchers, students, and practitioners interested in understanding
cancer survivorship, including survivors of cancers other than breast and
colorectal and the experiences of cancer survivors, such understanding is
critical for developing services to assist survivors in returning to healthy and
productive lives following treatment.