* 0425147
* Collaborative Research:  Asymmetric Circulation in Wind-Driven Bays
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Arnoldo Valle-Levinson, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2005
* USD 185,117.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0425147 Asymmetric circulation in wind-driven
bays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;A recent analytical model
predicts that the wind-driven circulation in small coastal basins is
fundamentally influenced by the Earth's rotation when the basin depth is greater
than the Ekman depth. Rotation affects the character and complexity of fluid
parcel trajectories, with important consequences for mixing and residence times.
A combination of observations and analytical and numerical simulations will be
conducted to verify and extend this model. Field observations will be done
during the winter season 2004-2005 in Bahia Concepcion, on the Gulf of
California side of the Baja California peninsula in Mexico. The bay is subject
to strong wind forcing throughout the winter, when it is vertically well mixed.
The observations will include moored instrumentation, shipboard surveys and
drifter deployments and the scientific objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;(a) to describe
through observations how rotation affects the wind-driven circulation and the
exchange with the ocean in a relatively deep, well-mixed, semi-enclosed bay that
is exposed to strong winds, and&lt;br/&gt;(b) to extend the analytical model to
represent the circulation driven by tides and by lateral density gradients, and
to describe with numerical models how advection and vertical stratification
modify this circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
ecological and societal importance of small coastal basins (bays, estuaries,
lagoons) is out of proportion with their size. Among other ecological functions,
lagoons and estuaries serve as way stations for bird migration, as nurseries for
fauna and flora and as mating and calving grounds for certain marine mammals. At
the same time these water bodies have been deeply impacted by anthropogenic
activities. By developing a dynamical description of the processes that control
circulation in these basins and exchange with the ocean, this study will help
minimize human impacts such as sewage discharge through science-based management
and engineering practices. In addition, this project represents international
collaboration with Mexican scientists, supports two graduate students. One of
the PIs is a member of an underrepresented group. The study will also expose
undergraduates, including minority groups, to research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;