* 0425285
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Construction of the Admissibility of Expert Testimony after Daubert v. Merrell Dow, Inc.
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* James Richardson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 7,499.00

Specialists who are qualified as experts on a subject relevant to a trial often
are called upon to offer scientific opinions relevant to that lawsuit or case.
Expert witnesses, attorneys, and judges all participate in a process in which
some of those opinions become redefined as evidence that will be helpful to the
judge or jury. In an adversarial setting such as a courtroom, how does this
movement of expert testimony from the status of "science" to "legal science"
take place, particularly when the participants often differ in knowledge, skill,
and motivation? The primary purpose of this research is to examine negotiated
movement in the courtroom process by applying the tenets of the sociology of
science, as theorized by Sheila Jasanoff, to the construction of the
admissibility of expert testimony, in order to investigate how the construction
and deconstruction of expert testimony shapes "legal science." Jasanoff argued
that understanding the sociology of science will benefit judges and attorneys by
alerting them to the shortcomings of the adversary system as a way of
understanding science, by providing them with a more principled basis for
evaluating expert testimony, and by presenting a clearer accounting of what
occurs when courts engage in scientific fact finding. To date, Jasanoff's ideas
have not been studied empirically. This research will test Jasanoff's theory by
examining the social construction of the admissibility of expert testimony. A
sample of Federal district court cases published on the Lexis/Nexis online
database following the 1993 U.S. Supreme Court decision Daubert v. Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (509 U.S. 579, 113 S.Ct. 2786, 1993) will be content
analyzed to investigate the impact of Daubert and its progeny on scientific
"fact." The broader impacts of this research include the following: The
methodology developed in this research will be of value to other researchers in
science and law by providing a technique and classification scheme for future
studies in this area. This research has implications not only for disciplines in
which these issues are studied, such as sociology, social psychology, and
communications, but also for scientists from many diverse disciplines who
provide expert testimony to the courts and policy makers, judges and attorneys
who argue and decide the use of such testimony, and legal educators who must
prepare future attorneys and judges to meet the challenges posed by expert
testimony in the courtroom.