* 0425692
* International Workshop on Antarctic Permafrost and Soils; November 15-19, 2004; Madison, WI
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* James Bockheim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 04/30/2006
* USD 65,001.00

This award supports an international workshop to be held Nov. 15-19, 2004 in
Madison, Wisconsin, with the main goals of integrating and synthesizing data and
initiating discussions on preparation of maps of permafrost and ground-ice
conditions and soils of the Antarctic region, especially in the McMurdo Dry
Valleys (MDV). Intellectual Merit: Antarctica contains 90% of the world's ice
and exerts a predominant influence on southern hemisphere and global atmospheric
and cryospheric systems. Only 0.3% of the continent is ice-free, with the MDV
constituting the largest ice-free area in Antarctica (4,000 km2, or 25% of the
total). Permafrost underlies the entire continent, except where glaciers are
thick enough to induce pressure melting. Although soils have been studied in
ice-free areas of Antarctica for nearly 100 years, no comprehensive electronic
database exists for soils information and soil maps using modern global
taxonomies are lacking for the continent. In this work plan, we propose to lay
the groundwork for archiving data and constructing maps of the permafrost and
ground-ice features and soils of the Antarctic region (>60oS), emphasizing the
MDV. Assembled by an international team, these maps would constitute the first
permafrost and soil maps of the southern hemisphere and would complement those
published for the northern hemisphere. Broader Impacts: Because widespread,
systematic changes in the temperature and distribution of permafrost could have
profound effects on the flux of greenhouse gases and on the human infrastructure
in the Antarctic region, it is critical that observation and analysis procedures
be optimized. Similarly, there is a need to collect benchmark analytical data
and soil maps for natural resource management of the continent. This workshop
will bring together permafrost scientists, soil scientists, and GIS and mapping
experts from many of the Antarctic Treaty nations to compile data that will
eventually lead to the generation of the first comprehensive maps showing the
distribution of permafrost and soils in the southern hemisphere.