* 0425093
* US - French Workshop and International Collaboration on Fractional Derivatives and Their Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Om Prakash Agrawal, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 01/31/2006
* USD 16,000.00

US - French Workshop and International Collaboration on Fractional Derivatives
and Their Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
purpose of this workshop is to formally initiate a collaborative research
program between two teams of researchers (one from US and the other from France)
in the area Fractional Derivatives and Their Applications. The US team consists
of 7 people, and they come from academia, business, and government research
labs. The French team consists of 13 people and most of them come from Bordeaux
University and CRONE Lab. During the period of the workshop, the US and the
French teams will present their research efforts, make research proposals, and
discuss as to how the two teams will collaborate on these project. The following
topics have been identified for discussion at the workshop: Fractional Control
of Engineering Systems; Fundamental Understanding and Explorations of
Viscoelastic, Foam, Gel and other type of Materials and Their Engineering and
Scientific Applications - Experimental/Theoretical; Application of Fractional
Derivatives to Thermal Modeling such as Disk, Caliper and Drum Brakes, Machine
Tools; Analytical and Numerical Tools and Techniques; Advancement of Calculus of
Variations and Optimal Control to Fractional Dynamic Systems; Fundamental
understanding of wave and diffusion phenomenon, their measurements and
verifications; and Image and signal processing. Discussion will include both
fundamental as well as applied research and their impact on the field. In
addition, the US team will visit the research facilities at the CRONE and other
laboratories, and learn how the CRONE team members are using these laboratories
to advance the knowledge in the field of applications of fractional derivatives
to engineering and scientific problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the end of the
workshop, the participants will develop a preliminary research collaboration
plan that they will further develop and pursue upon their return. To facilitate
this, a web-site will be created that will document the outcome of the workshop.
It will also provide a mechanism for continuing discussion by the participants.
In the future, it will also document progress made by the team members in the
area of Fractional Derivatives and Their Applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;