* 0425984
* Historical Phylogeny of Tahitian Partula, an Almost Extirpated Land Snail Fauna
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* John Burch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Oceanic islands hold particular interest for both evolutionary
and&lt;br/&gt;conservation biologists. Native plants and animals evolved in
isolation on&lt;br/&gt;these islands and provide detailed insights into
fundamental evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;processes. However, they characteristically
lack well-developed defensive&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms and are exceptionally
vulnerable to introduced predators. Using&lt;br/&gt;DNA analyses of museum
specimens, we aim to reconstruct the evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;history of a
critically threatened radiation of land snails from Tahiti&lt;br/&gt;(French
Polynesia). This Pacific island snail fauna has recently been&lt;br/&gt;driven
to the brink of extinction by an introduced predatory land&lt;br/&gt;snail. Our
museum samples predate the introduction of the predator and, in&lt;br/&gt;their
DNA, they collectively contain a genealogical record that we can
use&lt;br/&gt;to revise the traditional shell-based taxonomy and to determine
how all&lt;br/&gt;these snails evolved on such a small, geologically young,
island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research will have practical value in helping
to prioritize on-going&lt;br/&gt;conservation and rehabilitation efforts.
Collaborative agreements have&lt;br/&gt;been established with Zoological Society
of London personnel involved in&lt;br/&gt;overseeing captive Tahitian snail zoo
populations and in saving the last&lt;br/&gt;remnant wild populations. Our
shared aim is to place the remnant wild and&lt;br/&gt;captive populations into
their proper evolutionary context: that of the&lt;br/&gt;previously intact
fauna, by obtaining DNA profiles of extant wild and&lt;br/&gt;captive
populations that will be referenced with our historical
Tahitian&lt;br/&gt;database. Preliminary efforts have received considerable
general publicity&lt;br/&gt;(e.g.,
http://whyfiles.org/shorties/151land_snail/index.html). We&lt;br/&gt;anticipate
that our research will be of interest to that fraction of the&lt;br/&gt;public
keen on high-profile conservation biology
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;