* 0425399
* Collaborative Research: Particulate Organic Carbon in the Air and Snow at Summit, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* James Schauer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2008
* USD 296,929.00

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at Georgia
Institute of Technology, Universities of New Hampshire, and Wisconsin-Madison.
Atmospheric aerosols are of concern because they can influence climate by
altering the radiation balance of the Earth and are harmful to human health.
Fine particulate matter (particles having diameters less than 2.5 micrograms)
contains a significant amount of both organic carbon (OC) and elemental carbon
(EC), which can account for a considerable fraction of the fine particulate
mass. The OC fraction is composed of a wide variety of compounds from both
anthropogenic and natural sources. Little is known about the historical
concentrations, sources and emissions of carbonaceous aerosols. Ice core
concentrations of OC and specific organic compounds could yield information on
the past influence of carbonaceous aerosols on climate and the sources of these
aerosols. Before ice core concentrations of carbonaceous compounds related to
particulate matter deposition can be evaluated, it is important to determine the
link between the concentrations in air and snow. In addition, the extent to
which carbonaceous aerosol is modified after deposition to snow needs to be
determined before specific compounds can be used to infer past atmospheric
concentrations. Preliminary results of water insoluble particulate organic
carbon (IPOC) in a snow pit from Summit, Greenland show a decrease of ~ 50% in
IPOC concentrations in the top 50 cm, hinting that early post depositional
processes may be very important. These results are consistent with recent
suggestions that organic carbon in surface snow may play an important role in
snow photochemistry. The Principal Investigators will conduct a field study at
Summit in 2006 to measure the concentrations of particulate OC, EC, and specific
organic compounds that serve as source tracers in the air, surface snow, and
snow pits. To assess the influence of post depositional processes in surface
snow, they will measure the concentrations of water-soluble gas-phase organic
compounds (WSGOC) in the atmospheric and firn air with the expectation that the
degradation of IPOC in surface snow leads to the formation of WSGOC. They will
deposit carbon-13- and deuterium-labeled particulate organic compounds to
surface snow and measure the change in concentration over the duration of the
field season. In addition, they will conduct specific experiments where surface
snow is shaded from solar radiation in order to determine the relative influence
of photochemistry on the degradation of particulate organic compounds deposited
to surface snow. The research will yield insights into the processes that
influence the concentrations of particulate carbon in the air and snow at Summit
and will serve as the groundwork for future modeling, laboratory and field
studies that will focus on the deposition, and transformation of particulate
organic compounds in snow. Broader Impacts: The research will advance education
through the training of several graduate and undergraduate students, including
students from under-represented minority groups. The information will be
disseminated through conference presentations, publications, and a webpage as
well as within graduate and undergraduate courses. The Principal Investigators
will give presentations at K-12 schools. The research effort will result in the
development of new measurement techniques as well as unique modifications to
existing techniques. The project will yield insights into processes that are of
importance to the atmospheric sciences as well as paleoclimate communities. The
research will potentially open the door for studies that address the historical
sources and impacts of aerosols based on the concentrations of specific organic
compounds deposited in snow.

