* 0425199
* Volatile Polonium and Tellurium Species in the Marine Environment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Thomas Church, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2009
* USD 600,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0425199&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers at the University of Delaware will study the formation of volatile
polonium (Po) and tellurium (Te) species in marine environments. These two
elements may provide a metric of air-sea metalloid evasion using the natural
radionuclide 210Po by comparison to its stable Group XVI congener Te. The basic
chemical properties of polonium and tellurium suggest that alkylation will occur
via common reactions, and strong field evidence exists for the production of
volatile species of both elements in marine environments. However, volatile
species have not yet been directly observed in marine systems. The researchers
hypothesize that stable alkyl species of polonium and tellurium contribute to
their volatile flux across the marine atmospheric boundary. This hypothesis will
be tested through analytical development, laboratory reactions, microbial
methylation assays, and field sampling studies leading to the first direct
volatile species identification in the marine environment. Analytical methods
will be developed including GC-ICPMS technologies for species separation and
identification. Laboratory studies will test for alkylated products of abiotic
methylation reactions, and microbial cultures grown for biotic generation of
volatile tellurium and polonium species. Finally, both head space analysis in
batch incubation of natural sediments and downwind of marine areas with expected
methylation activity will be sampled for naturally occurring volatile products
of polonium and tellurium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
will deal with globally significant biogeochemical processes that include
potential pollutant transfer and marine biotic stress. Graduate and post-
graduate students will gain experience developing next generation analytical
techniques to address such processes. Undergraduate students will participate in
the NSF-sponsored research resulting in educational and professional experiences
by exposure to the proposed research under the NSF-REU (Research Experience for
Undergraduates) program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;