* 0425035
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Negotiating social identities in an elite independent school
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Michele Lamont, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 7,490.00

This ethnographic study will focus on how students with different socio-cultural
backgrounds at a New England preparatory boarding school construct identities as
students of an elite educational institution, and how race, class, and gender
influence how they construct these identities and negotiate cultural boundaries.
Schools play a crucial role in drawing symbolic boundaries around specific
identities. But students do not simply accept the definitions they encounter or
behave strictly along established boundaries. Research into this dynamic
interaction has focused primarily on public schools and on students from
underprivileged backgrounds. Scholars have rarely considered how students in
elite educational settings-including students from privileged backgrounds-
experience their schooling and in what ways they may reproduce, resist, and/or
redefine the repertoires of identity available to them. To observe how students
construct and enact identities in an elite school setting, four kinds of
interactions will be observed: interactions in official school activities, in
informal school contexts, one-on-one interviews, and among participants in a
focus group. Several sampling strategies will be combined to identify a group of
respondents that includes a wide range of experiences and backgrounds. Four
complementary methods of data collection will be employed: participant
observation, a student questionnaire, in-depth narrative interviews, and focus
groups. The data will be analyzed through grounded theory and narrative analysis
strategies. While the experiences of a small number of students at one school
can hardly be generalized, this study will shed light into both macro and micro
social and cultural processes. It will: 1) improve our understanding of the
actual experiences of students who attend schools that have historically served
elite groups; b) expand our view of the educational system beyond mainstream
public school settings to include the experiences of this select group of
students; and c) consider the influence of larger cultural relationships and
social forces on student experiences of school in general. The broader impacts
of this research include the following: This research will be of interest to
scholars of education as well as a broader audience of policymakers and
educators, including parents and teachers. Given the urgency to improve public
schools, particularly for disadvantaged groups, the lack of interest in elite
schooling is an understandable yet critical oversight in policy and theoretical
debates; in the interest of leaving no child behind, we must pay attention to
the experiences of those who are, presumably, "ahead."