* 0425801
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Landscape and Livelihood Effects of Lands Trusts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* B. Turner, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Strategies for effective landscape-scale conservation remain a priority
worldwide. As governments throughout the Americas have found large
interventionist park projects alone to be insufficient, new public-private
partnership strategies for conservation have assumed an increasingly important
role in an emerging vision of landscape-scale conservation. Among these
partnership strategies are land trusts that non-profit organizations have
established to facilitate and administer the voluntary, long-term commitments of
private, individual landowners to protect their holdings for conservation,
recreation, or other publicly beneficial purposes. This doctoral dissertation
research project will explore the viability of land trusts and conservation
easements as public-private instruments for landscape-level protection of
diverse environments and human livelihoods in Addison County and in the
Northeast Kingdom of Vermont. The two in-depth case studies focus on two sets of
easements explicitly engineered to serve both communities and conservation in a
working landscape given, respectively, an agricultural and forest matrix. This
study focuses on two interrelated questions: (1) Does the aggregate activity of
land trusts function as a landscape change agent? (2) Can land trusts function
as a commons, enabling broad access to a variety of resources on private
property? Regional assessment of remotely sensed landscape-scale data will be
grounded through explanation derived from in-depth place-based assessment. GIS-
derived landscape-level analyses will be linked to interview and focus group
data, in part by establishing transects through respondents' properties. The
doctoral student expects to show that easement activity increases connectivity,
patch size, and habitat diversity, and decreases land use and cover class
transition frequencies at the landscape scale. Within the working landscape of
two rural communities, the study findings will delineate the gendered, classed,
and temporal patterns of access to lands held in conservation trusts. The
student expects to demonstrate how the legal structures provided by conservation
easements enable or limit participation differentially, thus adversely affecting
the potential of land trusts as effective agents of conservation. The study also
may characterize a potential user community that trusts have failed to engage.

At a regional scale, this research project investigates whether the public can
and does benefit from land in trust, and whether these privately conserved lands
fit or extend the theoretical limits of common property. The study should
contribute to understandings of resource access strategies for developed-world
adaptive agents in cultural and political ecology, and to the emerging
literature in land-change science on the role of institutions. More broadly,
results from this investigation will contribute to theories of conservation,
integrated land-change science, and common property. The regional assessment
will help identify potential controlling agents of future landscapes. Study
outcomes will also pinpoint practical ways that easements, an attractive
existing tool, can better serve scientific efforts to promote a type of
landscape-scale conservation that commands the support and engagement of
residents in place, by addressing livelihood as well as ecological and aesthetic
concerns. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.