* 0425970
* Diffusion and Flexibility in Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2007
* Michael Thorpe, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 222,000.00

This award is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research and Mathematical
Sciences under the umbrella of the NSF-wide Mathematical Sciences Priority
Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of networks of atoms are determined to
a large degree by the constraints present, which include fixed bond lengths and
angles. This theoretical research extends previous work on statics to study the
effect of constraints on dynamical behavior of networks. The emphasis will be on
the diffusion of sticky spheres that are packed together. The theory of
constraints will also be extended to finite temperature as it relates to the
thermal properties of network glasses. Constraint theory replaces the strong
forces in a network by hard constraints. This allows the rigid regions, both
unstressed and stressed, to be determined, as well as the location of the
hinges, especially near the rigidity phase transition, where the whole network
transforms from flexible to rigid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present theory of
constrained networks in three-dimensions is restricted by the necessity to
include bond bending forces everywhere along with central forces. While this is
appropriate for some networks, it has been found to be restrictive to wider
applications. We therefore will develop a general theory for the rigidity of
generic networks in three-dimensions, with the aim of finding a very integer
algorithm. This will be added to the software on flexibility that is available
free to academic users at the website that has been set up at
flexweb.asu.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion in sphere packs can be studied
experimentally using a confocal microscope, and it is found that certain regions
are locked so that no diffusion occurs over the time of the experiment, while
diffusive motion is possible in other regions. We will predict these regions,
using a single initial configuration to determine constraints, and the theory as
generalized above. Such an approach will provide a bridge between statics and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new model will be introduced that will allow
the effect of constraints to be tracked as the temperature increases up through
the glass transition temperature. This will lift the current restriction to zero
temperature, and allow entropic effects to be included. The potential is
constructed with the sticky spheres locked together at low temperature, so that
constraint theory is applicable, but as the temperature is increased, entropic
effects become important and can be tracked thermodynamically. This work will
help to explain the differences in the fragility of glasses as seen through the
viscosity as a bulk glass is formed from the melt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
theory that is developed has broader implications, particularly to bio-
molecules, where function is often associated with flexibility, and diffusive
motion. Proteins in the native state unfold as the temperature is increased
above room temperature to become denatured, and so entropic effects are
important.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Divisions of
Materials Research and Mathematical Sciences under the umbrella of the NSF-wide
Mathematical Sciences Priority Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of
networks of atoms are determined to a large degree by the constraints present,
which include fixed bond lengths and angles. This theoretical research extends
previous work on statics to study the effect of constraints on dynamical
behavior of networks. The emphasis will be on the diffusion of sticky spheres
that are packed together. The theory of constraints will also be extended to
finite temperature as it relates to the thermal properties of network glasses.
Constraint theory replaces the strong forces in a network by hard constraints.
This allows the rigid regions, both unstressed and stressed, to be determined,
as well as the location of the hinges, especially near the rigidity phase
transition, where the whole network transforms from flexible to
rigid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new theory that is developed has broader
implications, particularly to bio-molecules, where function is often associated
with flexibility, and diffusive motion. Proteins in the native state unfold as
the temperature is increased above room temperature to become denatured, and so
entropic effects are important.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;