* 0425397
* Understanding People as Normative Agents: A Workshop Exploring The Intersection of Morality and Theory of Mind
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Judith Smetana, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 08/31/2006
* USD 14,990.00

This project supports a workshop on the topic of how children come to understand
norms, rules, and obligations: a social cognition of norms. The workshop will
bring together scholars who are leaders in the fields of moral development and
theory of mind. While moral development research has, over the last 20 years,
documented the richness of children's knowledge of principles of justice,
fairness, and rights, only recently have moral development researchers started
asking how children's psychological understandings inform their moral thinking.
During the same time period, there has been an extensive research program on
children's knowledge about others' psychological states, referred to as "theory
of mind". Parallel to the new directions in moral development research, an
emerging direction for theory of mind research is exploring the relation between
normative and psychological construals of human action. Surprisingly, there has
been little collaboration between researchers on children's moral development
and researchers on children's theory of mind, despite the extensive lines of
research in these two respective areas and the potential conceptual overlaps.
The charge of this workshop will be to explore how those perspectives together
generate a deeper understanding of the social cognition of normative relations.
If the goal is to develop a full account of how children develop the abilities
to use and form norms, rules, permissions, and obligations, what are the key
concepts and distinctions? The challenge is to define a field of reasoning about
norms, and to encourage researchers to view existing questions in this new
light. &lt;br/&gt;