* 0425418
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Medicine and Inequality in the Welfare State:  AIDS Policy-Making in the United States and the United Kingdom
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Renee Anspach, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2006
* USD 7,500.00

This dissertation aims to answer two central research questions: (1) Why was the
U.S., as the first nation to encounter HIV/AIDS, still establishing the first
elements of its national response at a time when the U.K. had already embarked
on a centralized and coordinated strategy to combat the epidemic? (2) Has this
dissimilar policy trajectory continued over the past twenty years, or has there
been significant convergence? I suggest that in order to answer these questions
we must move beyond the concerns that have thus far dominated the AIDS policy
literature - cultural biases against the social groups most affected by AIDS and
the ascendance of neoconservative economic philosophies - to consider the
formative role of political institutions. Specifically, my dissertation compares
the AIDS policy-making trajectories of the U.S. and the U.K. to assess the
hypothesis that differences in national responses to AIDS can be explained, in
part, by cross-national variation in the institutions of the health system. This
research draws on a range of archived materials and original interviews.
Starting from a survey of AIDS-related policy proposals from each nation, I will
analyze minutes and testimony from involved committees and subcommittees,
speeches and debates from the floors of Congress and Parliament, and reports
generated in connection with these policy proposals by executive agencies. My
interviews with key legislators, staffers, and agency leaders will address
issues such as choices made during the policy design phase, the selection of
experts to testify at hearings, and the success or failure of various
strategies. To understand the agenda-setting stages of the policy-making
process, I will also collect key informant interviews, reports, and publications
from policy advocacy organizations in each nation. This project will contribute
to our understanding of the factors that determine health policy trajectories at
the national level, by considering the role of institutional precursors in the
health system alongside more commonly addressed cultural and political
determinants of health policy, and by weighing the importance of these factors
in various national and historical contexts. Because the project compares two
similar welfare states with dramatically different health systems, it will also
illuminate the relationship between events in health policy and more general
trends in social provision. As such, it deepens our understanding of welfare
states by questioning the sociological assumption that overarching welfare state
regimes determine choices within specific areas of social policy. This research
will have the following broader impacts: By enhancing our understanding of the
factors that have contributed to the success or failure of recent strategies, it
will provide valuable information to researchers and policymakers about the
effectiveness of future political efforts to promote specific health policies
and about the ways in which differently structured health institutions are able
to respond to a health crisis, information that can be factored into future
choices about the formation of these institutions.