* 0425083
* ACM 2004 Conference Workshop:   Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium; April 24-29, 2004; Vienna, Austria
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2007
* Gary Olson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2007
* USD 55,352.00

This is funding to support this year's HCI doctoral research consortium
(workshop) of approximately 15 promising doctoral students from the United
States and abroad, along with distinguished research faculty. The event will
take place in conjunction with the ACM 2004 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI 2004), to be held April 24-29 in Vienna, Austria, and
sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on
Human Computer Interaction (SIGCHI). Goals of the workshop include building a
cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network of colleagues
spread out across the world, guiding the work of new researchers by having
experts in the research field give them advice, and making it possible for
promising new entrants to the field to attend their research conference. Student
participants will make formal presentations of their work during the workshop,
and will receive feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is geared to
helping students understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative
to other human-computer interaction research, whether their topics are
adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are
correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are appropriately
analyzed and presented. Student participants will present their work to the
doctoral consortium on April 25-26, with follow up activities to be held during
the technical program of the CHI 2004 conference. Extended abstracts of the
students' work will be published in the CHI 2004 Extended Abstracts, which has
wide print and electronic distribution. SIGCHI's conference management committee
will evaluate the doctoral consortium, and the results made available to the
organizers of future consortia. The CHI doctoral consortia, which began in 1986,
have been highly successful in providing a forum for the initial socialization
into the field of young doctoral scholars, and many of today's leading HCI
researchers participated as students in earlier consortia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The annual CHI doctoral consortia
traditionally bring together the best of the next generation of HCI researchers,
allowing them to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development. Because the
students and faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions,
including nationality/cultural and scientific discipline, the students' horizons
are broadened to the future benefit of the field.