* 0425684
* Support for US Participants at the 13th International Congress on Catalysis
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* William Conner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 04/30/2005
* USD 28,000.00

The 13th International Congress on Catalysis will be held in Paris, France on
July 11-16, 2004. This is the most prominent international scientific meeting in
catalysis, which is held every four years and which involves more than 1200
attendees from over 25 countries. The attendance at these meetings has had
significant increases due to a renewed worldwide interest in the synthesis of
alternative fuels, specialty chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and other value-added
products. US participation at this meeting is central to our presence in this
crucial area of research that impacts a significant fraction of the American
economy. Further, catalysis remains central to the solution of many
environmental problems. The Paris meeting will focus on catalyst preparation and
characterization, catalytic reaction mechanisms, catalytic reaction engineering
(multiscale approach), fuels and energy for the future, synthesis of chemicals
and polymers (towards cleaner processes and atom economy), and pollution
prevention and remediation.

The proceedings of all International Congresses on Catalysis are published and
constitute a significant contribution the scientific literature on catalysis.
The purpose of this grant is to help defray costs for US faculty participation
in the meeting, especially for persons presenting papers and/or chairing
sessions; priority will be given to requests from younger faculty, minority
faculty, and faculty from underrepresented groups.