* 0425075
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement:  A Comparative Study of Agency Capture in Stream Restoration
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Michael Watts, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2008
* USD 11,975.00

Organizations ranging from local community groups to the federal government
spend hundreds of millions of dollars and countless hours of time each year
attempting to restore streams to a more natural condition. Unfortunately,
grassroots demand for restoration projects far outstrips contemporary knowledge
of how to implement them, raising the stakes for conflicts over what constitutes
sound science in river restoration. One of the most important of these conflicts
was catalyzed by a relatively simple system for classifying and restoring stream
channels developed by a consultant named Dave Rosgen. Despite the opposition of
scientists and consultants with advanced degrees in hydrology and geomorphology,
the Rosgen Method has become the most influential method of stream restoration
in the U.S. Over the last ten years, it has been rapidly and widely adopted by
federal agencies, including the EPA, USFWS, and USFS, and by natural resource
departments from more than a dozen states, a process known as agency capture.
This doctoral dissertation project will explain the Rosgen Method's impressive
record of agency capture in the face of stiff scientific opposition and
illuminate the socio-political forces at work in stream restoration. Research
will take the form of comparative fieldwork in California, Maryland, and
Montana, which have adopted the Rosgen Method, and Washington and Oregon, which
have not. The doctoral student will draw on political ecology and science and
technology studies to answer three key questions. (1) What explains the rapidity
with which the Rosgen Method was adopted? (2) How do the forms and dynamics of
agency capture vary? (3) Why have some states resisted
adoption?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to traditional environmentalist
attempts to protect a pure nature from further human damage, ecological
restoration claims that people can go beyond conservation and repair the
environmental damage already done. The tremendous appeal of this image of humans
as a positive contributor to environmental health has rapidly made restoration,
particularly stream restoration, a driving force of the environmental movement
and an institutionalized commitment at all levels of American government. This
research will have a broad impact on stream restoration by providing a better
understanding of the social and political forces that limit scientists' role in
setting restoration policy. In addition, ecological restoration is transforming
American environmentalism and environmental policy, yet is understudied by
social scientists. This research will provide a much-needed examination of the
social and political forces affecting restoration policy and the environment
itself. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will
provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;