* 0425699
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Effect of Elevated Temperature and Fire on Structural Elements Retrofitted by Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer Composites
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* D Reddy, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 24,965.00

0425699&lt;br/&gt;Reddy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research between Dr. V D Reddy and Dr. Khaled Sobhan,
Department of Civil Engineering, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton,
Florida and Dr. Hala M. El-Kady, Department of Civil Engineering, National
Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study the effect of elevated
temperature and fire on structural elements retrofitted by carbon fiber
reinforced polymer composites. Retrofitting structures using new materials such
as Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer Composites (CFRPs) has recently gained
increased trust and confidence by practicing engineers due to their properties.
There is, however, little available information on the performance of these
structures when exposed to fire conditions. Unlike regular steel and concrete
members, the FRP as a material is generally combustible, and may even alter the
fire characteristics. Therefore, correct assessment of the fire resistance of
CFRP retrofitted structures is one of the important safety concerns for design
engineers involved with the structural application of FRP materials. There is a
growing interest to investigate the fire effects on numerous retrofitted
structures using externally bonded CFRP laminates or near surface mounted CFRP
bars. The PIs will conduct experimental and analytical investigations for
evaluating the effects of fire exposure on the properties of structural elements
retrofitted by CFRP as recommended by the American Concrete Institute committee.
Different protection methods for CFRP material such as the application of rich
mortar covers, using near surface mounted CFRP techniques, etc. will be
evaluated. Analytical modeling will be performed, and the results will be
compared with the experimental results. The conclusions will lead to
recommendations and guidelines to designers and practicing engineers for using
CFRP in retrofitting reinforced concrete structures with adequate fire
resistance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impacts: This research is of
mutual interest to both institutions, as the Egyptian researcher has worked
earlier at FAU to investigate the dynamic characteristics of CFRP cables. Both
partners recognized the importance of extending the combined effort to
investigate the effect of fire on structures retrofitted with CFRP. The project
has a strong educational impact because the junior scientists from Egypt and the
graduate students from the U.S. involved with the project will have the
opportunity to learn and participate in the counterpart's research activities
through exchange visits and active collaboration. A concerted effort will be
made to hire undergraduate minority students for assistance in the testing
program. Since infrastructure safety and security is a major consideration in
the post 9/11 era, fire resistance of structural materials will be an important
new topic of study and research for FAU students. In addition, the acquisition
of a fire furnace will enable inclusion of new undergraduate laboratory
experiments for concrete and civil engineering materials courses. This project
is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants
to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;