* 0425088
* Collaborative Research: Fertilization in free-spawners - interaction of gamete properties and hydrodynamic regime
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Philip Yund, University of New England
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2008
* USD 327,976.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how the viscosity and
longevity of sea urchin gametes interact with different flow regimes to
determine where gametes contact and the resulting level of fertilization and
polyspermy. Preliminary data suggest that under a range of field conditions,
fertilization in echinoids is a time-integrated process that occurs largely on
the aboral surface of the female or in flow structures (eddies) immediately
downstream. Consequently, fertilization and polyspermy levels may be much
greater than predicted by earlier experiments and existing models that treat
fertilization as a water column process. Components of these hypotheses will be
tested through a series of laboratory flume experiments that will assay the time
course of gamete advection, the site of fertilization, and levels of
fertilization and polyspermy under a range of turbulence conditions in both uni-
directional and oscillatory flow regimes. Complementary field assays will
explore the flow conditions under which natural spawning
occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The green sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus
droebachiensis) is commercially harvested, and local population densities are
consequently quite low along much of the Maine coast. Increased understanding of
fertilization processes and temporal patterns of sperm availability will help
managers evaluate the likelihood of fertilization failure in low density
populations and the consequences for population dynamics. Two local sea urchin
reserves will be used as study sites, so results will also help managers
evaluate the reproductive potential of small, localized reserves. This project
will also train students (both undergraduate and graduate) and post-
docs.&lt;br/&gt;