* 0425095
* Collaborative Research:  Coastal Form Drag and Eddies
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Parker MacCready, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2009
* USD 396,084.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0425095: Collaborative Research: Coastal Form
Drag and Eddies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;This study will explore the physics of "form drag," and its
importance to the dissipation of tidal energy in coastal regions. Form drag is
that part of the total drag experienced by a fluid flow that arises from
pressure differences across an obstacle, in this case rough topography. Form
drag is typically associated with the generation of large, coherent flow
features, such as tidal eddies and internal waves. The study therefore focuses
in part on the physical mechanisms governing the creation and decay of these
eddies and waves. The importance of this type of drag has come to be seen as a
leading candidate for the dissipation of tidal energy in the deep ocean, whereas
in the coastal ocean the more classical type of drag, bottom boundary layer
friction, is assumed to be of greater importance. However, the PIs' recent work
on tidal flow past the Three Tree Point headland in Puget Sound, WA demonstrated
that form drag was, by at least a factor of 20, the dominant mechanism
extracting energy from the tides in that region of the Sound. They will continue
that line of work, with the overall goal of predicting the net drag (and loss of
energy) a current will experience when flowing over the complex topography of
any coastal region. In addition the PIs seek to understand the dynamics and
dissipation mechanisms of tilted eddies in a stratified fluid, which are key
processes in tidal dissipation. The current study has two main objectives. The
first is to perform further analysis of existing observations, along with new
numerical simulations and lab experiments, to determine the tilted eddy
potential vorticity evolution mechanisms. The second component is a numerical
investigation of form drag with the goal of developing a practical method of (i)
its calculation in complex channel shapes, and (ii) its parameterization in
numerical models. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;This study
will help to improve the predictive skill of coastal numerical circulation
models, by increasing our understanding of the effects of unresolved rough
topography. &lt;br/&gt;Numerical models are important tools used both for
conceptual understanding of the ocean and for predicting outcomes of practical
management decisions. Improvements to model accuracy will have general
scientific and societal benefits through such uses. This study will also
contribute to education through the involvement of two graduate students and
three undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;