* 0425712
* SGER: Characterization of the Magnetic Compass in C57 BL/6 Mice
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* John Phillips, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 04/30/2006
* USD 118,458.00

Characterization of the Magnetic Compass is C57 BL/6
Mice&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;John B. Phillips&lt;br/&gt;Biology
Department&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech&lt;br/&gt;Blacksburg, VA
24061-0406&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary. The proposed research will use
a behavioral approach with laboratory mice to investigate the sensory mechanism
responsible for detection of the Earth's magnetic field. The C57 BL/6 strain of
laboratory mouse will be used to investigate whether a newly-discovered class of
photopigments involved in synchronizing circadian rhythms to the light-dark
cycle (cryptochromes), which have also been implicated in magnetic field
sensing, are an essential component of the mouse's magnetic compass. Experiments
will also be carried out to determine whether low-level, broad band (1-20 MHz)
radio frequency fields disrupt magnetic compass orientation (as shown in recent
studies of birds and amphibians). For a given frequency (7 MHz) shown to affect
magnetic compass orientation of birds, the intensity threshold for an effect on
magnetic compass orientation in the mouse system will be determined. The
potential impact of this work includes: (1) characterization of the mechanism
responsible for magnetic field sensitivity in a small mammal; (2)
characterization of the molecular changes that have occurred during the
evolution of a novel sensory system (the magnetic compass) from a well-
characterized antecedent (the light-dependent circadian clock); (3) development
of biophysical and genetic techniques for manipulating access to magnetic
information that can be used to investigate the role of magnetic stimuli in
other behavioral and neurophysiological responses; (4) development of
collaborative research programs with a number of laboratories in the USA and
abroad with the goals of: a) using discrete radio frequencies to characterize
the biophysical processes underlying the magnetic compass, b) modeling the
changes in a light-sensitive circadian clock that would be necessary to optimize
sensitivity to small, magnetic-field-dependent modulations of light input, and
c) identifying brain regions involved in the processing of magnetic information.
&lt;br/&gt;