* 0425914
* NSEC: Center Of Integrated Nanomechanical Systems (COINS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2012
* Arunava Majumdar, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Keith Roper
* 08/31/2012
* USD 12,528,486.00

The Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center entitled Center of Integrated
Nanomechanical Systems (COINS) is a partnership between UC Berkeley, Caltech,
Stanford and UC Merced. This team will interact closely with partners from
national laboratories (Sandia and Lawrence Berkeley National Labs) and industry
(HP, Nanosys, IBM, GE, Intel, Honeywell, and ChevronTexaco). The NSEC includes
27 investigators from 7 departments.

COINS has a focus on molecular and nanometer level mechanics at the interface of
hard and soft matter, with five thrusts centering on an "element-to-device-to-
system" research strategy: (I) Key Nanomechanical Building Blocks; (II)
Theoretical Simulation of Nanomechanics; (III) Mechanical. Behavior of
Nanostructure Elements; (IV) Instrumentations for Nanomechanical Measurements;
and (V) Nanomechanical System Integration.

Chemical synthesis (Thrust I) plays a significant role in generating key
nanomechanical building blocks including synthetic/biological molecules,
nanotubes and nanowires. Computational schemes at the atomistic and continuum
levels (Thrust II) will be developed to address the scaling effects observed in
the experiments and offer theoretical insight and guidance for the experimental
works in COINS. Research Thrust III probes the intrinsic mechanical behaviors of
the key nanomechanical building blocks produced in Thrust I. Optical tweezers,
AFM/STM and in-situ TEM are used to systematically study the quality factor,
strength, friction, wear, and energy dissipation at nanometer scale. In
addition, novel nanomechanical testing procedures and devices (Thrust IV) will
be designed in order to assess the mechanical properties of the nanomechanical
building blocks. These include AFM systems for RF resonator characterization,
MEMS-based testing platforms for nanostructures, and non-contact nanomechanical
instrumentation. Thrust V will tackle the system integration issues utilizing
nanomechanical units developed and characterized in the other four thrusts.
Here, the bottom-up synthetic techniques will substantially leverage the
conventional top-down approaches for NEMS fabrication. Concepts of
selforganization will be adapted from nature in intriguing biological mechanical
systems. Thrust V will ultimately enable the integration of individual devices
into fully functional nanomechanical systems capable of performing highly
complex tasks. All five thrust areas will be represented at Berkeley; Stanford
University will contribute to Thrusts II, III, and IV, and Cal Tech will
contribute to Thrusts III, IV, and V.

The Center has broader impacts in addressing the real-time study of
nanotechnology as a leading edge system of innovation; the influence of the
intellectual property system; standard-setting; control on emerging
nanotechnological industries; industrial location, both within the United States
and around the world; and the management of risks-both real risks and the
perception of risks created by potentially disruptive technologies.

Educational efforts within COINS will not only encompass the scientific themes
proposed for the Center, but also address the broader need of workforce training
in the emerging world of nanoscale science and technology. COINS includes an
education program involving the general public, high school and college students
to attract them to the diverse educational paths and career opportunities. A
"Capital Science" workshop program will be designed to help state legislators
and their staff make better policy decisions on issues with a significant
scientific and technical dimensions. As a result of the NSF IGERT and the
Designated Emphasis in Nanoscale Science and Engineering, Berkeley is in the
process of developing a number of new graduate and undergraduate courses in
nanoscience. In particular, an introductory course on nanoscience and a course
on nanomechanics will be developed. In addition, COINS will support education
and outreach activities at UC Merced, which will open in August 2005, and is
likely to qualify as a Hispanic-Serving Institution. The Chancellor of UC Merced
has set a goal to enroll half of the student body from the Central San Joaquin
Valley, an economically and educationally underserved area. Fifty-three percent
of the students demonstrating an interest in UC Merced were from households with
incomes of $40,000 or less. We will focus on creating online modules that cover
key concepts in nanoscience. Undergraduates from UC Merced and partner community
colleges will construct the modules, under the supervision of graduate students
and faculty. This experience will also include time in residence in the
laboratories of faculty participants. This will enable their exposure to
university research early on in their academic careers. The courseware developed
in this effort will be used in K-12 outreach efforts that UC Merced faculty will
undertake in the lower Central Valley. In addition, a nanoscale technology
component will be incorporated into the Environmental Engineering program, one
of the opening majors for UC Merced.

