* 0425069
* Collaborative Research: Demonstration of a New Framework for Studying Aerosol Indirect Effects
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Zhanqing Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 08/31/2007
* USD 426,789.00

These investigators will use a new coupled model to study how aerosols influence
the properties of clouds. This study thus addresses one of the major
uncertainties in climate simulations, the "indirect effect of aerosols" that
arising from their influence on the radiative properties of clouds. It is
expected that higher concentrations of particles lead to more cloud droplets and
so to brighter clouds as well as clouds with longer lifetime and reduced
probability of producing precipitation, but it has proven difficult to formulate
a quantitative prediction based on this expectation. In this study, the
investigators will attempt to isolate cases where the influence is expected to
be prominent and will then use their model to separate the influence of aerosols
on those clouds from other factors that also affect the same cloud properties.
The effort requires coupling of several models in order to represent realistic
cloud fields, cloud elements, cloud-droplet sizes, and chemical and aerosol
transport. This coupled model will then be applied to conditions appropriate for
Houston, Texas, where there is significant urban pollution expected to affect
the properties of clouds that form downwind of the
city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected result of this research will be an
assessment of how urban pollution or other sources of aerosols affects cloud
properties like reflectivity, probability of forming precipitation, and
lifetime. The product of this research will apply to Cumulus clouds, and so will
need eventual extension to other cloud types that also influence the global
radiation balance. This information is needed by climate scientists who seek to
predict how the increasing aerosol content of the atmosphere will affect the
radiative balance and the precipitation distribution of the Earth.