* 0425749
* FIBR: A Systems Approach to Study Redox Regulation of Functions of Photosynthetic Organisms
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Ralph Quatrano, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2011
* USD 4,936,705.00

Redox homeostasis is central to the functions of oxygenic photosynthetic
organisms such as cyanobacteria and plants. In this project, a systems approach
will be undertaken to analyze the impact of cellular redox status on the overall
functions of these organisms. The initial focus will be on the cyanobacterium
Synechocystis 6803, with subsequent applications in the understanding of the
biology of Arabidopsis, a vascular plant, and Physcomitrella, a non-vascular
plant. Synechocystis 6803 has a completely sequenced genome and is amenable to
high-throughput genome level manipulations. Although the detailed inventory of
the genes, transcripts and proteins are available for Synechocystis, it is
inadequate to comprehend the organizational hierarchy of the complex functions
of this organism. A multidisciplinary approach will be used to resolve this gap
in fundamental knowledge. The expertise of the project team spans molecular
genetics, biochemistry, proteomics, metabolomics, computational biology and
systems engineering, which includes nonlinear modeling, estimation and
statistical analysis. The experimental research experience of the team spans
model systems in cyanobacteria, moss and flowering plants. One aim is to infer a
gene regulatory network in cyanobacteria that will include identification of the
sensing and signaling pathways. In addition, a gene regulatory network will be
independently generated in Arabidopsis, and the conservation of the genes and
interactions will be evaluated. The network will be validated, the contribution
of the network modules to the overall redox regulation will be studied, and the
model will be extended to Physcomitrella. Such an iterative process is expected
to generate fundamental insights into the organization and function of the redox
control network (RCN) in these organisms. Furthermore, the proposed approach,
viz. first to model an RCN in cyanobacteria and then to extend it to plants,
will highlight the expected conserved nature of these processes during the
evolution of land plants.

Broad Impact: The research activities in this project will be intimately
connected to the training and development of undergraduate, graduate and post-
doctoral students, and visiting scholars, both at Washington University and
Colgate University. In particular, students from both Biology and Systems
Engineering will become well-versed in the use of mathematics and computational
methods to answer challenging questions in biology. Collaborative interactions
with Saitama University will allow scientific interactions and research visits
between USA and Japan. An important goal of this project is an integration of
cutting-edge technologies with learning experiences that will inspire faculty
and student development from small colleges lacking significant research
programs. The students will obtain mentoring, research credit and training. They
will become aware of the fascinating array of activities and career choices in
modern life science research. Hands-on training in genomics, bioinformatics and
systems science research will have far-reaching educational impacts well beyond
the project period. The link for the project web site is
http://www.sysbio.wustl.edu/.