* 0425677
* Advective Controls on Organic Carbon Export and Burial on the Northwest Atlantic Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* John Toole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 02/29/2008
* USD 705,026.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0425677&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
growing body of evidence indicates that oceanic particulate organic matter (OM)
is subject to extensive redistribution by bottom currents so that material at a
given depositional location may be substantially pre-aged and remote from its
site of formation. Processes that impart spatial and temporal decoupling of OM
sources and sinks may be particularly prevalent on continental margins where
particles can be laterally advected down- and along-slope, and ultimately
exported to the ocean interior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution have pooled their expertise in geochemistry,
sedimentology and physical oceanography to document these processes on the N.W.
Atlantic margin. Beginning in Spring 2004, an array of moored physical
oceanographic instrumentation and coordinated shipboard measurements will
establish in the dynamics of the Deep Western Boundary Current and its
interactions with the Gulf Stream in unprecedented detail. For this project, the
researchers will augment the moorings with transmissometers and collect
sediments, sediment trap samples and suspended particles for detailed
geochemical, isotopic and mineralogical analyses, permitting them to constrain
the nature, provenance, age and fluxes of particles and organic matter
transported via lateral advection and to help establish its ultimate
depositional fate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broader impact will be a better
ability to identify other areas that may be similarly affected, and hence to
establish its global significance. If these processes are widespread, this
finding would have important implications for our understanding of the global
carbon cycle since the hypothesized transport mechanism of benthic "storms" is
climatically controlled. An ability to recognize diagnostic sediment and OM
accumulation patterns could also be identified in the sedimentary record and
unambiguously interpreted in the context of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;