* 0425061
* Geochemical Transformations in Subterranean Estuaries: Reactions, Rates, and Fluxes to the Coastal Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ann Mulligan, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2007
* USD 698,618.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0425061&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will study e the
geochemical transformations and fluxes of several key elements as they pass
through the subterranean estuary of a coastal aquifer. Recent studies indicate
that submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) may contribute significant fluxes of
dissolved chemical species to the oceans. However, the magnitude of such fluxes
is strongly influenced by biogeochemical processes occurring in the subterranean
estuary, defined as the mixing zone between groundwater and seawater in a
coastal aquifer. Evidence is mounting that the subterranean estuary plays an
important role in geochemical cycling and it is therefore critical that we
understand these processes so that the role of SGD in oceanic elemental budgets
can be determined. In order to make this determination, we must first understand
the major geochemical reactions operating on such elements on the scale of
subterranean estuaries. The main objective of this study is to identify the
processes that control the cycling of several elements having contrasting
geochemical behavior: (1) the redox sensitive elements Fe, Mn, and U, and (2)
Sr, Ba, and Ra, which are sensitive to both redox conditions (e.g. sorption to
Mn oxides) and changes in ionic strength driven by salt transport through the
subterranean estuary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of a unique
collaborative effort between a geochemist and a hydrogeologist, who will achieve
project objectives through a combination of field studies, controlled laboratory
experiments, and hydrogeologic flow modeling. More specifically, the proposed
project will probe deeper into redox and salinity-driven biogeochemical
reactions in a subterranean estuary through seasonal groundwater sampling
coupled with surface water surveys. In support of the field work, the research
team will develop a simulation model of density-dependent flow at the site.
Finally, a series of laboratory column experiments will be conducted to follow
the release and/or removal of Sr, Ba, Ra, and U from aquifer sediments under
different temperature, salinity, and redox conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: As analogues to surface estuaries,
subterranean estuaries have high potential for significant geochemical
transformations and so elucidating these mechanisms may have significant
influence on understanding coastal groundwater geochemistry in other areas.
While the overall importance of SGD on the global cycle of certain elements is
uncertain at present, there is little doubt that SGD is important at the local
scale both within the United States and throughout the world. Nutrient-rich
(phosphate, nitrate, ammonium) groundwater, entering into coastal waters and
bays, is not uncommon and represents an environmentally important component of
SGD. Hence, improved understanding of the geochemical regime in subterranean
estuaries has important water-quality implications for coastal aquifers and
allows insights into fundamental biogeochemical reactions at a major
freshwater/seawater interface. This project has an important educational
component and seeks funding for a graduate student and an undergraduate who has
worked on this project since high school outreach programs (lectures, posters)
associated with the Waquoit Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve. &lt;br/&gt;