* 0425241
* Predation Mortality and Behavior of Fish Larvae: Seasonal Variation and Critical Survival Skills
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Lee Fuiman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2009
* USD 480,000.00

This project will examine the relationships between larval fish behavior,
growth, and mortality, as related to population success. It concentrates on
variability in behavior of larval cohorts during the spawning season due to
variation in parental contributions and the possible trade-off between growth
rate and behavior at the cohort level. It also seeks to identify critical
survival skills from among a set of suspected survival skills and how critical
survival skills change with habitat. Specific objectives are to: (1) determine
how survival skills and growth rates of cohorts produced by individual adults
vary during the season and among adults, (2) identify critical survival skills,
(3) compare critical survival skills for presettlement and postsettlement
larvae, and (4) confirm the importance of critical survival skills in reducing
predation mortality. These objectives will be met through laboratory experiments
on reared and wild-caught larvae that will measure 11 suspected survival skills.
Characteristics-of-survivors analyses on wild-caught larvae will reveal the
critical survival skills in each habitat, which will be confirmed by field-based
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits. Variation in recruitment
levels is one of the most important, yet poorly understood problems in
population dynamics of marine organisms, including many economically important
fishes. This study will examine: (1) a source of variation in recruitment that
has received little or no formal investigation and (2) the linkages between
larval fish behavior and recruitment and the changes in these linkages in
different habitats. The research will contribute to the ongoing effort to
understand and predict variations in animal abundance and the mechanisms of
mortality, by providing a better understanding of the link between behavior and
mortality, including the mechanisms of individual survival as well as
variability in mortality among cohorts. All of this is essential for management
plans for commercially harvested species and those in need of protection from
human impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The results will have
application beyond natural populations. Fishery management plans for exploited
fish populations often include enhancement of natural populations through
stocking of hatchery-produced fish. This study could allow hatchery managers to
allocate effort and funds more efficiently so as to maximize the effectiveness
of stocking protocols. It could also provide direction to future research
efforts to improve the efficacy of stocking as a management tool. This project
will provide professional training to one postdoctoral associate and two
graduate students in the form of laboratory and field research experiences, data
analysis, and report preparation. These participants will also attend scientific
meetings to disseminate projects results, to learn from other researchers, and
to expand their network of professional contacts. Undergraduate student
volunteers will be incorporated as well, giving them their initial research
experience. All participants will interact daily with an interdisciplinary group
of researchers representing biogeochemistry, ecosystem dynamics, and fish
physiology and ecology. The project represents a new professional linkage
between Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD), a resource management
agency, and the research and education missions of the university. The
collaborator is an Hispanic American who received his PhD very recently. He will
provide critical assistance at no cost to the project and, in return, will be
exposed to a new array of experimental protocols and analyses. Results of the
project will be disseminated to the scientific community through publications in
primary journals, conference presentations, and newsletter articles, and to the
public through the institution's public lecture series, which typically draws
150-200 people weekly, and a public display in the visitor center, which will
reach thousands of people each year. Collaboration with TPWD will ensure that
the relevant results are evaluated by the stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;