* 0425983
*  Evolution of Coenzyme M Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* David Graham, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

Each year microorganisms produce more than 400 million tons of methane gas,
which is both a potential source of energy and a greenhouse gas. Methanogens use
a complex biochemical pathway that requires eight dedicated enzymes and seven
coenzymes to reduce carbon dioxide (or other single carbon compounds) to produce
methane gas. The terminal methyl carrying coenzyme in this pathway is coenzyme M
(CoM; 2-mercaptoethanesulfonic acid). This project examines how a biosynthetic
pathway evolved to produce CoM and how genes recruited from this pathway
function in some non-methanogenic microbes. Because the enzymes for CoM
biosynthesis are dissimilar to previously characterized proteins, tertiary
structural models are required to identify their provenance. Genes encoding
phosphosulfolactate phosphatase and sulfopyruvate decarboxylase from the
hydrothermal vent-dwelling methanogen, Methanococcus jannaschii, will be
heterologously expressed in Escherichia coli to produce soluble fusion proteins.
Protein crystals will be formed from chromatographically purified enzyme for
X-ray diffraction and structural analysis. Structural models of
phosphosulfolactate phosphatase will establish the relationship between this
Mg(II)-dependent acid phosphatase and well-characterized analogous phosphatases.
A model of sulfopyruvate decarboxylase will test that enzyme's proposed
relationship to pyruvate decarboxylase. Models of both enzymes will be used to
infer their mechanisms of sulfonate substrate binding and to guide the design of
highly specific inhibitors of CoM biosynthesis. Although the spore-forming soil
bacterium Bacillus subtilis produces neither methane nor CoM, it has homologs of
the first three genes required for CoM biosynthesis. Heterologously expressed
proteins will be tested as catalysts of sulfolactate biosynthesis during
sporulation. Combined with chromatographic analysis of sulfolactate production
by mutants of B. subtilis missing these genes, these results will link the
function of three previously unidentified genes to sulfolactate biosynthesis.
Together, results from studies of the methanogen and bacterial proteins will
clarify the evolutionary origins of CoM
biosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Understanding the
methanogenic process is important to control anthropogenic methane formation
associated with agriculture and waste processing. CoM is essential for methane
production from all known carbon substrates and is evolutionarily fundamental to
methanogenesis. Therefore inhibitors of CoM biosynthesis will be specific tools
to control methanogenesis. Knowledge of the structure and function of CoM
biosynthetic enzymes will establish the evolutionary and mechanistic
relationship of those proteins to previously characterized enzymes, revealing
the catalytic potential of these protein families. This research will provide
hands-on molecular biology, enzymology, and molecular evolution training for
undergraduate and graduate students. The relevant academic programs in
biochemistry, microbiology, cell and molecular biology at UT-Austin attract a
geographically diverse group of students with a high level of participation of
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;