* 0425173
* International: Internet Use in the Americas- A Research Workshop, January 2005; Mexico City, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Kenneth Flamm, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 36,200.00

0425173&lt;br/&gt;Flamm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico workshop,
organized by Prof. Kenneth Flamm, at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public
Affairs, University of Texas at Austin, and Prof. Judith Mariscal of the Centro
de Investigacion y Docencias Economicas (CIDE), Mexico, where it will be held,
intends to bring together academic researchers at the leading edge of research
on Internet use in different countries of the Americas, with national
policymakers from those countries. The workshop will explore the roles of
socioeconomic factors and national policies in explaining varying degrees of
Internet penetration in different countries of the Western Hemisphere, reasons
for varied patterns of use across countries, and differential impacts on
national economies. Policy issues to be addressed include the role of national
policy in explaining differences in rates of diffusion and national patterns of
Internet use, innovative applications of the Internet toward economic and social
development objectives, and differing national approaches to policies affecting
the development and use of the Internet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
format will include panels with policymakers from national governments
discussing the rationale, objectives, and performance of national policy
initiatives, with academics as discussants, interspersed with panels of
researchers presenting the results of their research, with national policymakers
as discussants. A published, edited conference volume is an expected outcome of
the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;