* 0425770
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement: Kinetics of Wind-Blown Sand: An Investigation of Unsteadiness in Saltation Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Douglas Sherman, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 10,064.00

Turbulence is important to sediment transport, whether in air or water. Linkages
between turbulent events and pulses in aeolian sediment transport have been
difficult to establish, however, especially in non-laboratory environments. One
deficiency with field-based studies is that none measured wind velocity and
saltation (sediment "jumping," the primary mode of sand transport by wind) with
precisely and tightly controlled time and space synchronization. Turbulence has
large temporal and spatial gradients, so it seems illogical to expect strong
correlations between wind speed and transport rates with instrument separations
at meter scale. The goal of this doctoral dissertation research project is to
establish and quantify the spatial and temporal scales of unsteadiness in wind
and saltation fields; to identify the nature of turbulence causing transport
pulsing; to characterize the spatial and temporal dimensions of wind and
transport unsteadiness; and to design, build, and deploy a new sensor for the
detection of saltating sand grains. Arrays of instruments will be deployed to
simultaneously measure the horizontal and vertical dimensions of sediment
transport and wind speed. Saltation sensors and anemometers will be placed 2 cm
apart to ensure tightly controlled space synchronization. Linkages between
turbulent wind events and pulses in sediment transport will be established using
variable interval time averaging (VITA), enhanced VITA, and autocorrelation
methods. Traps will be deployed to obtain samples of transporting sand to
determine their grain size characteristics and moisture content. The research
will be conducted in an Australian coastal dune system, but the results will be
applicable to sediment transport processes occurring in wind and water at a
broad range of settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a
fundamental understanding of the response of sand to fluctuating (turbulent)
wind conditions. This understanding is a necessary precursor to understanding
the deficiencies of wind-blown sediment transport rate models. This research may
have implications to coastal managers because they are interested in sediment
transport rates. Coastal dunes built by blowing sand also provide a defense
against flooding; a characteristic that is especially important in a time where
the average global sea level is rising. An increased understanding of aeolian
processes and the resultant landforms will improve capabilities to manage or
preserve coastal environments. It is essential that fundamental relationships
between wind and sand are understood to improve the ability to predict sediment
transport rates. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;