* 0425887
* Crustal Dynamics Research in Western North America: Data Acquisition for the WInSAR Consortium
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* David Sandwell, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 97,900.00

0425887&lt;br/&gt;Jordan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports continued
group purchases of synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery from the European
Space Agency (ESA) by the Western North America Interferometric SAR (WinSAR)
consortium. The U.S. currently has no civilian SAR satellite capability.
&lt;br/&gt;Since FY 2000, EAR has supported the WinSAR consortium to allow for
group purchase of SAR data and to make those data available to WinSAR consortium
members through an archival system. Currently there are 25 WinSAR member
organizations. WinSAR now maintains over 2000 SAR scenes through archives at
Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO), Caltech, and Stanford. This support
will increase the WinSAR holdings. Individual SAR scenes from the ESA ERS-1/2
and Envisat satellites will be purchased either: 1) directly from ESA - requires
that a science proposal submitted to ESA be accepted; or 2) through ESA
sanctioned re-sellers of the data (e.g, Eurimage or Spotimage). SAR imagery
available through the WinSAR archive has been used for interferometric analysis
to provide for spatially continuous images of crustal deformation patterns that
are a natural complement to discrete GPS measurements. InSAR imagery has been
used by WinSAR consortium member scientists to gain new insight into strain
accumulation and release surrounding active faults in western North America
(e.g., the San Andreas transform fault system) and for focused studies of co-
seismic and post-seismic deformation patterns surrounding the epicenters of
large earthquakes (e.g., 1999 Hector Mine Mw 7.2 and 1992 Landers Mw 7.3). InSAR
imagery has also provided insight into the dynamics of volcanic systems and land
surface subsidence related to petroleum and ground water extraction.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;