* 0425626
* NSEC: Center for Affordable Nanoengineering of Polymer Biomedical Devices (CANPBD)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Albert Conlisk, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Cooperative Agreement
* Keith Roper
* 08/31/2011
* USD 13,183,960.00

The Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center entitled Center for Affordable
Nanoengineering of Polymer Biomedical Devices (CANBD) is a partnership between
the U. of Akron, Boston University, UC Berkeley, Johns Hopkins, Florida A&M, and
Purdue. The NSEC includes 38 investigators from 9 departments.

The Center seeks to develop polymer-based low-cost nanoengineering technology
that can be used to produce nanofluidic devices and multifunctional polymer-
nanoparticle-biomolecule nanostructures for the next generation medical
diagnostic and therapeutic applications. The research plan is comprised of three
thrust areas. The Nanomanufacturing Thrust Area combines 'top-down' fabrication
and 'bottom-up' molecular self-assembly to produce well-defined passive and
active nanostructures. In the Transport Phenomena Thrust Area, the research will
achieve design capabilities at the nanoscale by combining nanofluidic design,
transport phenomena at the nanoscale, and multiphase transport structures with
multiscale modeling and macroscalar property assessment. Biocompatibility issues
will be addressed in the Biocompatibility Thrust Area in parallel with the
development of new nanofluidic designs and devices.

The near-term goal of the three closely linked research thrust areas is to
design and fabricate polymer-based, 3D nanofluidic circuits for manipulating the
shape, orientation and transport behavior of individual biomolecules in well-
defined nanoscale flow fields (5-100 nm). Test bed examples include a simple,
handheld protein separation/diagnostic device; a nanoneedle cell patch for low-
invasive delivery of genes and macromolecular medicines into cell walls; and
biomolecular nanopumps as synthetic ion channels. The ultimate goal is to design
and assemble a nanofactory based on the integration of nanofluidic circuits,
synthetic chemistry and biological complexation.

Center collaborators include at least 20 companies in Ohio and the U.S.,
Battelle, the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, the National Cancer Institute, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, Wright Patterson Air Force Labs, and researchers in
Asia, Australia and Europe. The Center also plans to coordinate closely with
NSECs at the University of California at Los Angeles and the University of
Illinois-Urbana (nanomanufacturing), the NSF STC at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill (environmentally responsible solvents), and the NSF ERCs
at the University of Washington (biomaterials and biocompatibility) and the
Georgia Institute of Technology (3D tissue models) because of complementary
research agendas.

The education and outreach vision of the Center is to integrate the latest
research developments into a practical student curriculum that imparts
multidisciplinary skills and global awareness to both graduate and undergraduate
students. The key education elements include a series of new courses to
introduce nanoengineering of biomedical devices and related topics; an
interdisciplinary curriculum offering an undergraduate minor and a graduate
certificate; internships and visits to industry and national laboratories in the
U.S. and abroad; and web-based dissemination. The recruitment and retention of
minorities and women will be emphasized through close collaboration with
minority institutes such as FAMU/FSU. Undergraduate students will participate in
research via senior honors theses and targeted REU support. Outreach activities
include web-based science modules for K-12 students nationwide; workshops and
short courses for high school science teachers and industrial researchers; and
on-site research projects and workshops for middle school and high school
students supervised by graduate students.

