* 0425826
* NSEC: The Center for High-rate Nanomanufacturing (CHN)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Joey Mead, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Barbara H. Kenny
* 12/31/2009
* USD 12,697,800.00

The Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center entitled New England
Nanomanufacturing Center for Enabling Tools is a partnership between
Northeastern University, the University of Massachusetts Lowell, the University
of New Hampshire, and Michigan State University. The NSEC unites 34
investigators from 9 departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSEC is likely to
impact solutions to three critical and fundamental technical problems in
nanomanufacturing:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control of the assembly of 3D
heterogeneous systems, including the alignment, registration, and
interconnection at three dimensions and with multiple
functionalities,&lt;br/&gt;Processing of nanoscale structures in a high-
rate/high-volume manner, without compromising the beneficial nanoscale
properties,&lt;br/&gt;Testing the long-term reliability of nano components, and
detect, remove, or prevent defects and contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel
tools and processes will enable high-rate/high-volume bottom-up, precise,
parallel assembly of nanoelements (such as carbon nanotubes, nanorods, and
proteins) and polymer nanostructures. This Center will contribute a fundamental
understanding of the interfacial behavior and forces required to assemble,
detach, and transfer nanoelements, required for guided self-assembly at high
rates and over large areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center is expected to have
broader impacts by bridging the gap between scientific research and the creation
of commercial products by established and emerging industries, such as
electronic, medical, and automotive. Long-standing ties with industry will also
facilitate technology transfer. The Center builds on an already existing network
of partnerships among industry, universities, and K-12 teachers and students to
deliver the much-needed education in nanomanufacturing, including its
environmental, economic, and societal implications, to the current and emerging
workforce. The collaboration of a private and two public universities from two
states, all within a one hour commute, will lead to a new center model, with
extensive interaction and education for students, faculty, and outreach
partners. The proposed partnership between NENCET and the Museum of Science
(Boston) will foster in the general public the understanding that is required
for the acceptance and growth of nanomanufacturing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Center will study the societal implications of nanotechnology, including
conducting environmental assessments of the impact of nanomanufacturing during
process development. In addition, the Center will evaluate the economic
viability in light of environmental and public health findings, and the ethical
and regulatory policy issues related to developmental
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;