* 0425149
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Sentencing reforms as anti-discrimination policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Bruce Western, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 6,925.00

Determinate sentencing polices were adopted, in part, in response to critiques
that linked discretion to discrimination and advocated for determinate
'colorblind' policies to replace the indeterminate sentences of the time; as
such, these policies are anti-discrimination measures. This dissertation will
examine the strengths and limitations of colorblind anti-discrimination policies
by analyzing the relationships between the adoption of determinate sentencing
policies and changes and continuities in the size and composition of the
incarcerated population. Research questions exploring this relationship will be
answered by analyzing primary and secondary datasets containing information on
punishment outcomes, sentencing, and a variety of state level variables and
characteristics of individual offenders. The analysis will use data from all 50
states, will examine the period from 1980 to 2000, and will consist of three
research designs. First, pooled cross-sectional time-series analysis will be
used to measure the effects of these reforms on incarceration rates, admission
rates, and time-served, as well as racial, ethnic, and gender disparity in these
measures. Next, an individual level longitudinal design will be employed to
access the effects of sentencing reforms on changes in time-served and the
impact of extra-legal characteristics on time-served. These first two analyses
will be limited to the six states for which I have collected extensive data on
sentencing reform legislation. Finally, an individual level longitudinal design
will be used to access the effects of truth in sentencing, parole abolition, and
the adoption of sentencing guidelines on time-served and the effect of extra-
legal characteristics on time-served. While group-membership based disparities
in punishment outcomes are a social reality with a long history in the US, the
prison boom of the last quarter century has increased the impact of these
disparities. As such, it is increasingly urgent that we understand the effects
of policies adopted as remedies The broader impacts of this research include the
following: Because the proposed analyses address the ways in which definitions
of discrimination shape policy and thus direct policy outcomes, the findings of
this study will help policymakers design more informed and effective anti-
discrimination policies. Although researchers and policy makers often assume a
causal relationship between sentencing reforms and changes and continuities in
the demographics of imprisonment, we currently have no comprehensive empirical
assessment of the effects of these policies. This study will provide an
empirical test for assumptions under which many criminal justice policy makers
currently operate.