* 0425892
* Mantle Heterogeneity and Melting and Magma Transport Beneath the Ultraslow-Spreading Gakkel Ridge: Evidence from Volatiles and Trace Elements
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Peter Michael, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2010
* USD 186,460.00

Intellectual Merit: Because its spreading rate varies progressively along its
length and it has no major offsets or obliquity, the ultraslow-spreading Gakkel
Ridge is an ideal laboratory for testing hypotheses that relate spreading rate
to mantle melting and the formation of crust. The Arctic Mid-Ocean Ridge
Expedition (AMORE 2001), the first comprehensive cruise to sample Gakkel Ridge,
succeeded well beyond expectations, and produced the first high-resolution,
well-navigated bathymetric chart of Gakkel Ridge. The Principal Investigators
recovered basement samples from more than 200 sites (only 60 were planned) and
discovered abundant hydrothermal activity. The new bathymetric map and samples
show a striking boundary where the ridge changes from being volcanically robust
west of 3degreesE to virtually magmatic (peridotitic) to the east. Volcanic
activity resumes even farther to the east, suggesting that spreading rate
changes are not responsible for the variations in volcanism. &lt;br/&gt; Basalt
geochemistry has revealed a remarkable geochemical boundary that coincides
closely with the ridge's morphologic boundary. West of 3degreesE, basalts have
high H2O /Cesium (Ce) and Barium (Ba)/ Niobium (Nb) compared to other ridges,
and Indian Ocean isotopic signatures. To the east, H2O /Ce and Ba/Nb are typical
of other ridges, and isotopic ratios resemble Pacific basalts. To test
hypotheses about the origin of this geochemical province, the Principal
Investigator will define its geochemistry in terms of key elements and volatiles
that can be compared to geochemical reservoirs. He will also define its
geographic extent in relation to the tectonic history of this region and look
for evidence that the geochemical signal arises from a discrete component in the
mantle by examining melt inclusions and crystal zoning of barium in basalts and
peridotites. Geochemical data for Gakkel Ridge is compared with other mid-ocean
ridges, especially Southwest Indian Ridge (SWIR), to determine the extent to
which high Ba and H2O can be attributed to ultraslow spreading rate as opposed
to Arctic tectonic history. The second part of the study addresses the structure
of the uppermost lithosphere and crust. He will examine the pathways by which
magmas flow eventually to build the crust of the Arctic Ocean by determining CO2
abundances in basalt glasses, their vesicles and in melt inclusions. These data
will be used to describe the gas exsolution to test hypotheses about the depths
from which magmas ascend, and the paths that they have taken to reach parts of
the ridge axis that are distant from volcanic centers. In the third aspect of
the study, he will examine the extent to which the enrichment of H2O has
influenced the depth and extent of melting on Gakkel Ridge. The H2O data
generated for basalts will be integrated with major element data. Models will be
constructed that take into account the influence of H2O. In particular, the
Principal Investigator will test hypotheses that H2O has played a major role in
creating the large variations in volcanic intensity along Gakkel Ridge, and that
ridges respond more acutely to such changes at ultraslow spreading rates.
Throughout all aspects of the study, he will integrate constraints from
geophysics and make comparisons with other ridges, especially SWIR.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the Proposed study: Undergraduate students will
play an important role in analyzing the data. At least two students will be
involved in this project, and will derive undergraduate thesis projects from it.
A large part of the project will constitute the Masters thesis project for a
graduate student. The Principal Investigator will continue giving illustrated
presentations about Gakkel Ridge to primary and secondary school classes, scout
groups, and civic groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;