* 0425916
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Test of Fundamental Symmetries, Theory and Precision Spectroscopy With Complex Atoms
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Dmitry Budker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/2010
* USD 42,040.00

0425916&lt;br/&gt;Dmitry Bunker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: The U.S.-India
Cooperative Research: Test of Fundamental Symmetries, Theory and Precision
Spectroscopy with Complex Atoms is concerned with topics at the cutting edge of
fundamental atomic physics. Professor Dmitry Bunker's group at the University of
California, Berkeley and Indian theorists at the Indian Institute of
Astrophysics (Dr. Bhanu Das), Bangalore and the Physical Research Laboratory
(Dr. Angom Singh), Ahmedabad will carry out the experiments, which promise to
yield new and important results in discrete symmetry violations and precision
spectroscopy of complex atoms. The combined results of experiment and theory for
parity nonconservation in atomic ytterbium have the potential to test the
Standard Model of particle physics and shed light on parity nonconserving
nuclear forces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The Bangalore and Ahmedabad groups
in India and Professor Budkar's group at Berkeley have a unique combination of
expertise and experience in various aspects of modern atomic physics,
particularly ones related to tests of fundamental symmetries in atoms. Direct
collaboration of Berkeley experimentalists with Indian theorists will be of
great benefit to both groups. A further important aspect of this project is the
direct involvement of graduate and undergraduate students at all three
institutions. In addition, to student benefit through participation in the
experiments, this award provides support for two Berkeley students to conduct
research at the participating foreign institutions in India.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;