* 0425023
* Doctoral Dissertation: A Social Psychological Analysis of Resistance to Equal Opportunity Laws
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Cecilia Ridgeway, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 7,500.00

This dissertation will develop and test a social psychological theory of how
laws aimed at reducing inequality are sometimes undermined by the effect they
have on people's beliefs about the existing status hierarchy. Equal opportunity
(EO) laws apply to behaviors that are customary and widespread, and thus send
the message that "normal" people need to change. I identify three important
sources of resistance that laws encounter when they work toward destabilizing
"normal" patterns of social interaction. The first is the accepted status order
among social groups in society and the latter two are perceived threats to
existing privileges and norms of social interaction that the law provokes. While
this dissertation will pose, at a theoretical level, a larger question about the
common sources of resistance to EO laws, it will test just one logical
application of that argument to the case of sexual harassment law. I will use
experimental research methods to assess the effect of sexual harassment policies
on men's and women's beliefs about gender status and difference. An experiment
will be conducted in which males and females complete a computer-based task with
a partner of the opposite sex. Three conditions will compare the gender beliefs
of participants who are read the university's sexual harassment policy before
beginning the task to 1) those who are told that men have higher average scores
on the task than women and to 2) those who complete the task with no
manipulation. Participants' explicit and implicit beliefs about gender
difference will be measured and then compared between conditions to show whether
sexual harassment policy interventions activate unequal gender beliefs in a way
that differs from other task-oriented situations in which gender is made
salient. The results of this study have broader impacts for both theory and
policy. Findings will show the effect of a certain type of sexual harassment
policy implementation. If the results suggest that policies disseminated as a
bureaucratic obligation, or as a means of avoiding legal threat, activate
beliefs that run counter to the policy's aims, this information should help
organizations implement policies more effectively. More generally, specifying
the nature of resistance to laws is important for understanding the conditions
under which people mobilize the law, obey the law, and protect themselves from
legal threat, as well as when a law can spur ideological change. The results
should also provide suggestive evidence about how to examine resistance to other
EO policies such as racial harassment, affirmative action, and sexual
orientation protections.