* 0425780
* NSEC for Molecular Function at the Nano/Bio Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Dawn Bonnell, University of Pennsylvania
* Cooperative Agreement
* David A. Brant
* 02/28/2010
* USD 11,403,500.00

The University of Pennsylvania's Nano Science and Engineering Center on
Molecular Function at the Nano/Bio Interface will exploit Penn's strengths in
design of molecular functionality, quantifying behavior of individual molecules,
and interactions at organic/inorganic interfaces to perform research that
establishes the foundation for understanding molecular function in the context
of interfacing with physical systems. The NSEC unites 18 investigators from
three schools (the School of Engineering and Applied Science, the School of
Medicine, and the School of Arts and Sciences). Two multidisciplinary research
teams are focused on aspects of the fundamental issues outlined above.
Additionally, two cross cutting initiatives develop ideas integral to the
research themes and make explicit links between them. The two fundamental themes
are: optoelectronic function in synthetic biomolecules and mechanical motion of
molecules from physiological systems. The two cross-cutting initiatives are on
Molecular Nano Property Probes and Ethics in Nanotechnology.

The impact of these efforts will be felt in biophysics, bioengineering,
chemistry, electrical and mechanical engineering and materials science.
Discoveries from this effort will provide a sound basis for the development of
new technologies for nanoscale device manufacture, drug delivery and integrated
chemical sensors, enabling several near term practical applications as well
provide the basis for future practical implementation. Furthermore, these issues
are also at the core of understanding many complex biological/physiological
processes. The broad impact of the NSEC will occur on several levels. From a
technical perspective it will articulate the critical issues that define the
field at the interface of nanotechnology and biology at the molecular level. As
such it will focus the attention of many disciplines to an area that is at the
core of future of the field. The NSEC will impact public education, social
discourse, workforce development and diversity, both locally and nationally. The
implementation of educational activities in an urban environment will target a
highly diverse audience at the early stage when exposure to exciting science can
influence interests and future career choices, while developing models that can
be implemented across the country. This NSEC will take a leadership position in
the social discussion of ethics in nanoscience and technology.

