* 0425153
* Marsh-Dominated Ocean Margins as a Source of CO2 to the Atmosphere and Open Oceans: A Field Study in the U.S. Southeastern Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Wei-Jun Cai, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2009
* USD 453,573.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0425153&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies in
several large continental shelves located in mid-to-high latitude areas indicate
significant air-to-sea CO2 transfer. Presumably the absorbed CO2 is transferred
into the open ocean. If this conclusion is globally applicable, such a
continental shelf CO2 sink would be very important in the study of global carbon
cycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at the University of
Georgia will test this hypothesis by quantifying air-sea CO2 fluxes in a low-to-
mid latitude ocean margin, the U.S. Southeastern Continental Shelf (also known
as the South Atlantic Bight, SAB), where preliminary evidence indicates an
opposite (sea-to-air) CO2 flux. The researchers hypothesize that the SAB is a
source of CO2 to the atmosphere and to the open ocean and that this CO2-release
is driven by the respiration of organic carbon (OC) exported from intertidal
salt marshes. Shelf-wide distributions of surface pCO2 and water column total
dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) and alkalinity (Alk) will be determined with
four cross-shelf transects and one alongshore transect covering the entire SAB
and through five quarterly cruises. The seaward export fluxes of DIC will be
estimated based on an area-integrated excess DIC inventory and the shelf water
residence time determined by freshwater balance. This DIC flux to the open ocean
is expected to be much higher than the riverine flux in this area. The
simultaneous quantification of air-sea CO2 flux and DIC export to the open
ocean, which has rarely been attempted before, will significantly improve our
understanding of the role that ocean margins play in the global ocean carbon
cycle. In addition to the determination of overall seaward DIC flux, the team
will also seek a better understanding of the relative importance of DIC fluxes
carried by cross-shelf and alongshore flows by taking advantage of a recently
published SAB 3-dimensional climatology model and other ongoing numerical model
activities in this region. In a similar approach, seaward fluxes of Alk and
dissolved organic carbon will also be estimated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The results of this project are expected to enhance our understanding
and ability to predict the fate of anthropogenic CO2 in the atmosphere. This
project will also promote teaching, training and learning in a number of
important ways that involve graduate, undergraduate and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;