* 0425821
* QSB: Unraveling Palmitate-induced Apoptosis and Oleate-conferred Cytoprotection by Systems Analysis and RNA Interference
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Christina Chan, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 09/30/2008
* USD 511,168.00

0425821&lt;br/&gt;Chan&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to test a hypothesis that
plasma levels of fatty acids palmitate and oleate can have cytotoxic or
cytoprotective effects in hepatocytes, respectively, and that by interfering
with their respective biosynthetic pathways, one may modulate cell death or
protection. In lipid metabolism, it has been shown that saturated fatty acids
(e.g., palmitate) initiate apoptosis while unsaturated fatty acids (e.g.,
oleate) do not. In both cases, oxidation is the primary means of breakdown for
these molecules. The presence of both saturated and unsaturated fatty acids
appears to confer protection from apoptosis. The signaling cascades that result
from metabolism of fatty acids have not, to date, been fully elucidated due to
network complexity and interconnectivity that could not be deconvoluted by
traditional biochemical methods. This research will leverage new high throughput
capacity for information generation to help elucidate the mechanism by which the
cellular fate is decided upon exposure to the palmitate and/or oleate, and
thereby improve our understanding of how a cell chooses among the multiple
possible pathways available to the cell. Two types of mathematical approaches
will be used to analyze the data, feature extraction and Bayesian network
analysis.