* 0425209
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Curvature-Migration Relations and The Planform Dynamics of Meandering Rivers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Bruce Rhoads, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 10,972.00

The planform dynamics of meandering rivers have been of fundamental interest to
fluvial geomorphologists and engineers because of the intriguing complexity of
these dynamics, the role of planform change in floodplain development and
landscape evolution, and the economic and social consequences of lateral channel
migration. Theoretical approaches to understanding the dynamics of meandering
rivers have attempted to relate rates of lateral migration to channel curvature
and channel geometry. Although models based on these approaches generally yield
fairly realistic predictions of bend asymmetry and patterns of bend translation,
the underlying equations have not been rigorously evaluated empirically.
Moreover, such models are incapable of reproducing complex forms of bend
development, such as double-heading or compound looping. The overall goal of
this doctoral dissertation research project is to advance the understanding of
the spatial structure of lateral migration of meandering rivers by exploring in
detail the relationship between spatially extended patterns of channel curvature
and local rates of lateral migration. To identify patterns of channel curvature
and rates of lateral migration for a set of study reaches along meandering
rivers, geographical information system-based (GIS-based) analysis of historical
aerial photography will be conducted. The project will focus specifically on the
development of a methodology for mathematically characterizing planform
curvature of natural meandering rivers as a continuous, rather than discrete
function. Curvature values will then be related to measured rates of lateral
migration to derive empirical curvature-migration functions. Estimated and
theoretical formulations will be compared to evaluate the validity of the
theoretical functions and the empirical functions will be used to refine the
predictive capabilities of theoretical models of meander migration.

The results of this doctoral dissertation research will contribute to
understanding and predicting the spatial structure of planform dynamics of
meandering rivers, a fundamental research problem in fluvial geomorphology. From
a scientific perspective, the results will evaluate the validity of underlying
assumptions of theoretical models of planform migration and improve the capacity
to accurately predict planform change along meandering rivers. Improved
predictive capability is important from a practical perspective because lateral
movement of meandering rivers can obliterate property and agricultural land,
damage structures, reduce water quality, diminish aquatic habitat, and degrade
aesthetic quality. This doctoral dissertation award will also provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.