* 0425878
* FIBR: Neuromechanical Systems Biology
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Robert Full, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 4,990,726.00

The last half-century has witnessed unprecedented discoveries from molecular
motors to brain images during movement. Despite such extraordinary advances, how
the multitudes of structures at different scales interact to generate an
animals' hallmark behavior - locomotion - remains elusive. While locomotion can
be deconstructed into a simple cascade - from brain to muscles to work on the
external world - such a unidirectional framework has failed to incorporate
essential dynamic properties created by an interaction of networks among and
within levels. The grand challenge is to elucidate the complex network of
dynamical systems that allows animal locomotion. This research will uncover
fundamental control architectures by physically perturbing running insects,
challenging them with virtual terrains, degrading and rewriting the neural codes
while measuring motion, forces and neuromuscular signals
(http://polypedal.berkeley.edu/NSB). The project capitalizes on a dynamical
systems approach in concert with our remarkable hexapedal, legged robot as a
controlled experiment, manipulating parameters more easily than in animals, but
subjecting the physical model to real environments. The project's stated
challenge cannot be met within the domain of Biology alone, even if biologists
take a multi-level, multidimensional approach. The challenge demands a
multidisciplinary effort to match data across mathematical models, numerical
simulations, physical models, as well as biological experiments. The project's
team incorporates experts across the full spectrum of these disciplines. Broader
Impacts: To the broader community, the project will deliver computational tools
applicable to dynamical models of gene regulation, metabolism, and cardiology,
as well as neuroscience and locomotion. Findings will stimulate a new field of
neuromechanical systems biology, inspire novel controllers in engineering, lead
to development of prostheses and artificial muscles and further the design of
the first search and rescue robot that has performance truly comparable to
animals. Most importantly, the project will produce a new type of young
scientist who can lead this emerging multidisciplinary frontier. Discoveries
will be shared through publication, symposia, a web-based flagship course, and
educational robotics contests.