* 0425869
* Collaborative Research:     The Cold Late Oligocene Arctic Ocean and its Unique Biota
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Louie Marincovich, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2010
* USD 194,072.00

This is a collaborative proposal from Principal Investigators at the California
Academy of Sciences and Florida Atlantic University. This study is an integrated
assessment of mollusks, microfossils, and oxygen isotopes which will be used to
document the presently unknown late Oligocene marine paleoclimate of the Arctic
Ocean. Fossils will first be collected from the Nuwok Member of the
Sagavanirktok Formation, in northeastern Alaska, the only upper Oligocene marine
sediments known to crop out in the Arctic Ocean region. After fieldwork, the
Principal Investigators will undertake taxonomic and oxygen isotopic analyses to
generate information that will form the basis for their conclusions. Based on a
pilot study of oxygen isotopes derived from mollusk shells, the first hypothesis
to be tested is that the Arctic Ocean was almost as cold in the late Oligocene
as it is today, that it was colder than contemporaneous mid- and low-latitude
seas, but that it was not as cold as Antarctica. If true, this would be the
first evidence of hemispheric climatic asymmetry during the Earth's Oligocene
transition from a Greenhouse to an Icehouse world. Pilot d18O values from Nuwok
mollusks imply greater seasonality than occurs in the adjacent Arctic Ocean
today. A second hypothesis is that Nuwok late Oligocene mollusks and ostracodes
are the earliest manifestation of the modern Arctic Ocean biota. The globally
unique presence of what appear to be entirely extant genera in the late
Oligocene Nuwok biota, and the equally unique absence of Eocene holdover
mollusks in such an Oligocene fauna, make a compelling case for this idea. The
Nuwok biota provides a unique opportunity to place the Arctic within the context
of global patterns of Cenozoic marine evolution and diversification during a
time of rapid global climate change. A third hypothesis is that late Oligocene
Nuwok mollusks and ostracodes evolved very little, based on their uncanny
resemblance to extant Arctic Ocean species. This will be addressed in
comparative taxonomic analysis of fossil and modern arctic and North Atlantic
faunas. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity: This study will be the
first to document the presently unknown late Oligocene paleoclimate and seasonal
temperature fluctuations of the Arctic Ocean, based on oxygen isotope analysis
of mollusk shells. Knowledge of Oligocene global cooling has dramatically
increased in recent decades, mainly due to oxygen isotope studies of
microfossils in deep-sea cores, but no such work has been done on Arctic Ocean
marine faunas. This proposed study, using coordinated isotopic and
paleontological analyses, will be the first to place the Arctic Ocean's late
Oligocene paleoclimate into a global context, and allow factoring this
paleoclimate into global climate models during the transition from a Greenhouse
to an Icehouse world. The broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity:
The climate history of the Arctic Ocean is one of the last unsolved epics of
Earth history. Documenting its late Oligocene (26-27 million years ago)
paleoclimate, including seasonal extremes, during initiation of the modern
Icehouse world will uniquely add to overall understanding of global climate
history. This study will provide the first insights from the Arctic Ocean realm
during the dramatic transition from a Greenhouse to an Ice House world, and will
have implications for many paleoclimate-related fields of marine and continental
geoscience. These new data from one of the world's most sensitive, but least
known, environments will be useful in considering the scale, rate, and potential
effects of global climate change.



