* 0425317
* Collaborative Research - Metazoan Life at Extreme Sulfide Concentrations:  The ecology and evolution of Dorvilleidea at methane seeps
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Lisa Levin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2009
* USD 328,871.00

Millimolar H2S concentrations and the near absence of oxygen make methane seep
sediments one of the most toxic environments on earth, yet metazoan assemblages
persist in such settings. In microbial-mat covered seeps on the upper slopes of
the Pacific Northwest, these assemblages are comprised nearly exclusively of
dorvilleid polychaetes. At seeps located within the oxygen minimum zone off the
Oregon and California margins the PIs have identified up to 17 co-occurring
dorvilleid species, including 10 in a single genus. The PIs hypothesize that
this annelid group, through exceptional tolerance to low oxygen and high sulfide
concentrations, has found a suite of niches which it alone has been able to
exploit, and as a result has experienced evolutionary release in the absence of
predators and competitors. The PIs propose to use this dorvilleid assemblage as
a model system with which to investigate how metazoan communities evolve in and
adapt to extreme sulfide conditions. By mapping ecological features onto a
phylogenetic framework, the PIs will identify correlations among ecology,
physiology, life history and evolutionary history that help elucidate the
mechanisms of speciation under extreme stress. The PIs anticipate that
dorvilleid polychaetes will ultimately provide a superb metazoan model for
integrated extremophile research. A partnership facilitated by California COSEE
(Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence) will allow the PIs to pursue a
rigorous education and outreach effort. Emerging findings will be incorporated
as part of a current NSF-funded Sea Floor Science project (ISE #0229063) at the
Ocean Institute.