* 0425053
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Paleoventilation of the Southwest Pacific and Southern Ocean in the Holocene and late Quaternary
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Elisabeth Sikes, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 10/31/2007
* USD 188,714.00

Under this award the PIs will construct a profile of 14C ages for several time
slices in the glaciation and deglaciation in order to better constrain past deep
water age of the southwest Pacific and Southern Oceans. To do this, the PIs will
perform a sediment coring expedition to the subtropical and subantarctic waters
to the north and east New Zealand. The cruise will recover multiple cores at
each of six locations that are known to contain widespread tephra layers from
the from the Taupo volcanic zone on the North Island of New Zealand. These ashes
have been well dated on land and provide stratigraphic tie points and a means to
establish the relative ages of marine and terrestrial (atmospheric) carbon
reservoirs in the past. Previous work on preexisting cores with these ashes has
demonstrated that surface and deep water masses in the last glaciation and
deglaciation could be centuries older than previously imagined and controversial
because surface water reservoir ages in subtropical locations of more than 1900
yrs are considered unlikely even in the glaciation. Continued work to resolve
these issues has been hampered because cores from subtropical locations have
either insufficient material and/or depth coverage for continued work on 14C and
have problematic ash identification. This project will collect giant piston
cores to provide sufficient sediment to obtain enough foraminifera from a narrow
sediment band surrounding the ashes to properly identify and date the tephras in
order to conduct 14C AMS radiocarbon dating foraminifera associated with ash
layers in the marine sediment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;