* 0425382
* Expansion &amp; Collapse of the Cordilleran Ice Sheet during the Quaternary
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Ingrid Hendy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Howard J. Spero
* 03/31/2008
* USD 275,533.00

Under this award the PIs will reconstruct the glacial history of the southern
limb of the Cordilleran Ice sheet using glacial-marine sediments off the coast
of Vancouver Island, British Columbia. Glacial advances and retreats associated
with corresponding paleoclimatic events are poorly documented in the Pacific
Northwest prior to 15 Ka. The jumbo piston core MD02-2496 will be used to
interpret the history of growth and decay of the Cordilleran Ice Sheet over the
last 500 Ka (at ODP Site 888). As the North Pacific greatly affects the climate
(including the jet stream) downwind across North America, data obtained from
this study should advance ability to model climate, to interpret glacial
geomorphology and calculate continental denudation rates. Knowledge of when the
British Columbian shelf was ice covered and when iceberg discharge occurred will
test the feasibility of the migration route of early humans attempting to occupy
the American continent via the North Pacific coastal route. The PI will examine
particle size and sediment fabric within a jumbo piston core (MD02-2496) and at
ODP Site 888 to determine ice sheet growth and decay in the region. At the same
time high quality 14C dates and local sea surface temperatures will be generated
based on planktonic foraminiferal d18O. Benthic d18O values will be employed to
resolve changes in global ice volume. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;