* 0425880
* NSEC: Templated Synthesis and Assembly at the Nanoscale
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Clark Miller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 12/31/2009
* USD 13,338,900.00

The Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center on Templated Synthesis and Assembly
at the Nanoscale at the University of Wisconsin-Madison addresses the self-
assembly of complex materials and building blocks at the nanoscale, including
development of a unique program to explore their societal implications. The
Center includes 27 faculty participants from 10 departments. The research
mission of the proposed NSEC is organized into four interdisciplinary research
thrusts.

The thrust on the Directed Self-Assembly and Registration of Nanoscale Chemical
Architectures addresses the question of assembling nano-structured objects into
functional nanoscale systems. It explores the self-assembly of block copolymers
on nanopatterned substrates, the convergent assembly of pre-fabricated nanoscale
elements on nanoscale patterns, and the biologically-directed assembly of
nanowires and nanorods for development of innovative biosensors. Another thrust
is entitled Templated Chemical Synthesis of Sequence Specific Heteropolymeric
Nanostructures. It explores guided processes of chemical synthesis and assembly
on the on the scale of atomic dimensions. The thrust on Driven Nano-Fluidic Self
Assembly of Colloids and Macromolecules explores the use of non-equilibrium
processes, such as the use of flow and other fields, for nanoscale assembly and
manipulation of nanoparticles and macromolecules, including DNA, under severe
confinement. Finally, the thrust on the Research in the Societal Implications of
Template Synthesis and Assembly at the Nanoscale uses a partnership with the
Holtz Center for Science and Technology Studies and the La Follette School of
Public Affairs at the University of Wisconsin to develop an integrated,
multidisciplinary understanding of nanoscale science and engineering as it moves
out of the laboratory and into society and to build a public dialog about its
societal, ethical, legal, and policy implications. In addition to these thrusts,
the center uses seed funds to support promising individuals or groups of
individuals in emerging areas of nanoscale science and engineering and its
societal implications.

The education and outreach program of the Center builds on the UW's experience
in scientific education and benefit from infrastructure provided by the
Institute for Chemical Education, the Journal of Chemical Education, and the
National Science Digital Library. An additional partnership with the UW's
Business School will assess the commercial potential and possible pathways to
commercialization of technologies under development in the NSEC.

The NSEC activities include the establishment of a Graduate Fellowship Program
to recruit the most talented young scientists and engineers to the
interdisciplinary field of nanoscale science and engineering and to foster a
community of diversity. Links to international laboratories on three continents
allow students to participate in substantive collaborative co-supervised
research projects. The shared experimental facilities of the proposed NSEC
include nanopatterning and surface sensitive characterization of materials, and
leverage existing state-of-the-art instrumentation and infrastructure at the NSF
sponsored Synchrotron Radiation Center (SRC), the NSF sponsored MRSEC, and the
Center for NanoTechnology (CNTech). Supporting infrastructure will also be
provided by the Wisconsin Center for Applied Microelectronics (WCAM) and the UW
Materials Science Center (MSC).

