* 0425625
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Temporal and Spatial Patterns of Holocene Peatland Carbon Dynamics, West Siberian Lowland, Russia
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Glen MacDonald, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 01/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Peatland ecosystems are significant components in the global carbon cycle, as
they have sequestered from the atmosphere the largest single terrestrial carbon
stock as organic soils over the course of the Holocene (the last 11,000 years).
Peatland ecosystems also are one of the most important contemporary sources of
atmospheric methane. Research from a range of high-latitude locations using a
variety of methods has revealed that northern peatlands are highly sensitive to
climatic variation, to the extent that they can switch interannually from net
atmospheric carbon sinks to net carbon sources. The future role that these
massive carbon stocks will play in a climate increasingly perturbed by
anthropogenic greenhouse gases remains uncertain, however. Long-term carbon
exchange behavior of these systems requires many years of observation, and basic
understanding of peatland carbon cycling response to climate over decadal or
longer periods remains poor. This doctoral dissertation research project will
apply paleoecological tools to investigate Siberian peatland ecosystem response
to past climatic changes. The West Siberian Lowland contains the world's highest
density of peat carbon, yet is poorly studied relative to Fennoscandian,
European, and North American peat deposits. This research will use information
in identifiable plant remains, soil carbon characteristics, and 14-C AMS age
determinations of peat from a wide collection of cores to investigate
spatiotemporal patterns of carbon dynamics in West Siberian peatlands.
Specifically, the project will (1) determine the spatiotemporal nature of major
ecological changes in peatland history important to Holocene peatland-atmosphere
methane exchange, (2) determine how Holocene peat accumulation rates have been
affected by these changes, and (3) assess recent patterns of C accumulation in
the WSL towards increased understanding of their sensitivity to modern warming.

Terrestrial Northern Hemisphere ecosystems have been identified as globally
critical carbon sinks for excess anthropogenic carbon dioxide, however, the
year-to-year strength of this important sink is variable. The greatest
terrestrial concentration of sequestered carbon is stored in peats within the
continental interiors of North America and Eurasia. Study of the West Siberian
Lowland is crucial to the assessment of the role of northern high-latitude
environments in the global carbon cycle owing to the relative paucity of
historical carbon accumulation studies in the region, the massive carbon stocks
present here, and its location at the focus of recent 1-degree Celsius to
2-degrees Celsius per decade Arctic warming. Previous NSF-funded Russian-
American collaborative research has resulted in the highest quality peat carbon
inventory to date as well as an unprecedented collection of hard-to-get peat
records from the remote West Siberian Lowland. These initial studies have
identified a large spatial gap in record coverage that is coincident with the
maximum latitudinal storage of peat carbon in the south of the region. This
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award will allow a final field
campaign to Siberia, and completion of laboratory analyses. A complete picture
of West Siberian Lowland carbon accumulation history can only be conclusively
developed when this gap is filled. This award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

