* 0425039
* Sustainable Technology, The Poltics of Design & Localism
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Langdon Winner, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 12/31/2007
* USD 159,469.00

The emergence of "green technology" poses new choices in the politics of design,
yet the choices have not yet been fully analyzed and articulated as political.
As the business world moves to embrace environmentally oriented technology
innovation, this project explores the potential for green technology design that
is guided less by the values of profits for large corporations and more by the
values of.economic localism, defined as organizations oriented toward poverty
reduction, public and local ownership, renewal of social bonds in civil society,
and the development of networks of national and transnational grassroots
enterprises. The PI and co-PI will study systematic relationships among the
technological design of production processes, organizational change and
development, and government regulations and support programs (or barriers) to
projects that are developing at the interface of ecological sustainability and
economic localism. The outcome of the project will be a coauthored book by the
PIs, completion of a book that is underway, course development, a summary
article for broad dissemination, and a web site with the interviews. Based on
about 40 site visits (100 interviews total) and documentary analysis, the book
and research project will have two sections: examples of sustainable, localist
projects in the fields of agriculture, reuse, and energy, and the politics of
labeling that have emerged in support of, or detrimental to, sustainable
localism. The intellectual contribution of the project will move technology
studies forward by examining the interface of ecological and social
sustainability in the design of literature advocating solutions to the various
environmental crises by technological innovation in corporate production
processes. The PIs emphasize what kinds of technological innovations are in
order, and how the more localist versions can be developed and sustained. The
broader impact of the project will be to analyze models of locally oriented
sustainable development that provide an alternative to the corporate versions of
green capitalism that are now emerging. The proposal will study low-income
participation in urban gardening and community-supported agriculture farms, the
development of building deconstruction linked to nonprofit reuse and resale
centers that employ low-income residents and engage in neighborhood development,
and the growth of energy conservation and renewable energy production in
municipally owned utilities. It will also examine the politics of product
labeling projects that are attempting to build awareness of these alternatives,
and we will contrast the sustainable, localist informational projects to those
that are oriented only toward environmental considerations. The analysis will be
made available not only to students of STS and public policy, but to
policymakers and activists engaged in local sustainability efforts.