* 0425851
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Collective Rape: A Cross-National Study of Political Sexual Violence
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* J. Craig Jenkins, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 6,830.00

The systematic and widespread sexual assault of civilians by state agents or
political actors is a matter of international importance but has received little
scholarly attention. In this project, I will conduct a cross-national time-
series analysis of incidents of collective rape, defined as a pattern of sexual
violence perpetrated on civilians by agents of a state, political group and/or
politicized ethnic group. The project focuses two primary research questions: 1)
How do factors such as gender inequality, world culture, military strength,
economic development, state strength, ethnic cleavages and political violence
affect the onset of collective rape? 2) How do these same factors affect the
intensity of collective rape? In order to address these questions, I will
construct an original dataset from media-based data of collective rape incidents
occurring between 1980 and 2003. The dataset will include two quantitative
measures of collective rape, onset and intensity (i.e., the estimated number of
victims), as well as several qualitative measures of the victim, perpetrator and
community characteristics. The data will derive from three major news sources:
The New York Times, Facts on File World News Digest and Reuters Business Briefs,
and will be acquired through the work of two student assistants. These
undergraduate assistants will be trained to electronically search The New York
Times and Facts on File World News Digest, identify relevant incidents in the
years 1980-2003, and code the data in several variables bearing on these
collective assaults. Data from Reuters Business Briefs will be procured with the
assistance of Virtual Research Associates, a private consulting firm that has
access to the Reuters archive (1983-2003). I will then test the hypothesized
relationships described above using pooled cross-sectional time-series analysis
and discrete-time event history analysis. The resulting knowledge will
contribute significantly to the sociological studies of gender, violence, peace
and conflict and international relations. In addition, this project will have
four broader impacts: First, it will produce the first cross-national attempt to
estimate incidence and intensity of collective rape on a worldwide basis in a
manner suitable for comparative analysis. Following the completion of the
dissertation, this dataset will be made available to other scientists. We have
extensive cross-national data on many other related topics (e.g. internal war,
political violence, geno/politicide) but not on collective rape. The
availability of this data will encourage others to use comparative methods to
study this issue. Second, the knowledge gained through this project will be
disseminated throughout the scientific community through articles and
professional conferences, such as the 2004 American Sociological Association
Annual Meeting. Third, the project will train two undergraduate students who
will be involved in coding the news stories and constructing the data. This type
of "beyond the classroom" experience is critical to providing an understanding
of what is involved in social science research. Finally, the research has real-
world implications. Policy makers and the general public are interested in the
processes that create collective rape and related human rights abuses. This
project will evaluate various popular theories about why these horrific
incidents occur and provide insights for the relevant public concerned about
prevention and mitigation.