* 0425440
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Participatory Effectiveness of Grassroots Rural Movements: A Comparative Analysis of Brazil, Chile and Ecuador
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Michael Coppedge, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

This study examines the impact of rural grassroots movements on agrarian policy
and legal rights expansion in Brazil, Chile and Ecuador in the 1993-2004 period.
This work generates insights into when and how it is advantageous for Latin
American social movements to enter party and interest group politics rather than
continuing direct action. It focuses on the dilemma faced by movement leaders
who must advance group demands by interacting with political elites without
making compromises that would alienate theirs own grassroots base of support.
The dynamic interplay between social movements and political actors is
formalized into a model in which leaders use the reliability of their grassroots
support to gauge the risks of cooperating with parties, politicians and state
agencies. The analysis innovates in bridging a link between social movement
resources, opportunities and strategies in the context of newly democratized
nations. A comparison of six movements with similar demands but varying degrees
of success in the resolution of conflicts illuminates the ways in which public
participation by underrepresented groups in civil society affects the quality,
accountability and inclusiveness of these democracies. The research methodology
will involve semi-structured interviews with MST (Landless Rural Movement)
leaders in Brazil, indigenous Mapuche leaders in Chile, and CONAIE
(Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador) leaders in Ecuador that
will reveal leadership characteristics, organizational structure, cohesiveness
of the movement, and the quality and nature of leaders' interaction with
members, the wider local population, and political representatives at the local
and national level. Interviews with supporters and opponents of the movement in
congress as well as key government officials will be also be conducted to assess
the political opportunities and obstacles the movement faces at the political
level. This material will be supplemented by archival and newspaper analysis.
The broader impacts of this study include the following. The findings of this
study will be of interest to scholars, students, and policymakers interested in
understanding of how underrepresented groups in civil society fare in exerting
influence in the policymaking arena. The results of this research wil be
disseminated among local, national and international organizations working with
grassroots groups and educational institutions exploring civil society issues
through the presentations in multidisciplinary conferences and lectures in the
U.S. and abroad.