* 0425040
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Women's Choice of Contraceptives:  Who Decides?
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Stephen Matthews, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 06/30/2005
* USD 7,500.00

This study will explore contraceptive choice among women who reside in Kathmandu
valley, Nepal. Kathmandu valley is well-served by health, family planning and
social services providing women access to the full range of contraceptive
alternatives. Given the availability of temporary contraception methods, it is
somewhat surprising that sterilization and injectables are widely used. Our
research centers on whether the government's campaign to reduce fertility in
rural areas has created a preference for sterilization and injectables even in
urban areas where in reality a wider range of choices are accessible and
available or are issues of women's status and patriarchal family structure more
important in determining contraceptive choice? In this study we propose to
examine how women's preference to use a specific method is influenced by socio-
economic and demographic factors as well as women's empowerment. Similarly, we
will examine indirect influences of the government and non-government sector
regarding policies regarding family planning and media messages on family
planning. Finally, we will examine the broader implications of women's choice of
method for their reproductive health and how this choice reflects knowledge of
reproductive health. Both quantitative and qualitative methods will be used for
the study. The data for the quantitative study will come from the 2001 Nepal
Demographic and Health Survey. Qualitative methods employed in the field include
focus group discussions with approximately 150 married women and men in three
urban districts of the Kathmandu Valley. Key-informant interviews of non-
government (NGO) workers, family planning workers and policy makers, and content
analysis of government/NGO policies and documents will also be other methods
employed for the qualitative component. The broader impacts of this study
include the following. Researchers, students, and policymakers interested in
understanding how women decide to use a specific method will find this research
important for improving reproductive health. Increasing contraceptive use in
developing countries, particularly in urban areas, makes valuable research on
how and why women choose specific methods. Results from this research could lead
to policy recommendations that would aid in the development of family planning
and reproductive health policies in Nepal as well as in other national settings.