* 0425562
* Biogeochemical Cycling and Fate of Mercury and Methylmercury in the Arctic Alaskan Lakes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* William Fitzgerald, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,664.00

Prior work has identified two general areas, (a) monomethylmercury (MMHg)
production and (b) photochemical sinks of mercury and MMHg, in which the cycling
of mercury in arctic lakes appears exceptional and highly influential in
controlling the fate of natural and anthropogenic inputs. Funds are provided to
investigate the production of MMHg within arctic lakes. Well-constrained mass
balances have confirmed the hypothesis that production of MMHg in sediments by
bacteria is the dominant source to these lakes. These systems may be quite
different, however, from those of temperate lakes and marine waters where the
activity of sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) is the dominant biogeochemical
process resulting in methylation of mercury. The arctic lakes are characterized
by very low productivity, low sulfate, moderate to high dissolved organic matter
(DOM), and high levels of iron. This biogeochemical setting could challenge
conventional understanding of the role of SRB in controlling MMHg production and
sediment concentrations. Field and laboratory investigations that examine the
relationship between MMHg production and biogeochemical properties of sediments
(abundance and diversity of SRB, mercury speciation in pore waters, temperature,
and sulfate, iron, and organic contents) collected from lakes with varying
physicochemical characteristics will be conducted. Given the abundance of Fe in
the sediments, iron-reducing bacteria will be of particular interest as they may
affect mercury methylation/demethylation processes. The second component of this
research will be a mechanistic investigation of the substantial photochemical
sinks for MMHg and mercury in arctic lakes. Photoreduction of mercury, leading
to supersaturation and emission of a volatile form of mercury, represents a sink
of ca. 20% of total mercury inputs to these lakes, and as a result lowers the
amount of mercury available for methylation. Even more dramatic is the
substantial photodegradation of MMHg, which can consume nearly all of the MMHg
released from sediments, reducing or preventing its bioaccumulation. These
processes are large enough to control concentrations and speciation of mercury
in these lakes, and thereby control bioavailability of this toxic metal. The
study of the mechanisms of mercury photochemistry will be expanded with a
combination of laboratory and field studies, which will focus on the importance
of DOM and Fe in facilitating mercury and MMHg photoreactions. This work is
particularly important because of the bioaccumulation of MMHg in the organisms
harvested by the subsistence hunter communities of the Arctic.