* 0425404
* Collaborative Research: Development of SF5CF3 for Ocean Tracer Experiments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* William Smethie, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 308,295.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0425197

Tracer release experiments using sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) in the ocean have
proven to be a powerful tool in the study of ocean mixing. An alternative to SF6
is desired because releases of SF6 can interfere with its very promising use as
a transient tracer invading the ocean from the atmosphere. Only a small fraction
of the ocean has been tainted with SF6 thus far, but in prospect is a tracer
release experiment in the Southern Ocean, a region for which SF6 would be very
useful as a transient tracer.

In this study, researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and
Columbia University will evaluate a promising new tracer, trifluoromethyl sulfur
pentafluoride (SF5CF3). An important advantage of SF5CF3 is that its background
concentration in the ocean is virtually undetectable, while that of SF6 limits
the useful duration of prospective tracer release experiments. The researchers
have already found that the minimum detectable level of SF5CF3 is as low as that
of SF6. A concern about the new tracer is that it may interact with particles in
the water strongly enough to not follow the water as well as SF6. Preliminary
laboratory measurements of the affinity of SF6 and of SF5CF3 to 1-octanol, to
calcium carbonate particles, and to silica particles have shown that transport
on particles in the ocean should not be detectable for either compound. On the
other hand, SF6 itself seems to have fallen 3 to 10 meters per year in the ocean
experiments. Hence they plan to refine and to extend their laboratory
measurements. They will also conduct a field test by releasing both tracers
together in Santa Monica Basin and following the distributions of the tracers
for two years to determine whether SF5CF3 is a viable substitute for SF6 for
tracer release experiments.

Broader Impacts: Both the study of mixing in the ocean with tracer release
experiments and the study of water mass ages using transient tracers are
important aspects of the overall study of the ocean circulation and of the
ability of the ocean to take up the large amounts of carbon dioxide that are
being released to the environment by the burning of fossil fuels. Adding a new
tracer to the oceanographic toolkit would contribute significantly to
technology, as was demonstrated to be the case when bomb tracers were added in
the 1960s, when helium-3 and CFCs were added in the 1970s, and when SF6 was
added in the 1980s. SF6 has also been used successfully in transport and
dispersion studies in estuaries. The availability of a second tracer would add
versatility and power to such experiments. Finally, as an educational component,
the researchers will hire an undergraduate student to work each summer to
participate in the cruises in Santa Monica Basin and in the laboratory work.