* 0425778
* Direct Observational and Fine-Scale Foraging Ecology by Diving Bearded Seals in Norway: A Feasibility Study
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Christopher Marshall, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2008
* USD 92,556.00

This project is a one-year feasibility study that will use animal-borne
integrated digital cameras and time-depth recorders (TDRs) to correlate direct
observations of underwater behavior of bearded seals (Erignathus barbatus) with
profiles. The focus will be on their foraging ecology and the affect foraging
has on the benthic community through bioturbation. Dive profiles obtained by
TDRs will be correlated with behavior and assigned ecological roles, such as
foraging, traveling, and resting. Other than walruses, bearded seals are the
only other northern pinniped to feed predominantly upon benthic prey. Their
foraging ecology has been largely overlooked, despite their large population.
The objectives of the research are to: 1) characterize the foraging tactics of
hunting bearded seals and the effect that prey type has on prey capture tactics
and sediment bioturbation, and 2) characterize the diving behavior of free-
ranging bearded seals and assign ecological roles to dive profiles. Animal-borne
integrated digital cameras and TDRs will record foraging locations, habitat,
search mode, pursuit behavior, prey capture tactics, and prey handling time.
Deployed cameras will also record prey type, the frequency, and durations of
these foraging behaviors for each prey type consumed, and the degree of
bioturbation to the seafloor. Individual seals will be used to record the
behavior of other seals, in addition to their own behavior, by simultaneously
tagging lactating females and their pups. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The
research will advance our knowledge of fine-scale foraging ecology in marine
carnivores, and the ecological role of diving behavior by marine vertebrates.
Although bearded seals are an important benthic forager, and they outnumber
walruses, few foraging data for bearded seals are available. The impact their
foraging has on the benthic community is unknown. Benthic foraging by bearded
seals likely results in substantial bioturbation, and may be an important
process for recycling carbon, nitrogen, and other nutrients trapped in the
sediment. Because polar bears prey intensely upon Erignathus, bearded seals are
an important trophic link between the characteristically short food webs of
marine and terrestrial arctic ecosystems. Understanding the biology of ice seals
is also important in assessing the impact of global warming on arctic
ecosystems. This study will influence agencies &amp; non-government
organizations as to how to best protect Arctic marine ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research will integrate research and education
at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels and encourage
underrepresented minorities to enter science. The Principal Investigator will
work with local science teachers to use the data collected to enhance the marine
science curriculum at a local high school with a predominantly minority student
population. Research infrastructure will be enhanced by international
collaborations between Texan and Norwegian researchers. Presentations in the
popular literature, media, scientific meetings, and publications in scientific
journals, by both the Principal Investigator and Norwegian collaborators, will
disseminate data to the scientific community. In addition, Polaria,Troms,
Norway, an international educational center that presents the findings of polar
research to the public, will display data from the research. Polaria is visited
by ~125,000 people/year and has a strong educational impact. The data will also
be disseminated to indigenous peoples of the Arctic in Barrow, AK, and others
who rely upon bearded seals, and other ice seals, for subsistance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;