* 0425719
* How Organisms Adapt to New Enzymes and Pathways
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* George Kenyon, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,250,000.00

Bacteria and other organisms live in a constantly changing, often hostile
environment. To survive, they must adapt by developing new enzymes and new
metabolic processes. These new activities might, for example, enable them to
destroy a new antibiotic or detoxify an environmental pollutant, or might enable
them to use that same pollutant as a source of nutrients, to boldly grow where
no microbe has grown before. The new activities may also suddenly cause a
harmless microbe to become a deadly human pathogen. Darwin anticipated all of
the major mechanisms for the generation of phenotypic diversity in living
organisms except one: the horizontal transfer of genetic information from one
organism to other, resulting in the immediate acquisition of a new enzyme or, in
some cases, an entire new metabolic pathway. With the advent of complete genome
sequences, it is now clear that at least a quarter, sometimes more, of the genes
in a bacterium have probably been acquired from outside in this way. This
natural process also mimics what scientists do in the lab when they try to
engineer microbes to produce useful substances or degrade environmental toxins.
Yet little is known about how organisms respond to the introduction of a new
enzyme or set of enzymes and how they subsequently modify both the new genes and
their own to generate a new species with new properties. The overall aim of this
project is to develop a model system for studying the origin, control and
integration of new enzymes and new metabolic pathways, and to utilize this
system to discover the factors that govern their evolution; to develop new ways
of modeling them effectively; and to understand how their presence influences -
and is influenced by - the core pathways already present in the organism. To
address this fundamental biological question, a team with expertise in microbial
genetics and physiology, mechanistic enzymology, molecular biology, structural
biology, and systems biology, including bioinformatics, has been assembled, and
a model system has been chosen. The project will transfer the enzymes of the
mandelamide pathway from the soil bacterium Pseudomonas putida into E. coli, and
follow their evolution as the organism adapts to use them to grow on lactamide
as a carbon source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how a cell responds to
new enzymes and pathways is of great importance to biology because this process
is a key part of the fundamental machinery of evolution at the cellular level.
The project will yield new basic information about how organisms adapt and
evolve. It will also provide guidelines for the more effective engineering of
new activities into bacteria for industrial and environmental uses. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project means that people with a wide range of
backgrounds can contribute and can benefit from the results. The project also
provides opportunities for secondary school teachers and students from minority
and non-Ph.D.-granting institutions to explore a wide range of basic questions
and to learn a broad range of techniques. We intend to make the results widely
available in a variety of forms that can be used from secondary education
through to advanced applied research projects. &lt;br/&gt;