* 0425361
* Collaborative Research: Oceanographic and Topographic Influences on  Dispersal of Hydrothermal Vent Species
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2010
* Andreas Thurnherr, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 345,713.00

When hydrothermal vent communities were first discovered 25 years ago,
biologists immediately recognized the key role of dispersal in the dynamics and
persistence of the populations. Despite substantial progress on this topic over
the past 10 years, some very important questions remain unanswered about the
mechanisms of dispersal and their effects on population dynamics, population
genetics and community structure. Investigators have hypothesized that larval
dispersal is driven largely by physical transport processes. The primary
objectives of this project are to investigate how larval behaviors interact with
topographically-influenced flows on mid-ocean ridges, and determine how these
interactions affect dispersal trajectories, maximal dispersal distances, and
relative probabilities of supply to natal versus remote vents. Three specific
ecological questions have been identified: 1. What are the influences of
advection and eddy diffusion on the maximal dispersal distance of vent species
with given larval life spans?; 2. What are the effects of ontogenetic changes in
larval behavior (i.e., vertical positioning) on dispersal distances?; and 3. How
are the probabilities that larvae will be lost from the ridge system influenced
by topography and flow? Might the axial summit trough inhibit off-axis transport
of larvae, and serve as a conduit between habitable vent sites? This project
will also address several issues of interest to the physical oceanography
community, including: 1. What are the mean and temporally varying flows in the
vicinity of a mid-ocean ridge crest, and what is their spatial structure and
coherence?; 2. What is the magnitude of the diapycnal diffusivity near the ridge
crest?; 3. How rapid is lateral dispersion, and how effective is lateral
homogenization by eddy diffusion near the ridge crest? &lt;br/&gt; These
dispersal questions cannot be answered without an integrated set of physical and
biological approaches. A diverse team of observationalists and modelers has been
assembled to investigate relevant aspects of ridge-associated oceanography and
biology, and to combine the data into a quantitative model of dispersal. The
approach includes tracer release in the field, current meter measurements, a
hydrodynamic- transport model, measurements of larval positions and stages in
the field, and a coupled biological-physical model. The region near 9 50.N on
the East Pacific Rise (EPR) has been chosen for the study, a site that has been
the focus of much interdisciplinary research in the past and has been selected
as an Integrated Study Site by the NSF Ridge 2000 program. &lt;br/&gt;Broad
impact of this project will be achieved through several different activities.
The approaches and results from the project will be incorporated into graduate
courses, and into presentations given to local K-12 classes. Two graduate
students will be supported, and undergraduates will be integrated through the
WHOI Summer Student Fellowship program and the NSF REU program. The research
will be linked with web-based outreach efforts including Dive and Discover
(www.divediscover.whoi.edu) and Women Exploring the Oceans
(http://wexo.whoi.edu/). The long-term benefits of the proposed activity to
society will be achieved by contributing to a general understanding of
retention, dispersal, and connectivity of marine populations, and a better
understanding of seafloor topographic effects on flows and mixing. Vent systems
are subject to increasing use by researchers, tourists and industry (e.g.,
extracting polymetallic minerals, and sampling fauna for natural products
discovery and pharmaceutical applications). Project results will inform efforts
to develop plans for sustainable use of vent ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;