* 0425602
* The Ecology of Prochlorococcus:  Toward a Model System for Microbial Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Daniele Veneziano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,200,000.00

The power of a model system for advancing our understanding of the natural world
has been proven repeatedly in diverse sub-disciplines of science. This approach
is equally valuable for the study of marine microbial ecology, either through
the sustained study of a particular ecosystem, or through the study of a
particular organism at all scales of organization from the genome to the
ecosystem level. In this project the investigators will do the latter through a
diverse set of laboratory and field studies designed to advance the
understanding of Prochlorococcus, the numerically dominant phytoplankter in the
world oceans. The objective is to understand what regulates the distribution and
abundance of this important primary producer. Prochlorococcus has a number of
features that make it a useful model organism for understanding the forces that
shape marine microbial systems, and for generating hypotheses that will advance
the field of Microbial Oceanography. It is the smallest and most abundant
photosynthetic cell in the oceans, it can be isolated into culture, and it can
be easily enumerated and studied in situ. Furthermore, it has the smallest
genome of any known photosynthetic cell -- the minimal phototroph to date.
Prochlorococcus is really a collection of "ecotypes", i.e., closely related but
physiologically distinct populations that co-exist with different distributions
along the light, temperature, nutrient, and predator (including viruses)
gradients that shape their habitat. These distributions are determined by the
relative fitness of the cells, i.e. the balance of growth rates and death rates
along these gradients. The broad challenge is to understand the forces that have
shaped this microdiversity over evolutionary time, and that guide the self-
organization of these populations under different selective regimes. This is a
multi-dimensional project designed to understand the "bottom up" (growth
limitation by light, temperature, oxygen, and nutrients) and "top down"
(mortality from viruses and grazing) influences on the population growth of
different Prochlorococcus ecotypes through both laboratory and field studies.
The project will involve high-throughput studies of the growth of ecotypes along
gradients of environmental variables in the laboratory, as well as studies of
the distribution of ecotypes along spatial and temporal gradients in the field
(at the Hawaii and Bermuda Time Series Stations, along a longitudinal Atlantic
transect, and in Oxygen Minimum Zones in the Arabian Sea and Peruvian Upwelling)
using Q-PCR to assess their relative abundance. The investigators will also
study the life cycle of viruses that infect Prochlorococcus and cross infect
between ecotypes, and the growth and mortality rates of specific ecotypes in
field samples due to grazing pressure. Another set of analyses will measure the
full diversity of co-occurring Prochlorococcus in selected field samples, and
work toward understanding at what level genetic diversity corresponds to
ecologically meaningful diversity. Finally, the study will develop statistical
methods for the characterization and analysis of Prochlorococcus ecotype
"fitness spaces" established in the laboratory, and compare them with the
distribution of ecotypes along environmental gradients in the field. This will
allow a rigorously analysis of the degree to which different selective pressures
shape the relative abundance of the different Prochlorococcus ecotypes in the
oceans, and how they change over time and space.

Broader Impacts. This project will support (in whole or in part) the research of
5 graduate students and post-docs, three of them women, as well as undergraduate
researchers. Through a formal collaboration with the Museum of Science we will
also develop exhibits that focus on marine microbiology. The investigators are
also participating in MIT's Knowledge Update Program, which produces multi-media
educational briefings designed for both professional and student audiences to
provide a focused, quick immersion into emerging fields. Finally, the
participants will be working with an anthropologist at MIT who is working on a
book, tentatively entitled Mapping a Sea of Genes, that will offer an
anthropological look at exploring the ocean in the age of genomics. The author
has been interacting with the research group to get a documentary sense of work
on ocean microbes and their genes. This book will transform the way scientists,
policy makers and lay public understand the sea.