* 0425431
* Doctoral Dissertation Research, Resource Variation in Social Exchange Networks:  The Effects of Duplicability and Transferability on the Use of Power
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Linda Molm, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 7,485.00

This project introduces resource characteristics as a fundamental component of
exchange affecting the mechanisms that produce power in networks. Previous
research has not considered how resource characteristics can vary and possible
implications for exchange processes and outcomes. Duplicability - whether a
resource can be copied - and transferability - whether resources received from
one exchange partner can be passed on to another partner - are identified as
fundamental resource dimensions which have implications for the variety of
resources actors are able to acquire and their ability to use power during
acquisition. Variations on these resource characteristics have been utilized in
social exchange and social network research, however no systematic comparison of
the implications of resource variation has been conducted. Predictions about the
level of power use are made based upon insights from the social exchange and
social network traditions. Approximately 160 subjects will participate in a
computerized exchange experiment in the Social Interaction Laboratory in the
Sociology Department at the University of Arizona. The 2x2 factorial design
crosses duplicability with transferability such that a different resource type
is exchanged in each condition. The experiment are designed to show how resource
type influences the relative advantage of positions in a network as well as
overall power usage in the network. By integrating two theoretical traditions
the proposed research can expand the scope of theory and research on social
exchange as well as provide social network theorists with insight to how the
behavior of actors affects the flow of resources through networks. Broader
impacts: This research will be of interest to scholars and students interested
in understanding observed differences in power dynamics across communication,
exchange, and influence networks. The results of this project will be published
in academic journals and at the social networks conference and group processes
conference.