* 0425979
* From Print to Web - Completing an Account of North America's Grasses and Initiating a Collaborative Web Site for Grass Floristics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Mary Barkworth, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

0425979&lt;br/&gt;Barkworth&lt;br/&gt; Grasses are the world's most important
plant group. They provide over 70% of the calories humans consume, either
directly as cereals or indirectly as forage. They grow in almost any habitat
that supports plants, and were once the dominant species over large parts of
North America. Despite this importance, there has never been a comprehensive
guide to the grasses of North America. The best available account covers only
the lower 48 states and dates from 1951. The lack of a current treatment for the
whole of North America is a major problem for workers in many different fields,
including ecology, land management, horticulture, weed control, and plant
systematics because all depend on accurate identification of the plants
involved. An additional need is for clear line drawings that show the
distinguishing features of individual grass species because grasses do not have
the conspicuous floral features that are used to identify most other flowering
plants. The project by Dr. Mary Barkworth will complete the publication of the
second, final volume on grasses that will provide, for the first time, a fully
illustrated account of the grasses of North America. The volumes reflect the
collaborative efforts of literally hundreds of taxonomists; this number includes
over 70 contributors and an even larger number who have reviewed individual
treatments, provided the information needed to generate detailed distribution
maps, and answered questions. In addition, many herbaria, including overseas
herbaria, have provided files of distributional information and/or loaned
specimens for illustration. An editorial team at Utah State University is
responsible for ensuring consistency, both among the treatments and between the
identification keys and the descriptions, and for checking that the
illustrations complement the identification keys. In addition, they developed
the indices that enable the account of individual species to be located using
either a common name or a scientific name, and two bibliographic references, one
listing published sources of information used in preparing the distribution maps
and another listing all the literature citations contained in the volume.
&lt;br/&gt; These two grass volumes will provide an unparalleled resource for
those seeking to identify grasses. Although designed for use within North
America, the volumes will be of value throughout the world because the species
treated include all species native to North America north of Mexico, all the
introduced species that are now established in this region, and several species
that, so far as North America is concerned, are known only in cultivation, some
for food, some for recreational use (such as golf greens and football fields),
and some as ornamentals. In addition, the volumes include all the grass species
that the USDA has identified as potential weed threats to U.S. agriculture,
whether or not they have yet been found in North America. The primary emphasis
of this project is on completion of the print volumes but, as material becomes
available, it is posted to the Web, so that it can be incorporated into
educational materials for use in both formal and informal
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;