* 0425804
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Production of Latino Vending "Street-Scapes" in Los Angeles
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Laura Pulido, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 10,000.00

Street vending is an economic practice exercised by millions of people around
the world. Although often attributed to third-world economies, it is a
phenomenon that it is visible in many cities in the United States. This doctoral
dissertation research project examines the landscapes in which Latino street
vendors exercise their daily informal economic practices in Los Angeles, a city
where many residents (especially Latinos) favor vendors who recreate the
cultural and informal economic spaces of their countries of origin. Immigrant
vending practices commonly transform street corners, yards, and parking lots
into informal commercial profit-making sites. This reconfiguration of urban
space not only shapes immigrants' and immigrant vendors' experience of everyday
life. It also shapes the urban landscape around them as well. Through the use of
various qualitative methods, especially field observation, semi-structured
interviews, photo-elicitation, and photo documentation, the project will examine
(1) how notions of "place" shape urban cultural landscapes of Latino street
vendors in Los Angeles, (2) how large-scale formal economic processes shape and
inform informal vending landscapes, and (3) how state enforcements, regulations,
and notions of "illegalities" imposed on "brown bodies" in relation to street
vendor's daily life, contribute to the production of cultural landscapes. The
dialectic process of vendors creating urban cultural landscapes is important for
understanding how the state at various scales intersects in the local, where
tensions are created between the local-state and the vendors through the
enforcement of code regulations and the surveillance of bodies. These tensions
between vendors and the local state inform the production of vendor landscapes.
This dialectical process shapes the collective or individual agency of the
vendors. In other words, by analyzing the actors such as vendors, local business
owners, and street vendors in relation to the local state (city council, code
enforcers and police department), one begins to understand how street vendors
exercise agency. The interplay of large-scale processes, such as the global
economy and international migration together with localized social and economic
efforts by vendors creates spaces where agency, individual or collective,
informs the production of urban cultural
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current theories and empirical studies that
focus on informal economies argue that local informal sectors develop as
informal employment opportunities resulting from global economic and cultural
processes in which immigrants seize the opportunities and participate as
informal labor. How these informal landscapes are actually produced at the local
scale (street) has not been analyzed, however. Furthermore, the studies do not
focus on the role informal vending plays in shaping immigrant's daily lives.
This study explores the effects of the informal economy at the local scale,
particularly in global cities like Los Angeles. By examining the experiential
nature of Latino street vending practices, this study furthers social science
understandings of the informal economy. It highlights how, why, and where it
functions as well as how this informal-labor market is racialized and gendered.
By privileging voices of vendors, in particular women, whose daily lives shape
and inform the urban landscape, this study links the street corner to
interrelated global processes. Finally, by focusing this research on human and
economic rights for street vendors and their families, this study will
facilitate the development of policy and programs that serve and affect this
population. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;