* 0425217
* Investigation of Laser Hybrid Welding Process Using a Self-Consistent Multiphysics Model with Experimental Verification
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Hyungson Ki, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 304,720.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0425217&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Hyungson Ki&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation:
Michigan State University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Investigation of laser
hybrid welding process using a self-consistent multiphysics model with
experimental
verification&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, laser
hybrid welding has invoked a great deal of interest due to its unique benefits.
However, the study of laser hybrid welding is still in its infancy, and even the
associated physics are not clearly understood. In fact, a very wide range of
physical phenomena occur during the process. Similar to other fusion welding
methods, complex melt flows induced by strong vaporization and the
thermocapillary effect, heat transport with phase transformations, dynamic free
surface evolution, and microstructure evolution form the kernel of the process.
However, what makes laser hybrid welding a unique and more challenging process
is the complex interaction between laser beams, electric arcs, and plasmas. This
extreme process environment caused by their interaction prohibits direct
observation and measurement of the welding process. In addition, modeling of
this process requires a multidisciplinary and multiphysics
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to develop a laser hybrid
welding model especially focusing on the laser-plasma-arc interactions and their
effects on microstructure/weld quality predictions. It is also proposed to
perform direct visualization experiments using a high-speed CCD camera, called
the Reflective Topography. This method will be improved using image processing
techniques. Weld microstructure will be investigated using the Scanning Electron
Microscopy to verify the model and provide inputs to the model. The Reflective
Topography method will be a valuable tool since it enables a direct observation
and measurement during the process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be
a very extensive and comprehensive work and will help deploy this technology in
industry for very challenging joining problems. A better understanding of the
process through a systematic numerical and experimental study will aid in
manufacturing and will justify more research aimed at developing more efficient
and economical hybrid welding systems. This study will be especially beneficial
to the shipbuilding industry and automobile industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is being supported jointly by the Thermal Transport and Thermal
Processing Program of the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems and the
Materials Processing and Manufacturing Program of the Division of Design,
Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;