* 0425852
* FIBR:  BeeSpace - An Interactive Environment for Analyzing Nature and Nurture in Societal Roles
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Gene Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* stephen vessey
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,987,688.00

One of the most important questions in biology is the origin of behavior: nature
or nurture? This research will use genomic biology to liberate the study of
behavior from the shackles of this dichotomy. The new paradigm is that the
environment ("nurture"), which includes other individuals, impacts an inherited
genome ("nature") by orchestrating gene expression during the lifetime of the
animal. This project will analyze social behavior on an unprecedented whole-
genome scale, using Apis mellifera the Western honey bee, as the model organism.
Honey bees live in a complex society governed by an age-related division of
labor, with each individual assuming many roles during her lifetime. Both
genetic heredity and environmental conditions determine what role a bee
performs, and when she performs it. The biology research will generate a unique
database of gene expressions for all social behavior, recording brain gene
expression for hundreds of individuals, each with a specific societal role.
These microarray experiments utilize the recently sequenced genome, supported by
state-of-the-art statistics. The informatics research will develop an
interactive environment to analyze all information sources relevant to bee
social behavior. These include genome databases from honey bee and related
organisms, linked to complete scientific literature relevant to insect behavior.
New text mining technology will integrate molecular description with information
from physiology, behavior, neuroscience, and evolution. The BeeSpace environment
will enable users to navigate a uniform space of diverse databases and
literature sources for hypothesis development and testing. The software system
will go beyond a searchable database, using statistical literature analyses to
discover functional relationships between genes and behavior. This research will
enable all scientists who study bee genes to live on the frontier of integrative
biology, where biotechnology enables routine expression analysis and
bioinformatics enables functional analysis unconstrained by pre-existing
categories. The broader impact of the interactive environment for functional
analysis will be tested in an international community of laboratories studying
honey bees and related organisms. Outreach for BeeSpace will provide integrated
research and education experiences at the graduate and undergraduate levels,
plus training courses and minority outreach at high school and middle school
levels.

