* 0425694
* 'Control and System Integration of Micro- and Nano-Scale Systems' Panel and Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Benjamin Shapiro, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2005
* USD 86,153.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A workshop is planned to bring two
disparate groups of researchers and educators together, those who deal with
micro and nano systems issues and those who deal with control and system
integrations design issues, specifically they each deal
with:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Extremely small length scales -- can pack lots of
actuators and sensors into a tiny space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Distributed
control and sensing techniques -- optimal placing of actuators/sensors,
coordinated control, data extraction, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- The
interaction of many different physical phenomena across many different length
and time scales -- complex phenomena, difficult to quantify.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Systems analysis/design tools built to capture coupling
across temporal and spatial scales -- tools may help understand
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Large manufacturing variability, sensitive
dependence on trace quantities of chemicals -- system uncertainty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Control theory tools have been built to address
robustness -- quantify and design for uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Need
dedicated, delicate and expensive equipment to measure basic quantities --
measurements are limited and may be noisy and it is hard to debug system errors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- System identification tools, design of experiments, data
mining -- mathematical tools may need help, research collaboration may be
beneficial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for a workshop is
recommended to support the "Control and System Integration of Micro- and Nano-
Scale Systems" Panel and Workshop. The funds are be used to provide support for
approximately 80 US academic researchers and educators to meet and discuss the
field of control and systems integration on the micro- and nano-length scales.
Workshop participants will look at a number of areas including micro
fabrication, nano fabrication, control optimization, bio-chem systems and
modeling to see where collaborations could yield new developments and how the
research can be integrated with education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the workshop is to foster collaboration
between different disciplines to develop micro and nano scale integrated
systems, as opposed to micro and nano components. The workshop is aimed at
assessing the current state of this area and to look for future directions that
could lead to new technology as well as develop new educational materials for
use in academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;