* 0425540
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Masculinity and AIDS in Urban Uganda
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Saskia Sassen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2005
* USD 11,560.00

This project explores the social impact of AIDS in Africa, examining how the
epidemic is shaping gender relations. Specifically, this project asks: how is
the AIDS epidemic affecting conceptions of masculinity in Kampala, Uganda's
capital city? The field research for this project consists of twelve months of
ethnographic participant observation, comparing two communities within Kampala.
The project investigates discourses about masculinity in these communities and
asks how men, and women, understand themselves in relation to current ideas
about manhood. The research also aims to illuminate how such self-understandings
shape their encounters with HIV/AIDS. By charting the impact of AIDS on
masculinity, this project provides insight into the cultural logic animating
sexual behavior, and may help illuminate how gender relations are connected to
declining HIV prevalence in Uganda. It extends previous research on masculinity
in Africa into new territory by analyzing how the AIDS epidemic is shaping
conceptions of manhood. While this project will clarify how masculinity is lived
in Kampala today, its findings will also provide a valuable reference point for
understanding the social impact of AIDS more generally. The research also probes
how norms about manhood change, an area that remains underdeveloped in the
masculinity literature. The broaer impacts of this project include the
following. By focusing on urban Uganda, this project broadens the participation
of African voices in American sociology, as research subjects, research
assistants, and academic colleagues. In addition, this project aims to show how
research conducted in an African setting is relevant to core sociological issues
such as gender, sexuality and social change. The broader impacts of this project
derive, in part, from global nature of the AIDS pandemic and the need for the
results of this research to be shared widely. Through workshops and conferences
this research will be shared with colleagues in African studies, anthropology,
and public health. By presenting this research in ways most familiar to the mass
media and policy-makers, the results of this project are intended to reach a
large audience beyond academia. This proposal was cofunded by the Sociology
Program and the Office of International Science and Engineering.