* 0425790
* Terrestrial Arthropod Survey - Fiji
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Dan Polhemus, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 400,650.00

Fiji Terrestrial Arthropod Survey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A two-year grant has been
awarded to the Bishop Museum under the direction of Dr. Neal Evenhuis to survey
selected biodiverse terrestrial arthropods (insects and related organisms) of
the Fiji islands and make the information from the survey (which will include
databases, checklists, and scientific papers) available to a wide user community
through the web and peer-reviewed scientific journals. &lt;br/&gt; Fiji is one
of the most unique island groups in the Pacific and as such offers opportunities
for helping understand the biogeographic dynamics that have taken place in the
southern island groups in the Pacific and their relationship to the faunas of
surrounding land masses. The results of the surveys of the biodiverse
terrestrial arthropod elements of these islands can be used as comparative
examples when studying similar faunas of Samoa, New Caledonia, and other
areas.&lt;br/&gt; With $25,000 per year partnership funding from the Schlinger
Foundation to augment funds from NSF, this project will significantly help
increase our knowledge of the unique terrestrial arthropod fauna of the Fiji
islands and make available to researchers the specimens collected. These
researchers will sort and identify new species and publish descriptions of them
in peer-reviewed papers. It is estimated that there will be over 500 new species
of flies, beetles, aquatic bugs, ants, wasps, and spiders that will be
discovered and described by specialists during the course of this
study.&lt;br/&gt; After sorting, specimens collected during this project will be
databased and sent to specialists worldwide who have agreed to further identify
and describe new species they find in the material collected. This information
will be published in peer-reviewed scientific journals and the information also
added to a list of all publications concerning Fiji terrestrial arthropods and a
complete checklist of names of Fiji terrestrial arthropods, both lists of which
will be made available via the web, electronically, and hard copy
publication.&lt;br/&gt; With added funding through a partnership with PACINET
via the South Pacific Regional Environmental Programme (SPREP), research
specialists who travel to Fiji to conduct surveys to collect organisms in their
specialty will train in-country students through periodic workshops. These
workshops will include hands-on teaching of how to collect, sort, and identify
the various biodiverse insects and related arthropods of this study that occur
in Fiji. Further community meetings will be held to inform villagers about the
project and will be used as a medium for interaction between scientists and
villagers in that both parties can learn from each other about the natural
heritage of Fiji.&lt;br/&gt;