* 0425522
* Accurate Calibration of Multiple Paleoceanographic Proxies in Benthic Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Thomas Marchitto, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Howard J. Spero
* 08/31/2006
* USD 183,646.00

Under this award the PIs will calibrate multiple paleoceanographic geochemical
proxies in several species of benthic foraminifera. This work should contribute
significantly to the understanding and application of benthic foraminiferal
geochemical proxies. Since such measurements form the foundation of many
paleoclimatic studies, improved calibrations are essential and will be widely
employed. Proxies include estimators for temperature and salinity (Mg/Ca, d18O),
nutrient content (Cd/Ca, Zn/Ca, d13C), pH (d11B), and possibly carbonate ion
concentration (U/Ca, Li/Ca). A series of multicore tops and seawater samples
were collected from 38 locations between Florida and Cuba in 2002, expressly for
this purpose. This collection represents a unique calibration opportunity for
several reasons: (1) abundant benthic foraminifera, high sedimentation rates,
and large volumes of collected sediment allow for multiple measurements of near-
modern specimens; (2) the sites span large ranges of the targeted parameters
(e.g., 15 C, 1.9 psu, 0.24 pH); and (3) seawater collected from a Niskin bottle
mounted on the multicorer provides accurate determinations of in-situ water
conditions, namely salinity, d18O, elemental concentrations, and carbonate
system parameters (accurate temperatures are available from accompanying CTD
casts).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;