* 0425077
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Immigration, Belonging and the [In-] Visiblity of Difference:  The Case of Polish Immigrants in Norway
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Rachel Silvey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2007
* USD 11,775.00

&lt;br/&gt;The racial politics of immigration are highly contested in Europe.
Ten new countries entered the European Union in May, 2004, and the current
membership states expect an increased influx of immigrants from these new member
states. The growing numbers of immigrants will also affect neighboring non-EU
nations, such as Norway. This research project examines the growing number of
Polish immigrants in Norway, and the ways in which their positions in the labor
market are being structured. The project investigates the ways that Norwegian
employers perceive of Polish immigrants as workers, as well as how Polish
immigrants in Norway navigate the norms of belonging and exclusion that shape
their employment. More specifically, it analyzes the ways in which Polish
transnational immigrant networks mediate the ways that immigrants find and get
jobs in Norway. The project's combination of geographic literature on race with
theories of immigrant social networks is directed at showing how exclusionary
practices play out in the labor market. Based on in-depth fieldwork in Oslo,
Norway and Warsaw, Poland, the project utilizes a combination of quantitative
and qualitative methods. The empirical data collected on the rapidly globalizing
labor markets of Norway and Poland are geared towards revising the conceptual
underpinnings of assimilation theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide insight into social science and policy understandings of the racial
politics of immigration. Findings from this study will direct attention
specifically to the needs of Polish immigrants in Norway, and will inform
immigration policy- makers about the ways that transnational social networks
influence migration and labor market processes. By studying white immigrant
minorities, the classical conception of race will be broadened to include this
new and growing immigrant population. The research will direct the attention of
researchers and social services agencies toward the racial politics of
employment among groups of immigrant minorities that tend to be overlooked.
&lt;br/&gt;