* 0425432
* Doctoral Dissertation Research, The Politics of Religion's Promise: State Implementation of Charitable Choice
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Mark Chaves, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 7,483.00

The policy initiative known as "Charitable Choice" or the "Faith-based
Initiative" is aimed at increasing the amount of public funds flowing to
religious organizations that do social services. This initiative began with the
1996 Welfare Reform Bill, and it has been implemented at the federal level
mainly through executive orders and administrative changes. At this time, states
are not required to pursue this initiative in any way beyond assuring non-
discrimination against religious groups in competitions for grants and contracts
involving relevant funding streams. However, there is tremendous variety among
states regarding the extent to which they are pursuing faith-based initiatives.
This variation provides the motivation for this dissertation, which asks two
main research questions. First, what are states doing to implement Charitable
Choice practices? Second, why are states implementing Charitable Choice
practices? To answer the first question, I will document the variation among the
50 states in their implementation of both legislative and administrative
Charitable Choice initiatives since 1996. I will investigate the second question
by examining the extent to which the political and religious composition of a
state, a state's dependence on federal funds, the closeness of ties between a
state's leadership and evangelical Christianity, and other factors influence a
state's pursuit of faith-based initiatives. This project will contribute to
substantive knowledge about the institutionalization of a significant and
ongoing policy initiative, and it will contribute to theoretical knowledge about
the sources of variation in the depth of that institutionalization. It also will
have at least two kinds of broader impacts. First, the data set I will construct
will enhance the data infrastructure available for examining the sources of
state-level variation in policy implementation. Second, and more broadly, the
systematic information I gather about states' activities in this arena will help
policy makers and the general public better understand exactly what the faith-
based initiative looks like "on the ground," and the results of this research
will inform public debate about an important and still developing policy
initiative.