* 0425240
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Democratizing Civil Society: Participation, Local Politics, and Community-Based Organizations in Tanzania
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Ronald Aminzade, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 01/31/2006
* USD 7,500.00

This dissertation research investigates the activities, opportunities,
achievements, limitations, and implications of a particular type of third sector
organization operating at the local level in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: the
community-based organization (CBO). Whereas the third sector comprises a wide
range of organizations - i.e., those which are neither part of the state nor
part of the business sector - operating at different levels and pursuing various
goals, the term CBO refers specifically to groups formed by individuals for the
purpose of improving the conditions of a geographically bounded area, such as a
street, neighborhood, or village. The project focuses on CBOs as a means to
explore theoretical issues that revolve around development, democratization, and
the concept of participation. The research is proceeding in two phases: Phase
one involves the in-depth analysis of two CBOs. Methodologically, the researcher
is using open-ended and structured interviews, participant observation, and
textual analysis to gather data and probe the debates in the literature. Phase
two of the project entails the collection of primary data from all CBOs
operating in Dar es Salaam. This consists of approximately one hundred
organizations spread across the city's three municipalities. The researcher will
utilize structured interviews, textual analysis, and statistical analysis. The
knowledge gained during both phases of the research and from this combination of
methods will allow the researcher to address the broader debate concerning the
potential of participation in third sector organizations to contribute to
sustainable development and democratic social relations. The research
contributes to the social science literature in three distinct ways. First, it
explores issues that are central to development studies, where increased
attention to participation in third sector organizations has arisen from the
perceived poor performance of the public sector in developing countries and the
desire to find more effective and efficient organizational forms for the
delivery of goods and services. Second, the project advances our understanding
of the process of democratization. That is, analysis of third sector
organizations operating at the local level will illuminate their capacity to
extend and strengthen civil society, increase opportunities for popular
participation, and challenge the monopolistic tendencies and poor performance of
the state. Third, the research demonstrates both the methods and the importance
of looking at micro-level phenomena as a means to understand macro-level
transformations. The research will have broader impacts beyond its contribution
to the social science literature. Specifically, the findings and conclusions
should be of particular interest to those who determine the course of
development and democratization in countries undergoing significant economic and
political change: professionals in multilateral development agencies,
consultants, government officials, and academics. By contributing to an informed
policy debate, the research will assist those who endeavor to build the
capacities of third sector organizations and to create an enabling environment
for their activities.