* 0425783
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Physician Professionalism and Rationalization of Clinical Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Andrew Abbott, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 6,300.00

Clinical decision-making in particular have been increasingly rationalized in
today's rapidly evolving healthcare system. Rationalization of clinical
decision-making refers to measures that standardize and formalize the core
activities of the physician, i.e. diagnosis and treatment; examples include
formal practice guidelines, expert systems, and computerized decision-support
tools. Clinical decision-making has traditionally been the exclusive domain of
the medical profession; clinical autonomy forms the foundation for professional
dominance. What, then, is physicians' reaction toward this rationalizing
process? What are the factors that influence their attitudes? This project
proposes to investigate these issues in the context of physician group
practices. It asks three specific questions: (1) Do physicians perceive
rationalization of clinical decision-making as undermining professional
expertise or making its application more efficient? (2) How does physicians'
conception of professional work influence their attitudes toward rationalization
of clinical decision-making? (3) How do the characteristics of rationalizing
measures and the organizational context of medical groups contribute to
physicians' attitudes toward the rationalization process? I will interview 36
physicians from 12 medium to large-sized medical groups located in California
and the Midwest. This research makes three contributions: (1) Empirical studies
of rationalization of clinical decision-making are rare, despite abundant
speculative and conflicting predictions on whether the rationalizing process
degrades or empowers the medical profession. This project may shed some light on
this debate by investigating whether individual practitioners regard
rationalizing measures as enhancing or degrading their work. (2) Theoretical
literature is ambivalent on the effects of rationalization and standardization
on professional status; moreover, this body of literature focuses mainly on
professions as collectivities. This project seeks to construct and test a model
of factors that affect individual practitioners' reaction toward the
rationalization of their work. (3) Medical groups are arguably the most
important form of physician organizations in the managed care environment, but
research on physicians in medical groups is scarce. This study will add to the
understanding of interaction of physician professionalism and work environment
in this under-studied type of organizational setting. The broader impacts of
this study include the following. This study will be of interest to scholars,
students, and policymakers interested in understanding the transformation of the
medical profession and the changing organization of expert labor. In addition,
from a health policy point of view, rationalization of clinical decision-making
is seen as holding considerable promise to improving quality and reducing costs.
The proposed activity will be to identify to an extent the elements of physician
professionalism, and those of rationalization measures and organizational
context that pose as barriers to the implementation of rationalization measures.
This research has the potential to contribute to the efforts that seek to reform
physician culture and improve the implementation of measures that rationalize
clinical decision-making.