* 0425374
* Investigation of Acoustic and Hydrodynamic Modes in a Two/three-dimensional Incompressible Cavity Flow Using Wall-microphone Arrays
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Ahmed Naguib, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0425374&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: AHMED
NAGUIB&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: MICHIGAN STATE
UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a study of the wall-pressure
and flow modes in a two- and three-dimensional low-Mach-number cavity flows.
Self-sustained oscillations occur in a wide variety of practical configurations,
including aircraft and naval vessels, openings in automobiles (e.g. sunroofs),
and even in the field of hydraulics and civil engineering. A unique feature of
the investigation is the resolution of both the frequency and wave number of the
wall-pressure modes by employing large sensor arrays at strategically chosen
locations. The array measurements will be coupled with simultaneous flow-field
measurements using Particle Image Velocimetery (PIV) to obtain time-resolved
estimation of the pseudo-instantaneous flow structure via multi-point wall-
pressure-based stochastic estimation. Two key flow characteristics are
emphasized in these experiments: (1) wave number-frequency spectra of the wall-
pressure on the cavity bottom and associated dispersion relation (convection
velocity versus frequency); (2) three-dimensionality of the flow structure in
the vicinity of the impingement lip. The influence of various cavity geometrical
parameters on these characteristics will be investigated during the first year.
In the second year, effects of the separating boundary layer properties will be
examined, while the third year will be dedicated to examining the significance
of mean-flow three-dimensionality. The project capitalizes on several existing
resources that have been enabled by a previously awarded NSF project. Execution
of this project will result in the training of one Ph.D. student. The PI intends
to involve an undergraduate student in the research, hopefully leading to
her/his recruitment to graduate school. Moreover, existing programs at Michigan
State University will be utilized to include a high-school student in the team
during the summer, demonstrating to him/her the excitement of the process of
research and discovery. &lt;br/&gt;