* 0425796
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Transformation of American Educational Policy, 1980-2001
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Christopher Jencks, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 7,500.00

The passage of the 2001 No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) was by all accounts the
most significant piece of federal education legislation since the federal
government became involved in education policy in 1965. NCLB is the capstone
(thus far) of more than two decades worth of inter-related legislative changes
that have slowly transformed education policy from a largely local and state
domain to one that is central to federal politics. This movement also reflects a
particular vision of both the purpose of education (increased individual
achievement on standardized tests) and the means for accomplishing this end
(state standards, testing and performance-based accountability). This
dissertation seeks to answer two sets of questions about this transformation of
educational policy: 1) Given the plurality of visions that have historically
governed Americans' views of the purpose of education, how did standards,
testing and accountability become the dominant educational paradigm? What ideas,
interests, and institutions were central in pushing this transformation, and
whose interests and ideas were marginalized in this process? 2) How did the
federal government become a legitimate and central player in an area that had
since the nation's inception belonged to states and localities? How did this
happen under a Republican administration in an era where devolution is otherwise
so prominently featured? I seek to answer these questions using a historical
approach. I trace key developments in two representative states during the
1980s, and examine case studies of three key events in the movement toward
federal involvement and standards-based reform. For each of these cases I am
collecting a range of archival data, complemented by approximately 100 key
informant interviews with policy-makers, staffers, interest group actors, state
education department officials, and knowledgeable journalists and academics. I
supplement this event-driven approach with a content analysis of key actors'
statements and writings on education over this period that seeks to understand
how key "problems" and "solutions" developed over time to the point that they
became important governing assumptions in the policy debates. My research seeks
to contribute to the theoretical debate in political sociology and political
science about how ideas, interests, and institutions interact to produce
important policy outcomes, and to develop a model of how policy paradigms shift
over time, a critical lacuna in the current scholarship on the politics of
ideas. The broader impacts of this project include the following. This research
is intended to stimulate about the purpose of schooling, what it would mean to
achieve equity and social justice in education, and how best to accomplish these
objectives. To that end, I am committed to publishing the results of this
research in a book, as well as in op-eds and magazines articles, in order to
reach the broad group of stakeholders, including the public, who should be
involved in such a conversation. At the very least, my work will illuminate the
roots of the policies that govern the daily lives of millions of students and
teachers, offering to them a long overdue explanation for why standards and
accountability are currently the ubiquitous method of school reform.