* 0425187
* SGER: Accumulation of Particulates in Complex Flows: Characterization by NMR Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Nina Shapley, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 04/30/2005
* USD 49,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0425187&lt;br/&gt;N. Shapley, Columbia
University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Accumulation of Particulates in Complex Flows:
Characterization by NMR Imaging &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of this
research is to probe the behavior of dispersed particulates (particles or
droplets) in complex flows that are relevant to industrial and biological
systems. &lt;br/&gt;Flows of concentrated dispersions (liquids containing many
discrete particles or droplets) are found in many processes in the
pharmaceutical, food, oil, and plastics industries, but their behavior is
difficult to control, generally due to nonuniform distributions of the
continually interacting particles or droplets. The intellectual merit of this
research derives from the goal of quantifying the distribution of particulates
in complex flow geometries and time-dependent flows. In complex flows (where
both shearing and elongation are present), existing continuum models of
concentrated suspensions often do not predict observed particle distributions,
numerical simulations in complex geometries are too overburdened by intensive
computations to be practical, and experimental data are sparse. Our aim then is
to acquire incisive sets of measurements of concentrated suspensions and
emulsions in simplified model systems that capture key elements of real
circulatory, bioreactor, or manufacturing processes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We
will apply noninvasive nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI) along with
optical methods to quantify concentration and velocity distributions in these
systems and relate observations to particulate properties. The enormous
capability of NMRI to be employed in opaque systems and both in vitro and in
vivo opens up an entire new dimension of systems that are not accessible to
optical techniques. The targeted element of complex flows that this study will
address is particulate accumulation in disturbed flows. We aim to identify the
most important system parameters determining particulate accumulation and to
quantify particulate concentration and velocity profiles as benchmarks for
testing continuum model predictions. The study is anticipated to reveal new
insights into the behavior of dispersion dynamics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this research program has two main directions. First, there
are the applications in which our fundamental research results can be
implemented as practical guidelines in the long term, ranging from hydrodynamic
targeting of drug delivery microspheres to plastics and pharmaceuticals
processing. In addition, there is the educational value of the intensive
research training that the graduate and undergraduates dents in our laboratory
will experience. &lt;br/&gt;