* 0425759
* FIBR - Molecular Evolutionary Ecology of Developmental Signaling Pathways in Complex Environments.
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Stephen Welch, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,999,835.00

This research project will investigate how plants in natural environments
integrate multiple environmental cues in order to flower during favorable
seasonal conditions. To this end, it will dissect natural genetic variation in
the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana, combining tools from molecular
biology, molecular evolutionary genetics, quantitative genetics, evolutionary
ecology, gene network modeling, and biogeography. Major objectives are: 1) to
identify natural genetic variants in environmental signal integration; 2) to
dissect molecular mechanisms of signal integration; 3) to uncover the
evolutionary forces shaping signaling pathways by analyzing DNA sequence
variation in candidate genes; 4) to test whether natural variation in these
candidate genes contributes to variation in response to multiple environmental
cues; 5) to map quantitative trait loci (QTL) contributing to natural variation
in flowering responses on a fine genetic scale; 6) to examine the effects of
different combinations of natural allelic variants of candidate genes on
flowering responses; 7) to model the effects of natural variation in candidate
flowering genes on overall flowering pathway function; 8) to test for evidence
of local adaptation to climate by examining geographic associations between
flowering responses, candidate gene variation, and climate in the site of
origin; 9) to measure geographic variation in natural selection by growing lines
from different parts of Europe in replicated field experiments across the native
European climatic range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The results of
this project will be important for predicting how plants will respond to ongoing
climate change. The broad research scope will provide interdisciplinary training
to postdoctoral, predoctoral, and undergraduate students as well as K-12
educators. International training collaborations with 7 leading European
laboratories will provide unique opportunities for students and postdocs to
learn Arabidopsis molecular and population genetics. Thus, future researchers
and educators will learn to transcend disciplinary boundaries and integrate
molecular and evolutionary approaches to biological
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;