* 0425833
* QSB: Quantitative systems analysis of the translational elongation in E. coli
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Vassily Hatzimanikatis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Martin L. Dunn
* 08/31/2009
* USD 492,062.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein synthesis, or translation, is one of the central
intracellular processes. Understanding the properties of translation is
extremely important for many problems in medical science and biotechnology, such
as identification of antimicrobial targets, and optimization of pharmaceutical
protein production. Translation involves three main steps: initiation,
elongation, and termination. The proposed research is to characterize and
understand quantitatively the mechanism of translation elongation in the
bacterium Escherichia coli. A mechanistic, mathematical model of the elongation
process will be developed, and the system properties will be characterized using
mathematical and computational analysis. Experiments performed within the
proposed work, as well as experimental data from literature, will provide
estimates for the values of the kinetic parameters. Simulation studies will
provide a deeper understanding of the systemic properties and the emerging
behavior of protein synthesis. The proposed activity is a systems biology
project at the interface of biochemistry, molecular biology, applied
mathematics, and systems engineering. The expected outcome will enhance and
broaden the understanding of the contribution of the individual steps of the
elongation process in the context of the systemic properties of translation. The
learning and the methodologies developed around translational elongation will be
readily applicable to other template biopolymerization processes. The new
knowledge and methods generated within the efforts of the proposed work will be
incorporated in new and existing courses, such courses on Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics. The proposed activities will train a new generation of
biologists, mathematicians, and engineers that will be able to creatively apply
the engineering principles on complex biological systems for the analysis and
interpretation of experimental information from modern biochemical and molecular
biology methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;