* 0425107
* Finding the Genes That Matter: Profiling Gene Expression in Strongylocentrotid Sea Urchins with Different Biogeographic and Temperature Distributions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David L. Garrison
* 12/31/2009
* USD 383,534.00

The goal of this project is: (1) to test the hypothesis that temperature
contributes to setting species distribution patterns in marine ecosystems and
(2) to employ genomic approaches and other molecular techniques to assess
changes in gene expression in congeneric sea urchins that are adapted to
different temperatures and have different biogeographical distributions in
nature. The project will use four congeneric species of temperate sea urchin
(genus Strongylocentrotus) as study organisms: S. purpuratus, S. droebachiensis,
S. franciscanus, and S. pallidus. These marine invertebrates are ideal study
organisms for this study because (1) the congeners are closely-related yet have
different ecological temperature ranges that facilitate comparative studies, (2)
it is possible to work on early life history stages as well adults with relative
ease and the embryos have intraspecific differences in response to temperature,
and (3) there are significant, readily-available molecular resources for the
purple sea urchin, S. purpuratus, as a result of the Sea Urchin Genome Project.
Gene expression profiles will be assessed in order to address how the
differentially thermally adapted sea urchin species respond to ecologically
relevant temperatures at the genomic level. The strategy for the genomics
approach entails using DNA macroarrays to screen for differentially expressed
genes that will then be analyzed using other genomics techniques -- DNA
microarrays and real time PCR. The objectives of the research component are
focused around the following three questions: Question 1: Are early life history
stages of strongylocentrotid sea urchins differentially sensitive to temperature
with respect to patterns gene expression and thermotolerance? This aspect of the
project will test whether embryos of the sea urchin congener are differentially
sensitive to temperature. Embryos will be raised using standard procedures and
thermotolerance of different stages will be assessed in thermal trials.
Different embryo stages for each species will be exposed to a range of
temperatures and then sampled in order to profile temperature-dependent gene
expression in the embryos. Gene expression patterns in larval stage sea urchins
will be assessed using the genomics strategy where macroarrays are used to
screen for gene expression patterns. Question 2: Do adults display differential
responses to temperature as detected at the genomic scale? Adult specimens from
each species will be acclimated to the same temperatures and molecular
techniques will be used to assess differential gene expression patterns.
Congeneric adults will be acclimated in aquaria at 5 and 15 C for 4 weeks.
Samples (dissected tube feet) will be analyzed for expression pattern variations
in the acclimated sea urchins immediately following acclimation and in the 2 h
heat challenge samples. cDNA macroarray, followed by DNA microarray experiments
on targeted genes, will be used to compare the expression in the sea urchins.
Question 3: How do temperature-dependent patterns of gene expression vary on a
latitudinal scale in two Strongylocentrotus congeners with distinctly different
distributions in nature? The hypothesis that differential gene expression will
be tested, i.e. variable transcript abundance and species, correlates with the
different distributions of the sea urchin congeners. Specimens will be collected
at different points in the biogeographic range and the transcript profile, as
measured using DNA microarrays, will be assessed and correlated to thermal range
of the species. Broader Impacts & Education: The ultimate contribution of this
study is to bring techniques of functional genomics to bear on questions in
marine systems. The results will provide insight into how marine organisms
function in the marine environment, and how they respond to variation in their
physical environment. Regarding education and training, in addition to the
standard training of undergraduates and graduate students in biological
research, the PI will collaborate with Oceans Alive!, an on-going educational
outreach program at UCSB's Marine Science Institute and the Research Experience
and Education Facility (REEF). REEF is a learning lab committed to formal and
informal educational activities for K-12 students and the public. The PI.s lab
will work with the REEF manager and the MSI educational director to develop
interpretive displays of local intertidal organisms and educational and training
materials for REEF docents.