* 0425294
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Educational Persistence in Veterinary Medicine: A Longitudinal Examination of Mentoring, Gender, and Organizational Context
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Amy Wharton, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Rubin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

Sociologists have paid increasing attention to the effects of social resources
on individuals' life chances. While there are many different kinds of social
resources, research conducted in educational and occupational settings suggests
that social ties with mentors may be especially influential. Of equal importance
is the organizational context which structures people's opportunities for social
relationships and, as a result, plays an important role in the availability,
quality, and impact of mentoring. This study seeks to contribute to our
understanding of the interactions between individual- and contextual-level
influences on women's and men's educational persistence in science. The specific
goals are to examine the social ties formed between students and mentors in the
context of veterinary school, which is distinctive, due in part, to the rate
that the veterinary profession has feminized in comparison to other health
professions. The proposed research will examine sex differences in mentoring,
and the effects of mentoring on career choices, educational persistence, and
career outcomes for both men and women by exploring four central questions: (1)
Are there sex differences in the mentoring experiences of third-year veterinary
students? (2) How do sex differences in mentoring (dyad composition and
functions) influence students' career decisions, including their interest in
pursuing advanced training? (3) How does the organizational context (especially
its sex composition) affect career outcomes? (4) Does organizational context
moderate the effects of mentoring on career outcomes? This research uses a
multilevel design, with data collected at the individual and organizational
levels. A survey is used to collect individual data from third year veterinary
students at 25 colleges of veterinary medicine. Organizational data will be
drawn primarily from archival sources, supplemented by an administrative survey
sent to all participating colleges. The broader impact of this study lies in its
ability to increase understanding of gender differences in educational
persistence in scientific careers. The results, disseminated through
professional conferences and publications, will inform not only the sociological
literature on social resources, gender, and organizations but also research on
science education, educational policy, and veterinary medical education.