* 0425592
* SGER: North Atlantic Climate Variability from a Nonlinear Perspective
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Richard Alley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2005
* USD 90,301.00

This award, under the auspices of the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
(SGER) program, will help support the development of a novel set of nonlinear
tools and their application to the analysis of a well-known climatic event, the
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). Success of this project could demonstrate the
value of nonlinear techniques in paleoclimate studies, reveal strengths and
weaknesses of linear versus nonlinear techniques, and contribute to better
understanding of variability in climate at time scales of societal
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The crux of the reason for pursuing this
exploratory project is that much paleoclimatic research relies on a strong form
of the uniformitarian hypothesis: a short term correlation between a particular
sedimentary characteristic and a climatic variable is applied to a longer
sedimentary record to reconstruct the climatic variable. The danger in such an
approach became apparent the wider science community, when three independent,
less-uniformitarian paleothermometers showed that a short-term calibration
between mean-annual temperature and stable-isotopic ratios of water in ice
underestimated past temperature changes in Greenland by threefold. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The researcher and his colleagues suggest that one way to improve
confidence in such analyses is to follow a completely independent uniformitarian
analysis pathway and compare results. The statistical tools used commonly in
uniformitarian paleoclimatic analyses are linear. Robust nonlinear "neural
network" techniques have been developed in diverse fields, and the researcher
has assembled appropriate nonlinear tools and applied them to reconstruction of
paleoclimatic conditions in West Antarctica. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategy
is to apply these tools to one of the classic paleoclimatic problems:
reconstruction of the history of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). He will
assess whether the nonlinear techniques do a better job in reconstructing this
important climatic feature in validation intervals, and whether new insights are
provided. If, as he and his colleagues suspect, the new techniques are better in
the validation interval, then the longer NAO history they produce will be of use
in broader studies, and differences between it and previous reconstructions will
provide one estimate of the uncertainty in paleoclimatic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader importance of the proposed research
is far reaching because if the researchers are successful, they will provide a
new tool for improving the confidence of paleoclimatic reconstructions.