* 0425106
* SGER:  Thermoelectrics in Nature:  Electrochemical and Thermal Measurements of Extracellular Shark Gel
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Alexis Abramson, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 11/30/2005
* USD 73,641.00

Proposal Number: CTS-0425106 Principal Investigator: Alexis R. Abramson
Affiliation: Case Western Reserve University Proposal Title: SGER:
Thermoelectrics in nature: Electrochemical and thermal measurements of
extracellular shark gel

The goal of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) is to explore a
thermoelectric substance found in nature: a gel found below certain species of
shark, Cetorhinus maximus, in which a voltage is generated in response to very
small temperature gradients. The main objective of the project will be to
determine why the shark gel exhibits unique thermoelectric properties. A better
understanding of the involved phenomena could potentially lead to the design of
better engineered thermoelectric materials for specific applications.
Investigations will involve measurement of the thermal and electrical properties
of the shark gel and atomic force microscopy imaging of the glycoprotein in the
gel to provide information regarding its structure and form. The limited
preliminary research conducted on this topic has been performed by researchers
with a strong background in biology, but not by researchers with expertise in
the areas of thermal/electrical transport or thermoelectrics. This research
qualifies as exploratory because it investigates an unusual topic from a unique
perspective; it ventures into potentially transformative research; it is likely
to catalyze innovative advances; and it has the potential to make a significant
impact on the field of thermoelectrics.

The proposed activity stands to benefit society through the potential
development of novel "smart" thermoelectric materials, and therefore energy
conversion devices with no moving parts, that are environmentally benign, and
that may be easily incorporated into small-scale technologies. If alternative
materials tailored with superior thermoelectric properties can be developed, a
revolution in energy conversion and generation and heat removal applications
will undoubtedly ensue. Beyond the scientific benefit to society, a strong
learning and teaching component, integral to the research objectives, will
provide for significant educational enhancement for both undergraduate and
graduate students involved in the project. These students will greatly benefit
from the inherently multidisciplinary nature of the proposed work; mechanical
engineers with a background in the thermal sciences will be interacting with
faculty and students at CWRU and University of San Francisco who are
electrochemists and biologists.