* 0425908
* FIBR:  Ecological Genomics and Heritability: Consequences of Extended Phenotypes
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2011
* USD 5,005,800.00

&lt;br/&gt; Ecological genomics is a new emerging field of biology that studies
the genetic basis for formation of an ecological community. It is a frontier in
biology because it provides an evolutionary framework for understanding
communities and ecosystems. Studies of cottonwoods (a dominant tree of a
threatened habitat type) show that genes have phenotypes that extend beyond the
individual to have community and ecosystem consequences (i.e., extended
phenotypes). Based upon this concept three major hypotheses will be addressed:
1) Biodiversity is an emergent property of extended phenotypes. 2) Community
structure, biodiversity and ecosystem processes are heritable. 3) Ecological
feedback loops result in genetic covariance and community evolution. The ability
to address these issues is enhanced by four major factors: 1) Established
collaborations among geneticists, phytochemists, modelers, community and
ecosystem ecologists on two continents. 2) Studies in the wild combined with
large experimental forests of known pedigree. 3) Cottonwood is the first tree
genome to be sequenced, providing the genetic background necessary for these
studies. 4) A new genomics center that will dramatically facilitate genetic
analyses. &lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts: This project will contribute new insights
and information for establishing the genetic foundations of communities and
ecosystems, for quantifying the impacts of newly introduced organisms on the
rest of the community, and for making informed decisions about environmental
management. The participating institutions have a rich tradition in training
graduate and undergraduate students in interdisciplinary studies and in
mentoring minorities. Planned outreach through the various nature centers
including those operated by federal, state and Native American organizations
will reach thousands of visitors. See http://www.poplar.nau.edu for further
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;