* 0425478
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Navigating the Social-Academic Divide in College Life
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Donna Eder, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

Upon arriving on campus, college students face both academic and social
challenges and opportunities, which are influenced by gender, racial/ethnic and
other social identities. Friendship may be crucial to how students navigate
academics and other aspects of college life. Recent sociological research
focusing on high school students has pointed to the role of student clubs and
organizations in facilitating the formation of peer groups and friendships that
support academic and social identities. However, we know little about the
broader role that friendship plays in academic life and transitions between
worlds, particularly for college students. This study will explore students'
friendships, especially as they relate to the connection between academic and
social aspects of college life, through a minimum of 80 in-depth individual
interviews and 12 focus group interviews with undergraduates at a large, public
research university. Guided by social psychological, critical race, and feminist
theories, as well as multiple worlds and subcultural approaches, this research
will highlight possible bridges between academic and social worlds, such as
participation in student organizations and academically-based friendships. The
intent of this project, then, is to answer the following questions: To what
extent do undergraduates perceive and personally experience academic and social
life as integrated or separated? In what ways are friends involved in academic
and intellectual life? How do friendships and social networks facilitate and/or
impede students' navigation of academic and social life? How do organizational
structures (e.g., student clubs) facilitate and/or impede students' navigation
of academic and social life? How do social identities-particularly gender and
race-inform students' perceptions and navigation of academic and social worlds?
How does the social location of friends (e.g., friendships among students of
color or friendships between men and women) inform students' perceptions and
navigation of these worlds? Through answering these and other research
questions, this research will contribute to sociological understandings of
higher education, college culture, youth and adolescence, race/ethnicity,
gender, and friendship through enhancing our understandings of how different
gender, racial/ethnic, and other social identities interfere with and/or
facilitate academic identities and illuminate what can be done to strengthen
academic success for diverse populations. This research will have broader
impacts beyond its contributions to sociological and educational scholarship.
This research will be of interest to educational administrators and policy
makers, especially those whose programs are aimed at improving the day-to-day
lives of undergraduate students (e.g., classroom learning, dormitories, living-
learning centers, and student groups). As women's and men's roles change and
more students attend college from diverse backgrounds, we need to examine the
practices that currently limit or enhance the development of strong academic and
social identities. Understanding the role friendship plays in students'
perceptions of academic and social worlds may help us better understand why some
students succeed academically or persist in college while others do not.