* 0425728
* Collaborative Research: Local adaptation across latitudes: microgeographic scales, gene flow, and correlates of countergradient growth variation
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Paul Barber, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2007
* USD 104,336.00

Intellectual merit: Knowledge of geographic patterns in adaptive genetic
variation is crucial to species conservation, yet in marine systems our
understanding of this phenomenon is virtually nil. Until recently, the belief
has been that because most marine species have highly dispersive or mobile life
stages, local adaptation could occur only on broad geographic scales. This view
is supported by comparatively low levels of genetic variation among populations
as indexed by surveys of DNA markers neutral to selection. Phenotypic variation
is expected to be largely of environmental origin, especially for physiological
traits that are highly sensitive to environmental conditions. Stimulated by
studies of the Atlantic silverside (Menidia menidia) and other species, these
long-held beliefs are rapidly changing. The silverside shows dramatic evidence
of highly structured local adaptation in a suite of coevolving physiological and
morphological traits tightly associated with climate change across latitudes
along the east coast of North America. Yet preliminary data from molecular
genetic surveys suggest extensive gene flow along the entire latitudinal range.
This project will address two central problems. The first concerns the micro-
geography of local adaptation. How finely scaled is it? How is it influenced by
gene flow? Is it closely tied to physical features of the coastline? Do multiple
traits co-vary similarly along the same gradient? The second problem focuses on
the evolution of growth rate, a trait that strongly displays countergradient
latitudinal variation not only in the silverside but also in numerous other
taxa. Recent experiments show that growth rate can evolve very rapidly in
response to size-selective mortality, including genetic changes caused by
fishing. This project will examine the correlates of growth rate evolution. We
will study how trade-offs with growth rate influence development, behavior,
morphology, and the ability of animals to defend against disease. This research
integrates biogeography, physiology, quantitative and molecular genetics,
behavior, immunology, and developmental biology. It draws upon natural and
experimentally evolved populations, thereby allowing rigorous testing of
hypotheses that would be impossible in most other marine species. Broader
Implications: This project unites the experience of a senior investigator with
the skills of two emerging junior faculty of minority background. Students
working on the project will have a unique opportunity to experience both
ecological and molecular genetic approaches to marine conservation. Because of
the continuous maintenance and availability of captive populations of the
silverside at the Flax Pond Marine Laboratory, this project provides excellent
opportunities for engaging the public in science through student research
projects, class demonstrations, and tours. In addition, the extensive worldwide
publicity and interest generated by our recent findings on evolutionary effects
of size-selective fishing represent an excellent opportunity to increase public
understanding of the principles of evolution and how they affect contemporary
societal issues.