* 0425273
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Investigation of the Scale Effects of DEM-based Fuzzy k-means Landform Classifications
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* John Wilson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,228.00

BCS-0425273&lt;br/&gt;John P Wilson&lt;br/&gt;Yongxin Deng&lt;br/&gt;University
of Southern California &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three
connected components of spatial scales in fuzzy k-means landform
classifications: the spatial resolution of the classification, the spatial
resolution of the attribute calculation, and the effects of size of neighborhood
window on calculated attributes. These scale components have potentially
important impacts when using this classification method to delineate continuous
biophysical patterns based on the genetic linkages existing between terrain
attributes and biophysical properties. The project includes three experiments.
The first experiment compares 10 classifications performed at 10 classification
resolutions ranging from 10 to 200 m. The second experiment incorporates
different attribute resolutions (ranging from 10 to 200 m) into a uniform
classification resolution (10 m), and then compares these results. The third
experiment compares the classification effects of using different sizes of
neighborhood windows to calculate terrain attributes. The project will use three
methods to compare the fuzzy k-means classification results. The first
calculates the attribute distance of two class centers based on the relative
differences of center attributes; the second analyzes the extent of hard class
overlaps between two classifications after they are defuzzified; and the third
examines the residual membership surfaces obtained by subtracting one membership
distribution from another. The experimental results will show how sensitive
fuzzy k-means landform classifications are to the selected spatial scales; how
the classifications may define different landscape patterns at different spatial
scales; how the tested terrain attributes may respond differently to scale
changes; and whether or not there are scale thresholds or natural boundaries
present in the study area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific value of this
project lies in the fact that fuzzy k-means classification can potentially use
widely available digital elevation models (DEM) to depict the geographic
variations of environmental characteristics, which are often extremely difficult
to measure. The focus on spatial scale issues is central in this modeling
process because both the terrain surface and the environment vary at a diverse
range of spatial scales, and the delineation of environmental characteristics
relies on appropriate selection of spatial scales. The research results will
also help to advance our knowledge of scale issues in geography, Geographic
Information Science (GIS), and environmental modeling. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will also provide support to
a young scholar that plans to pursue these and similar research questions
independently in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;