* 0425347
* Internal Tide Studies at the Hawaiian Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Mark Merrifield, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2008
* USD 490,749.00

0425347&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The pathways of energy transfer
from the basin-scale surface tidal motions to the smallest turbulent mixing
scales are not understood well. An important intermediate step is the scattering
of the surface tide into internal tides at mid-ocean topography, such as
seamounts, submerged ridges, and islands, which is a sink for barotropic tidal
energy. Models show internal tides emanating from these generation regions with
both beam structure, where energy density is localized along internal tidal
characteristics, and low-mode structure. The high-mode components of the
internal tide are believed to dissipate near the generation site and may be
important for local mixing, while the low-mode internal tides propagate away
from their source regions with decay scales on the order of 1000 km in
observations and models. Our ability to predict this process depends on well-
conceived models that are validated against field observations. The largest and
most comprehensive tidal conversion study has been the Hawaii Ocean Mixing
Experiment (HOME), focusing on tidal scattering at the ridge, seamount, and
island topography making up the Hawaiian Ridge. The modeling component of this
study has proven to be highly successful. The model simulations of internal tide
generation and radiation compares favorably to observed currents, displacements,
energy densities, energy fluxes, and dissipation. The continuation of the HOME
tidal modeling effort is based on the Princeton Ocean Model. The goals of this
project are to 1) finalize the tidal energy budget for the entire ridge, 2)
examine non-hydrostatic features observed over the ridge crest, 3) assess the
model turbulent closure scheme versus direct microstructure and finestructure
measurements, 4) determine the amount of deep mixing occurring along the ridge
flanks associated with internal tide beams, and 5) assess the sensitivity of the
internal tide to changes in the background stratification and circulation. HOME
provides an ideal test site to expand our understanding of the tidal scattering
process, to assess current modeling approaches, and to develop new tools based
on the field results. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Ultimately this
activity can lead to improved parameterizations of tidal dissipation and mixing
to be used in larger scale circulation and climate models, as well as in
regional models for seamount and ridge environments. An undergraduate and two
graduate student will participate in this project, with the goal of achieving a
senior thesis and PhD dissertations. The project will be highlighted during the
annual public open house at the University of Hawaii, an outreach activity
sponsored by the School of Ocean Earth Science and Technology. The Bishop Museum
in Honolulu, Hawaii will be contacted to discuss a possible display based on the
results of this study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;