* 0425225
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Situating Multiethnic Racial Identity in Neighborhood and Household Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Steven Holloway, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Multiethnic and mixed-race household partnerships between Latinos of varied
racial origin and non-Latino Whites are becoming ever more common in U.S. urban
areas, yet researchers know almost nothing about these households beyond their
demographic and geographic rates of occurrence. Social scientists understand
little about how multi-ethnic, mixed-race households comprehend and enact racial
and ethnic identity or about how they select and interact with their residential
neighborhoods. Decisions about "Where to Live?" rank among the most important
issues that confront mixed-race families because they must select residential
locations from among a set of neighborhoods that are typically marked in terms
of single racial categories. Neighborhoods shape potential social interactions
and thus influence the formation and enactment of ethnic and racial identities
within mixed-race households. This doctoral dissertation research project will
examine one type of mixed-race household, couples including a non-Latino White
(hereafter referred to as "White") and a Latino of Mexican heritage (hereafter
referred to as "Mexican") in one metropolis, the Los Angeles metropolitan area.
The doctoral student will examine the multi-scalar interactions of family and
family members' racial and ethnic identity formation processes with household
and neighborhood contexts. The study will employ a rigorous combination of
tabular and cartographic quantitative analysis of geographically detailed
confidential census data with qualitative analysis of residential history
interviews with Mexican mothers and adult multiracial children from White-
Mexican (WM) households. The project will (1) examine the residential
distribution of WM households relative to other L.A. area households and
characterize the racial identification of multiracial children in WM households
relative to household demographic structure and neighborhood racial composition,
(2) assess WM family-level perceptions and residential decisions related to the
racial and ethnic socialization of children, and (3) evaluate the dual impacts
of WM household and neighborhood contexts on the formation and expression of
racial and ethnic identity among WM multiracial
offspring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance understanding of
racial and ethnic identity development by examining two of the multiple social
settings (households and neighborhoods) that impact identity formation. This
project conceives of the household as both a contextual social setting that
affects individual identity and as a subjective unit of collective identity
assertion, negotiation, and enactment. Similar analyses are largely absent in
academia because of substantive foci upon individuals rather than households.
Broader scientific impacts arise from the study's focus on WM households; a
mixed-race household type that is far more common that other multiethnic and
multiracial partnerships but that is also nearly ignored by researchers. WM
households might retain elements of both partners' racial and ethnic
identifications and the household's complex racial, and ethnic identity might
manifest itself in family residential decisions that are similar to but quite
distinct from those of most same-race White or Latino households. WM households
might not gravitate towards residential neighborhoods that are dominated by
members of either partner's racial group. This research will address the manner
with which Latino cultures and racial identities blend into and/or alter those
of White America and offer crucial empirical information about where mixed-race
households settle within large metropolitan areas. Finally, as research funded
by a Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award, this implementation of this
project will facilitate the establishment of a solid independent research
program for a promising young scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;