* 0425615
* The effect of mesoscale eddy perturbations on  microbial processes and community structure in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Craig Carlson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/2008
* USD 342,038.00

This proposal award will serve as a companion project to the "EDDIES" (EDDY
Dynamics, mixing Export, and Species composition) project funded by NSF
Biological, Chemical and Physical Oceanography. This interdisciplinary field
program will be initiated in the Sargasso Sea during the summer of 2004 and
2005. Recent evidence suggests that mesoscale eddies are an important nutrient
transport mechanism in the oligotrophic waters of the main subtropical gyres.
Numerical simulations and satellite-based statistical estimates indicate that
the magnitude of the eddy-driven nutrient flux could be sufficient to balance
geochemical estimates of new production. Relatively few direct observations of
this process are available, owing to the spatial and temporal intermittency of
the events that drive it. Available data demonstrate that isopycnal
displacements associated with certain types of eddies can transport nutrients
into the euphotic zone, resulting in the accumulation of chlorophyll in
overlying waters. Preliminary data, included in this proposal, indicate that
coincident with the passage of a cyclonic eddy at the BATS site, bacterial
production rates were significantly enhanced relative to the monthly mean
values. However, the extent of the prokaryotic heterotrophic response and their
impact on coupled biogeochemical cycles and export has yet to be elucidated.
This companion project proposes to sample parameters relevant to heterotrophic
prokaryotes across mesoscale eddies documenting how these parameters vary inside
the eddy through time and space (horizontal and vertical) relative to outside
(.control.) waters. Specifically the PIs propose to: 1. Assess the spatial and
temporal variability of prokaryotic biomass and production rates in response to
eddy induced nutrient pumping by comparing stocks and rates throughout the
surface 700 m, in and out of the mesoscale feature. 2. Determine if a mesoscale
eddy perturbation and subsequent nutrient pumping affects the bioavailability of
newly produced dissolved organic matter (DOM) and the efficiency with which the
prokaryotic community processes it. 3. Assess how eddy induced nutrient pumping
may affect the partitioning of attached versus free-living microbial processes.
4. Determine if the mesoscale perturbation and the resulting changes in
biogeochemistry lead to a change in the prokaryotic community structure.
Intellectual Merit Compilation of these measurements will provide a rigorous
assessment of the response of heterotrophic prokaryotes to the organic matter
regime of the eddy bloom environment. Prokaryotes play an important role in
determining the biogeochemical fate of a bloom. The oligotrophic waters of
subtropical gyres are typically characterized by extensive recycling of elements
through the microbial loop with little export. As biology responds to the eddy-
induced nutrient pumping it will be important to document the rate and
efficiency by which heterotrophic prokaryotes process freshly produced organic
matter in order to better understand the flow of carbon and energy in these
mesoscale features. Monitoring the prokaryotic community structure will be
important to gain insight to the ecological response and biogeochemical
processing within these features. Our measurements will complement and
strengthen concurrent assessments of various parameters collected by the funded
EDDIES program. Broader Impacts There are four specific objectives incorporated
into the broader impacts portion of this proposal: 1) Participation and support
for a post-doctoral fellow as well as undergraduate laboratory assistants, 2)
Curricular development at UCSB, 3) Web-based outreach programs integrating the
microbial data set into a centralized .EDDIES. website, the BATS and Microbial
Observatories websites as well as the UCSB Marine Science Institute web- and
laboratory-based outreach programs, and 4) Integration of fieldwork at sea
experiences into the UCSB Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) mentorship
program targeted at keeping undergraduate women in the sciences.