* 0425413
* A Study of Warm Core Ring - Shelf/Slope Interaction from the Oleander Project
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Dong-Ping Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2009
* USD 340,438.00

0425413&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The Oleander project was
conceived primarily to establish a long-term monitoring of the Gulf Stream's
pole ward transport of mass and heat. Since October of 1992, the container ship,
the MV Oleander, has been collecting ADCP observations on an almost continuous
basis as the ship makes its weekly trips between New York and Bermuda. Over the
last nine years (1993-2001) a total of 554 useful shelf/slope transects have
been obtained, as well as a complete analysis of detiding, which has offered new
insights about the Mid-Atlantic Bight shelf/slope circulation. But, perhaps what
has been even more revealing from the Oleander transects are the observations
which have indicated that the warm core rings observed over the transit area
have sustained much influence on the shelf/slope. Nearly one-half of the
transects were influenced by strong easterly currents associated with warm core
rings, suggesting that the warm core rings most likely dominate the shelf-slope
water exchange. Therefore, it is timely to complete a study of the shelf/slope
circulation that also considers the impact of warm core rings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers from the State University of
New York at Stony Brooks will continue the present data analysis effort of the
Oleander project, but shift the emphasis toward interpretation rather than
quality assurance. Specifically, the team of scientists will combine the
Oleander observations with satellite and other complimentary data, to
investigate the interaction of the Gulf Stream warm core rings with the Mid-
Atlantic Bight shelf and slope. Each ring-induced small-scale feature along the
transit line will be isolated and their generation mechanisms examined, so that
the researchers can: 1) define the velocity structures of small-scale cyclones,
anticyclones, and jets (streamers and shelfbreak jet) with respect to the
swirling motion of the warm rings; 2) determine whether or not there are
significantly different types of ring-slope interactions in relation to the ring
size, strength, and proximity to the shelfbreak; 3) determine the seasonal
dependence and possible interannual variability (in relation to Gulf Stream path
variations) of the ring-slope interaction. And 4) Examine the mechanisms of
generation of cyclones, anticyclones, and
streamers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The mean and seasonal
shelf/slope currents are determined for the period of no visible influence of
warm core rings. It is shown that the equatorward transport extends well beyond
the shelf break and that the upper slope currents are a major source of the
shelf water transport.. Since the shelf/slope currents are much more energetic
during the ring period, it is likely that warm core rings may dominate the
exchange between shelf and slope. At present, very little is known about the
ring-slope interaction. The proposed study will shed insights about this
important but long ignored process. The implication can be enormous, leading to
a new understanding of the material (water, salt, carbon cycle, etc.) exchange
across the continental margin. This project also includes training of a Ph.D.
student. The principal investigator is committed to training of the next
generation leaders of diverse background (and professional interests). He also
is involved with the university's new undergraduate environmental studies
program and plans to engage several undergraduate students for honor credits in
this project, in the area of processing and analysis of satellite
imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;