* 0425603
* Collaborative Research: Electrodialysis/Reverse Osmosis - Development of an Improved Method to Concentrate Dissolved Organic Matter from Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Peter Pfromm, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2008
* USD 213,119.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0425624&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large size
and dynamics of the ocean dissolved organic matter (DOM) pool have made it an
important focus of many studies of global elemental cycles. These studies are
motivated by the direct and indirect influences of DOM cycling on processes such
as global warming and marine productivity. Over the last three decades, numerous
compositional studies of various size fractions and chemical extracts have
significantly increased our understanding of the origin and cycling of marine
DOM. A large fraction of marine DOM, however, still remains compositionally
uncharacterized. A major obstacle in the study of marine DOM has been isolating
from seawater sufficient quantities for analysis of this highly dilute and
chemically complex material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project researchers
at the Georgia Institute of Technology and Kansas State University will develop,
test, and apply a process using reverse osmosis (RO) in combination with
electrodialysis (ED) for the concentration and practical retrieval of
significant quantities of essentially unaltered DOM from seawater. RO methods
have been shown to recover a significant fraction (90%) of DOM from fresh waters
with little physical or chemical alteration. Unfortunately, the extent to which
a DOM sample can be concentrated by RO in saline waters is very limited because
RO membranes co-concentrate inorganic salts with DOM. Salt accumulation during
RO leads to solutions requiring very high pressures during processing to
overcome osmotic forces and to formation of membrane-fouling inorganic
precipitates. To achieve the same high DOM recoveries from saline waters that
are achieved when RO is used to process fresh waters, an independent method for
removal of inorganic salts is required. Electrodialysis, a well-established
process for removal of inorganic salts from aqueous solutions, is such a method.
Preliminary experiments by the co-investigators indicate that ED can
significantly reduce salt concentrations in natural waters with little or no
loss of DOM. Thus, the proposed process will use ED to reduce the salt
concentrations, so that RO techniques can be used to recover
DOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of laboratory experiments using artificial
and natural seawater solutions will be used to evaluate and optimize the coupled
RO/ED process. During the final stage of this research, the combined technique
will be applied to seawater samples. The PIs already have two laboratory-scale
ED systems and a portable RO unit capable of processing large volumes of water
(hundreds of liters), which represents a significant cost savings to NSF for
this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The expected result from this
work is an enabling tool for environmental research that is far superior to the
best current techniques (i.e., ultrafiltration) for recovery of marine DOM.
Research involving the recovery of complex organic molecules in natural water
sources (rivers, lakes, seawater) will be greatly facilitated by a field-
deployable method for pre-concentration. In terms of broader educational
impacts, this investigation will allow the PIs to train and mentor a diverse
group of students and researchers, including several minorities and women.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;