* 0425151
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Vision for the Center--Elite Refashioning of American Evangelicalism
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Robert Wuthnow, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 08/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

This dissertation aims to explore the changing contours of American
evangelicalism, examining its development as a contemporary social movement and
paying particular attention to the role of societal leaders in the refashioning
of this religious movement. Evangelicalism is a central part of the American
religious landscape, and it has changed over the last thirty years. While some
studies have explored the evangelical movement at the grassroots level, little
scholarly attention has been directed to the role of elites within American
evangelicalism. This dissertation hypothesizes that a cohort of elites-who will
be called "leading evangelicals"-represent the "hidden hand" of evangelicalism
and have exerted significant, often understated influence in changing the
movement's direction, scope, and strategies since 1976. This project seeks to
understand how a cohort of leading evangelicals have transformed the movement
from one confined to the lower socio-economic strata of American life to a
movement at home in the White House and among other positions of societal
influence. Through semi-structured interviews with leading evangelical
informants, content analysis of evangelical organizations' documents, and
participant-observation at several evangelical gatherings, this project will
bring to bear multiple methods of inquiry to examine this important, changing
aspect of American society. The proposed research will address five primary
issues: 1) identification of leading evangelicals and an analysis of their
religious lives; 2) relative cohesion and polarization of leading evangelical
networks; 3) legitimating the movement to a wider public audience; 4) financing
the movement and examining the tensions among issues of power, wealth, and
philanthropy; and 5) social movement leadership. The broader impacts of this
research are as follows: This research will be of useful to researchers
interested in understanding contemporary U.S. evangelicalism, elites' religious
lives, ways in which contemporary religious movements interact with the wider
social world, particularly at the highest levels of power and influence, the
relationships between cultural icons and the general public within the matrix of
a shared identity, and the role of elites and their networks in refashioning
institutional boundaries and cultural repertoires.