* 0425690
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Globalization and the Women's Movement in Indonesia
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Saskia Sassen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 7,500.00

Since September 11, 2001, the world has been rocked by terrorism and war. The
repercussions of these events have deeply impacted Indonesia, home to the
world's largest Muslim population. Not surprisingly, there has been a backlash
in Indonesia against ideas and institutions identified as American or "Western."
The rights and roles of women in the family and society are currently vital
discussions in Indonesia. At the same time, the Indonesian women's movement has
continued to grow and mature. Women's groups have benefited from their exposure
to foreign donors and interaction with international women's movements. So in
the current context of polarization, I ask, how are Indonesian women's
organizations using Western-derived ideas about gender and women's rights? How
are they adapting these concepts in their struggles for equality, rights, and
justice? How does their application of such ideas shape their participation in
ongoing debates and conflicts within Indonesia? To answer these questions, I
spent September 2002 through August 2003 pursuing ethnographic research on four
women's organizations in Jakarta. These organizations ranged from a secular
feminist group to the women's division of an Islamist political party. Through
in-depth, participant observation, I came to know these Indonesian activists and
understand their views on women's rights, gender equality, and sexuality.
Women's rights movements in the Middle East are usually secular, so the
Indonesian women's movement is distinctive in that many participants find it
possible to be a Muslim and a feminist. This research examines the multiple
meanings of gender and women's rights to women activists, probing different ways
of being feminist. It also contributes to the debates on feminism, gender, and
Islam by adding an Indonesian context to the research of scholars such as Lila
Abu-Lughod and Haleh Afshar. Finally, suggesting that similar women's
organizations even within the same city may be engaging with diverse global
structures, this research provides a more multifaceted understanding of
globalization's impacts on Indonesia. Though globalization is often blamed for
provoking religious fundamentalism, this research shows that global flows of
culture and ideas can also provide important conceptual tools for women's
organizations to promote rights and equality in their countries. The broader
impacts of this research include the following. This research will be useful to
researchers, students, and policymakers interested in understanding Muslim
women's movements in the developing world, a topic which has not been adequately
studied in the social sciences. When the dissertation is complete, I will donate
copies to the libraries of my research sites, as well as to the Women's Studies
Department at the University of Indonesia and the Center for Societal
Development Studies at Atma Jaya University.