* 0425798
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dividing the Field: Credentials, Organizational Dynamics and Sex Segregation in U.S. Higher Education, 1970-2000
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,10/31/2005
* William Bielby, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 10/31/2005
* USD 5,900.00

Do organizational actors in colleges and universities play a role in
orchestrating and facilitating student segregation processes by creating new
credentials, abandoning others, and offering a specific menu of credentials
tailored to their student constituencies? How do organizational structures and
student constituencies interact dynamically over time in the marketplace of
credentials? Can we begin to visualize credentials as constituting a larger
symbolic system that is socially organized and capable of adapting to ongoing
social change? In answering these questions, this dissertation tests the
provocative thesis - derived from key findings in economic sociology and the
sociology of culture - that institutional categories such as credentials
constitute symbolic boundaries that are grounded in societal cleavages, and
organized into meaningful systems through the collusion of individual choice and
organizational fiat. Using annual survey data on student characteristics and
degree choices (Cooperative Institutional Research Program) as well as
organizational characteristics and degrees conferred (National Center for
Educational Statistics), I employ a comparative strategy, analyzing two
carefully selected fields of higher education (business and engineering) since
1970 - a period when the constituencies of these fields change dramatically,
especially in terms of gender. I employ social network methods to both (1) model
credentials as institutional categories competing for position within a dynamic
socio-demographic space of student consumers, and (2) relate the position of
business and engineering credentials within this consumer space to processes of
organizational differentiation and student segregation within the field of U.S.
colleges and universities. I employ more standard regression techniques to test
key hypotheses concerning how these two levels interact over time. Although it
is well understood that the unequal distribution of credentials plays a central
role in reproducing racial, class and gender inequalities, there has yet to be a
sociology of credentials that connects such societal-level outcomes explicitly
to the dynamics of credential markets themselves. Broader impacts of this
project therefore include the following: Theoretically, this work helps to
further bridge a gap between micro and macro level approaches to student
segregation processes, while further linking two important areas of sociological
research - the study of organizational dynamics and the culturally focused
analyses of social inequality. Substantively, a more organizationally grounded
understanding of segregation processes will help inform those concerned for
scholarly or policy reasons with addressing the persistent and underlying causes
of inequality within higher education as well as the workplace.
Methodologically, this research develops a unique approach for modeling and
testing field-level hypotheses that is tailored for this project, but will be of
value to other researchers concerned with organizational dynamics.