* 0425806
* Stability of Thin Current Sheets in the Earth's Magnetotail: Theory, Simulations, and Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Amitava Bhattacharjee, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 06/30/2008
* USD 329,998.00

Thin sheets of electric current form in the Earth's magnetotail during the
growth phase of a magnetospheric substorm. It is likely that the stability or
lack thereof of the current sheets plays an important role in the triggering of
the substorm expansion phase. This project will utilize analytical theory, Hall
Magnetohydrodynamic (Hall-MHD) simulations and Particle-In-Cell (PIC)
simulations to study the stability of thin current sheets. The theoretical and
simulation results will be compared with observations from the Cluster and Polar
satellites. The high-performance computing tools to be used include a 3D Hall
MHD code which incorporates Adaptive Mesh Refinement, and a fully
electromagnetic PIC code. The tasks proposed are: (i) a comparative study of the
linear stability of the kinetic drift-ballooning instability in Hall MHD and PIC
models, including the effect of sheared flows and the effects of line-tying at
the ionosphere, (ii) investigation of the nonlinear stability and possible near-
explosive growth of drift-ballooning instabilities and possible coupling to
reconnection dynamics at substorm onset, and (iii) the comparison of the
predictions of theory and simulations with CLUSTER and POLAR observations at
mid-tail and near-Earth distances. The proposed work integrates teaching and
research at all levels, from high-school to postdoctoral studies. It includes:
(i) participation in a summer institute at the University of New Hampshire
called Project SMART (Science and Mathematics Achievement through Research
Training) which provides exciting research experiences for local high school
students, (ii) co-sponsorship of a pilot Summer Internship in the Research And
Discover (RAD) program for undergraduates in their junior and senior years, and
(iii) mentorship of postdoctoral and junior research scientists.