* 0425118
* Collaborative Research:  The Impact of Advice on Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Andrew Schotter, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 234,001.00

The PI team's past research on decision making under the influence of advice has
led to a body of experimental results that indicate that word-of-mouth advice is
a very powerful force in shaping the decisions that people make and tends to
push those decisions in the direction of the predictions of the rational theory.
More precisely, their previous research has indicated that: 1) Laboratory
subjects tend to follow the advice of naive advisors, i.e. advisors that are
hardly any more expert in the task they are engaged in than they are. 2) This
advice changes their behavior in the sense that subjects who play games or make
decisions with naive advice play differently than those who play identical games
without such advice. 3) The decisions made in games played with naive advice are
closer to the predictions of economic theory than those made without it. 4) If
given a choice between getting advice or the information upon which that advice
was based, subjects tend to opt for the advice indicating a kind of under-
confidence in their decision making abilities that is counter to the usual ego-
centric bias or overconfidence observed by psychologists. 5) The reason why
advice increases efficiency or rationality is that the process of giving and or
receiving advice forces a decision maker to think about the problem they are
facing in a way different from the way they would do so if no advice were
offered. This research project will continue experimental research on the role
of advice giving and receiving in a variety of economic environments with
strategic and state uncertainty. There are three main foci of the research, each
with a distinct experimental program. These are (i) the role of advice in
individual decision-making, (ii) the role of advice in learning transfer, and
(iii) the role of advice in intra-generational convention formation. The goal is
to investigate the role that advice can play in improving by incorporating some
of the elements of the previous research on individual decision-making , We will
compare the play of subjects who receive advice from "experts" who have played
the game previously with the play of subjects who are only able to view the
history of play of the experts. We will also manipulate the amount of experience
the advice giver has, e.g., as little as one period of experience or as much as
100 periods of experience. Previous and ongoing research on learning transfer
-referring to the process whereby experience in one environment helps one to
understand how to behave in another environment-has been concerned mainly with
the question of how and whether individuals are able to learn some general
principles that apply in related strategic situations. In general, learning
transfer does not seem to be very strong. Individuals have trouble carrying over
general game-theoretic principles from one environment to another, even if the
specific application of the principle in one environment appears to be
understood. As so much of the previous research has shown that the presence of
advice in strategic situations tends to be rationality-enhancing, we will
investigate the role that advice plays in improving learning transfer. The PIs
have studied inter-generational (or vertical) advice giving and receiving in
many different games, but another dimension of interaction that figures
prominently in theories of social and cultural evolution is the intra-
generational (or horizontal) dimension, in which members of the same generation
interact with and influence one another, and it seems natural to ask what the
role of advice giving and receiving might be here as well. The PIs will study
this dimension of advice-giving and receiving in order to quantify, for example,
the relationship between the strength of a convention of behavior within a
generation to the continuation probability of that convention over subsequent
generations of players.



