* 0425994
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Electrokinetic-Enhanced Bioremediation of Metal-Contaminated Soils
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Krishna Reddy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 08/31/2006
* USD 11,000.00

OISE 0425994&lt;br/&gt;Krishna Reddy, University of Illinois at
Chicago&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports an U.S.-Korea research
collaboration involving Professor Krishna Reddy and a graduate student of the
University of Illinois at Chicago and Dr. Ji-Won Yang and others of the National
Lab for Environmental Remediation of the Korea Advanced Institute of Science
&amp; Technology (KAIST). They propose to develop an innovative integrated
electrokinetic-bioremediation technology to remediate heavy metal contamination
in soils. The Korean team has conducted extensive research on soil and
groundwater remediation technologies and has expertise on bioremediation of
contaminated soils. They will study biological transformation of heavy metals in
conjunction with the use of electrokinetics as delivery system. The PI has
extensive research experience with in-situ remediation of contaminated sites and
in particular with electrokinetic remediation of soils; he will focus on the
electrokinetic aspects of the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heavy metal contamination is prevalent at numerous
sites in the United States and Korea. The specific objectives of the proposed
research are (1) investigate biological transformations of heavy metals in
soils, (2) investigate electrokinetic transport of nutrients and microorganisms
in soils, and (3) investigate biological immobilization of heavy metals in soils
through electrokinetically enhanced biostimulation and bioaugmentation. Several
fundamental aspects of this technology for the removal of toxic hydrophobic
organic compounds from soils are being addressed under Professor Reddy's current
NSF research support from the Division of Civil and Mechanical Engineering.
CMS-0100073. These objectives will be accomplished by laboratory experiments:
(1) to characterize microbial transformation of heavy metals in soils; (2) to
assess electrokinetic delivery of nutrients and microbes under different soil
conditions; and (3) to investigate efficiency of integrated electrokinetic-
enhanced bio-immobilization of heavy metals in different soil conditions. The
experimental results will be utilized to develop guidelines for the design and
implementation of field-scale systems and to assess long-term implications of
the treatment technology. The combined relevant expertise of the US and Korean
researchers will facilitate successful completion of the proposed research.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Electrokinetic
bio-immobilization has great potential to remediate contaminated sites under
difficult subsurface conditions. Numerous sites in the United States and in
Korea are contaminated with toxic heavy metals and they require urgent cleanup
to protect public health and the environment. Employing natural biological
processes is finding widespread public support. Unfortunately, most contaminated
sites suffer from the poor bioavailability and mobility of contaminants, as well
as increased toxicity. The proposed research will determine the ability of this
process to immobilize heavy metals. It also establishes a new collaboration
between US and Korean researchers and brings together the relevant expertise to
develop an innovative hazardous waste site cleanup technology. Integrated
electrokinetic-bioremediation technology has potential to be a simple, efficient
and cost-effective in-situ technology to remediate contaminated sites in many
countries. Being an in-situ method, this technology can reduce site disturbance
during remedial operations, thereby eliminating contaminant exposure of the
surrounding environment and the public. Korean participation will be supported
by the Korean Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). This project will
provide international research training and experience to the PI and to a U.S.
graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;