* 0425307
* Santa Cruz Meeting on Developmental Biology; August 5-9, 2004; Santa Cruz, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Andrew Chisholm, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2005
* USD 5,000.00

Funding is requested for the 2004 Santa Cruz meeting on Developmental Biology,
to be held 5-9 August 2004 at the University of California, Santa Cruz,
California. Previous Santa Cruz Developmental Biology (SCDB) meetings have
provided a stimulating and focused forum for discussion of current research by
developmental biologists. SCDB meetings are international in scope and are
accessible to junior faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students. SCDB
meetings emphasize the conceptual unity of developmental biology at the level of
mechanism, while covering and eclectic range of current topics. The topics for
the 2004 meeting include: pattern formation; morphogenesis and cell migration;
evolution and development; stem cells; non-coding RNAs; cellular asymmetry;
organogenesis; development of the nervous system, and disease. Speakers are
invited from both plant and animal development fields. The 2004 meeting will
have 40-50 platform speakers, of which 10-15 will be chosen from abstracts
submitted to the meeting organizers. Platform sessions are organized to allow
ample time for discussions; the extensive discussion periods have been cited as
one of the best features of previous SCDB meetings. Posters are continuously
displayed and several poster sessions are scheduled in the meeting, as well as
time for informal discussions.

The 2004 SCDB meeting will build on the success of previous meetings in this
series. SCDB meetings are hosted by the University of California, Santa Cruz
(UCSC). The conference site is arranged so that platform sessions, posters,
accommodation, and dining facilities are in close proximity; access for disabled
participants is ensured by UCSC. The UCSC setting is cost effective. Conference
logistics are provided by UCSC Conference Services. The UCSC campus is within an
hour's drive of the San Francisco Bay Area; travel from nearby airports is
simple, but the site is sufficiently isolated and pleasant that speakers and
participants tend to stay in residence for the entire meeting. Thus, the SCDB
meeting, although modeled on a Gordon Research Conference, has several
additional advantages that have made it a valued venue for the Developmental
Biology community.

Intellectual merit: The Santa Cruz meetings on Developmental Biology have become
a well established venue for presentation and discussion of current results
across the field of developmental biology. Unlike other comparably sized
meetings, SCDB meetings emphasize interdisciplinary approaches, and are not
focused on specific processes or organisms. One theme of the 2004 meeting will
be the use of comparative and evolutionary approaches to understanding
development; for example, in addition to classical model systems, the meeting
will include presentations on mollusks, planarians, and stickleback fish. The
SCDB meeting will emphasize the general implications of such studies for
developmental mechanisms.

Broader impact: The broader impacts of the 2004 SCDB meeting will be in
fostering developmental biology research and in training. Previous SCDB meetings
have stimulated collaborative research by bringing together an eclectic group of
active investigators in a collegial setting. It is anticipated that the 2004
meeting will likewise foster new collaborations.

Previous SCDB meetings have also had broader impact in enhancing the training of
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty in the field of
developmental biology. The size and organization of SCDB meetings allows all
attendees to present their research and to fully participate in discussions.
SCDB meeting attendees also regularly include representatives from major
scientific journals. Active participation in meetings and exposure to prominent
scientists in the field are both important training goals for scientists in the
early stages of their careers.