* 0425714
* Student Travel for IEEE/LEOS 1st International Conference on Group IV Photonics (GFP2004); Hong Kong; Sept. 29 - Oct. 1, 2004
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Paul Shumate, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/2005
* USD 5,000.00

An international conference on Group IV Photonics will be held September
29-October 1, 2004 in Hong Kong. The conference is organized to include
discussion of new research results on materials and devices in which the active
region consists of binary or ternary alloys of C, Si, Ge, Sn or of the elemental
semiconductors themselves will be presented and discussed. Materials structures
may employ bulk layers or quantum-confined heterostructures including quantum
wells, wires, and dots. Papers on photonic-bandgap structures and other
nanostructures are welcomed. Although an "all-group-IV" solution is emphasized,
the conference will accept papers that describe monolithic, or quasi-monolithic,
integration of group III-V and II-VI semiconductor structures upon silicon. The
format includes oral and poster sessions. The conference is expected to
stimulate collaboration and discussion between researchers, especially between
young professionals and established experts and to identify critical scientific
issues.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An evaluation of the progress and status of
fundamental phenomena involved in Group IV Photonics is an important and timely
topic, and will be of great value to progress in the electronics/photonics
field. Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future directions, it
is expected that new ties will be established among universities, research
institutions, and industry. The requested NSF funds will be used to facilitate
participation in the meeting by students. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;