* 0425247
* Center for Multi-Scale Modeling of Atmospheric Processes (MMAP)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2006,06/30/2017
* David Randall, Colorado State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2017
* USD 37,505,835.00

This NSF Science and Technology Center (STC) will focus on the representation of
cloud processes in climate models. The STC's name is the "Center for Multi-Scale
Modeling of Atmospheric Processes" (MMAP), and the lead institution is Colorado
State University (CSU). The goal of MMAP is to break the "deadlock" that has
stalled the progress of climate research for several decades. Climate models are
physically based and include representations of the atmosphere, the ocean, the
land-surface, and the cryosphere. They run on the most powerful computers
available. They are now providing predictions of future climate change due to
anthropogenic changes in the composition of the Earth's atmosphere. These
predictions are being used as input to policy decisions that have enormous
economic implications for the U.S. and the world. It has been true for decades
now that our inability to simulate the interactions of clouds with large-scale
atmospheric circulations is one of the most important limitations on the
reliability of climate-change simulations. Poor simulations of cloud systems
also reduce the skill of weather forecasts, especially for precipitation. MMAP
will address this problem through a revolutionary new approach called the
"multi-scale modeling framework" (MMF), in which fine-grid Cloud-System
Resolving Models (CSRMs) are embedded within the much larger grid cells of an
atmospheric general circulation model (GCM). In an MMF, the CSRM takes the place
of the single-column "conventional parameterizations" that are used in current
GCMs. Whereas conventional parameterizations are based on statistical theories
involving uncertain closure assumptions and little or no information about the
spatial structure of the cloud field, MMFs resolve cloud processes explicitly
down to a scale of a few kilometers, and so represent some aspects of the
spatial structure explicitly.

The first MMF was created by MMAP scientist W. Grabowski of NCAR. In most of the
prototype studies carried out to date, the CSRM is two-dimensional (2D), with
periodic boundary conditions. It represents a "sample" of the clouds in a GCM
grid column. The CSRM's high-resolution depiction of a cloud field can be used
to compute statistics (e.g., the precipitation rate and fractional cloudiness)
for the sampled portion of the GCM's grid column, and these statistics are
applied to the entire grid column. A key point is that MMFs can represent the
cloud-scale interactions among the many physical and chemical processes that are
active in cloud systems, including cloud dynamics, microphysics including
aerosols, turbulence, and radiation. MMFs eliminate the need for closure
assumptions to determine the strength of deep convective activity. They
eliminate the need for cloud-overlap assumptions in the radiative transfer and
microphysics parameterizations. They have the potential to represent the
interactions of both clouds and gravity waves with orography. They are also
particularly attractive for the simulation of chemical species transports and
transformations within cloud systems, as well as small-scale interactions
between the atmosphere and the biological and hydrological processes of the
land-surface. MMFs must still include parameterizations of critical sub-cloud-
scale processes, including microphysics, turbulence, and radiative transfer.
Because these processes are represented on the cloud-scale, however, they can be
parameterized in relatively straightforward ways. A further very important
strength of an MMF is that the results produced can be evaluated by comparison
of simulated and observed cloud-scale processes. Recent work at CSU has shown
that, relative to a control simulation with a conventional GCM, a prototype MMF
produces greatly improved simulations of atmospheric variability on a variety of
time scales, from diurnal to intra-seasonal. It also gives more realistic
simulations of cloudiness and precipitation. Experiments with the MMF have
already shown that cloud-scale variability of the radiative heating rate is
important, as is convective momentum transport, which is included in a new
version of the MMF that uses a 3D CSRM. A key part of the research consists of
further development of the MMF concept, beginning with a new version of the MMF
in which the periodic boundary conditions of the CSRM are eliminated, and
multiple 2D CSRMs are combined to create a "quasi-3D" MMF. Removal of the 2D
constraint permits convective systems to have arbitrary orientation and to
vertically transport horizontal momentum. Removal of the periodic boundary
conditions allows convective systems to propagate from one GCM grid column to
the next, and prevents the convection from being artificially "squeezed" as the
periodic domain decreases in size. Because there is no reason to alter the
formulation of the embedded CSRM when the GCM's resolution is increased, the
formulation of the quasi-3D MMF is independent of the spacing of the outer grid.
In addition, realistic topographic forcing can be prescribed from data, and used
to simulate orographic gravity waves and orographic clouds. Finally, a quasi-3D
MMF converges in a smooth and natural way to a global CSRM, as the size of the
outer grid is refined. The PIs emphasize that no existing GCM has this
convergence property. They plan to develop, evaluate, and apply a quasi-3D MMF
as the central, organizing activity of the research.

MMAP's education and human-resource goals are to provide first-rate graduate
education in Atmospheric Science; to interest undergraduates in graduate
education and careers in climate science; and to develop and disseminate
teaching materials designed to inform K-12 students (and their teachers) about
the nature of the climate system and the career opportunities in climate
science. In each of these areas, MMAP will make a special effort to include
students from groups that are under-represented among climate- science
professionals. MMAP will undertake two publishing projects that will
significantly enhance scientific communication in our field: the creation of a
new and unique online technical journal devoted to global modeling, and the
production of an edited book on the history of global climate modeling,
including transcripts of interviews with the key participants.

The intellectual merit of MMAP's research lies in its revolutionary approach to
the cloud-climate problem. Earth system scientists can learn a lot about the
global climate system by approaching the problem of climate modeling from a new
and different perspective, and this new knowledge is the most valuable thing
that will flow from MMAP's research.

The research will have broad impacts on both science and society because it will
increase both our understanding of climate dynamics, and our ability to make
reliable predictions of cloud feedbacks on climate change. The legacy of MMAP
will include important new modeling tools that will provide substantially more
reliable predictions of anthropogenic climate change. In addition, MMAP will
demonstrate new ways to compare high resolution observations with global model
results, enable improved weather forecasts by the operational centers,
strengthen the scientific interactions between global modelers on the one hand
and cloud-scale observers and cloud modelers on the other, create a heightened
awareness of the excitement and opportunities of climate research among both
female and male students from all ethnic backgrounds and at all levels,
inaugurate a unique new scholarly journal, and produce a book that captures the
history of global climate modeling with an emphasis on the cloud
parameterization problem.