* 0425433
* Doctoral Dissertation Research, Diversification, Mergers, and Acquisitions in the Telecommunication Market, 1990-2002
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2005
* USD 4,744.00

This study will explore how potential market value is constructed in a field of
competitive firms seeking to grow using acquisitions. I will use a
neoinstitutional framework to examine how competition, monitoring, and mimicry
leads to the construction of value in telecommunications and media market
segments following the 1996 deregulation. I will ask and attempt to provide
answers to two questions: 1) what is the effect of mimicry on acquisitions into
specific market segments, and 2) did acquisitions contribute to overvaluation of
firms in market segments characterized by aggregated peer mimicry? These
questions are of particular interest when applied to the telecommunications and
media market segments in the post-1996 era when those markets experienced
significant deregulation and new technologies emerged that threatened to
displace incumbent firms and market segments. I will collect data on
acquisitions among publicly traded corporations in the telecommunications and
media segments during this time span (using the Mergers and Acquisitions
publication) and then combine it with financial data from the COMPUSTAT and CRSP
databases. I will also collect additional data on technological innovation (from
the U.S. patent website) and corporate interlocks. Using the dyad as the unit of
analysis I will, first, determine to what extent competition and peer mimicry
(and their interaction) affect the acquisition of a target by a bidding firm. In
a second analysis, I will determine to what extent peer mimicry positively
affects the shareholder value (or excess value) of acquiring firms. Finally, I
will discuss how peer mimicry among telecommunications and media firms may have
contributed to the creation of a "market bubble," which eventually imploded when
revenues and productivity did not meet expected levels. This study will
contribute to our understanding of the construction of market value. While
earlier studies have focused on how external norms and institutions affect
pricing, in my dissertation I will conceptualize market value as emerging from
the competitive dynamics of the market itself, although not in the ways
typically conceived by economists. Competition, rather than causing prices to
center on some "true" level of demand, may actually cause firms to inflate the
potential value of products and services. The broader impacts of this study are
twofold: This sociological understanding of value creation will provide
policymakers and scholars with a more empirical understanding of market
processes and of the effect of increased competition and deregulation on
innovative industries. These findings will contribute to an interdisciplinary
approach to market behavior and will provide evidence of firm behavior following
deregulation that can be used in future policy debates.