* 0425267
* Conference:  3rd International Congress on Plant Metabolomics to be held June 2004 in Ames, Iowa
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Eve Wurtele, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 05/31/2005
* USD 27,225.00

Partial support is requested for the 3rd International Congress on Plant
Metabolomics to be held from June 3 to 6, 2004 at Iowa State University, Ames,
Iowa. The meeting will include presentations by 9 invited speakers who are
leaders in different aspects of plant metabolomics. Up to twelve additional
speakers will be selected from submitted abstracts for short oral presentations.
The meeting also includes poster sessions and time for informal discussions. The
conference incorporates programmatic and educational features to encourage
meaningful participation by scientists and students representing diversity in
experimental system, career level, ethnicity and
gender.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Since the sequencing
of the first plant genome (Arabidopsis), it has become possible to envision the
functionality of the entire complement of genes that encompasses a plant. This
challenge has manifested a systems-based approach to visualize the expression of
the entire genome. Specifically, technologies for globally measuring gene
expression at the mRNA (transcriptomics) and protein (proteomics) levels have
been developed. Metabolomics is the technology for globally measuring gene
expression at the metabolite level, which probably represents the ultimate
expression of the functionality of a genome that can be chemically defined.
Metabolomics is an emerging field. The International Congress on Plant
Metabolomics was initiated just 2 years ago and is the medium that brings
together the leading practitioners in this new emerging area of plant functional
genomics. Previous meetings have been held in Europe, and this, 3rd meeting in
this series will be the first to be held in the US. The Congress will for the
first time in this country provide a landmark opportunity for plant biologists,
chemists and bioinformaticists to meet, discuss and interact in the context of a
major international meeting on plant metabolomics. The Symposium will be one of
an ongoing series of symposia sponsored by the Plant Sciences Institute at Iowa
State University. The program will address the current and potential
applications of metabolomics in gene discovery and directed genome
modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This symposium is designed
to initiate and foster interactions among practitioners of metabolomics and
researchers studying plant biology. The speakers have been chosen to present
investigations on a variety of related topics, including the development of new
analytical technologies, statistical analysis of metabolomics data, and the role
of metabolomics in solving biological problems via a systems approach.
Approximately one third of the invited speakers are women; up to twelve
additional short talks will be selected from submitted abstracts to increase
diversity in career level and to enhance participation of underrepresented
groups. An important purpose of these symposia is to promote interactions and
new collaborations among researchers who might not normally come together at a
single symposium. In addition to the attendance of graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers, special efforts will be made to encourage participation by
NSF-REUs, other undergraduate students, and interested high school teachers.
Long-standing relationships of ISU with historically black institutions and
undergraduate research experience programs will foster attendance of
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;