* 0425488
* Acceleration of Glacier Wastage in the Arctic System: Facts, Causes and What to Expect
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mark Meier, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2008
* USD 348,101.00

Glaciers are ubiquitous features of the Arctic archipelagos, islands, and
borderlands around the Greenland Ice Sheet. A significant fraction of the
freshwater that feeds the northern seas is derived from glaciers in the pan-
Arctic and for the most part, this meltwater discharges directly to the ocean
rather than into the major Arctic rivers. Thus, water balance on land,
calculated using the gauged discharges, is a poor estimate of the real water
balance. Arctic glaciers have had negative mass balances in recent decades due
to climate warming. This increasing contribution of runoff, which is spatially
and temporally different from normal precipitation-derived river runoff, affects
inflow to the Arctic Ocean and other northern waters. This change in turn
affects the future environment in the pan-Arctic region as well as global sea
level, imposing feedbacks to climate, the environment, the economy, and to
change in the geosphere. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This three-year project includes
new regional syntheses of glacier volume change and runoff using new data
sources and methodologies, leading to better understanding of the processes that
are causing increased glacier wastage. This synthesis will bring a better
understanding of the role of glaciers to the scientific community and provide
background for projecting future changes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit of the proposed research includes: It will present the relationship
between several scientific disciplines, involving glaciology, climatology,
oceanography, environmental change, and other geosciences. Glacier seasonal
balances will provide useful information on climate processes, especially
precipitation, and as the basis for hydrologic studies in parts of the Arctic
region. By estimating the melt-water exchange between land and ocean due to
receding glaciers, it will help us to understand the changes in Earth's
gravitational and rotational field, as well as ocean circulation and the pattern
of sea-level change. New analysis techniques, such as the template method for
expanding results spatially, and new ways to calculate size distributions, will
contribute new tools for researchers to use in other fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad implication of the proposed research: This will be
the first quantitative analysis, with carefully estimated accuracy, of glacier
change in the pan-Arctic for the period of instrumental observations. As such,
it will have broad impact on the interdisciplinary scientific community. The
time-series results will serve as a necessary source of data for validation of
model results and projection of future change. These environmental changes will
have noticeable effects on Arctic processes, such as ocean thermohaline
circulation, biota, local economy and life of indigenous people in USA, Canada,
Russia, and other Arctic countries. &lt;br/&gt;