* 0425579
* An ecophysiological analysis of marine facultatively lithotrophic bacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Gary King, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 478,400.00

Drs. King and Tolli will analyze the significance, structure and function of
bacterial facultative lithotroph and mixotroph (FL/M) communities along a near-
shore to offshore transect in the water column of the marine Damariscotta River
and the Gulf of Maine, and in intertidal sediments proximate to a near-shore
sites. The investigators suggest that FL/M communities play important and poorly
appreciated roles in heterotrophic carbon metabolism, as well as in the dynamics
of carbon monoxide (CO), hydrogen and other reduced inorganic substrates. These
researchers will investigate FL/M using molecular tools for the large sub-unit
genes of form IA and IC bacterial ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/
oxygenase (rbcL), and CO dehydrogenase (coxL) that they have recently developed,
and that they will apply for assays of marine systems for the first time. CoxL
will provide insights regarding the distribution and diversity of some
mixotrophs and facultative lithotrophs; rbcL will provide insights regarding
both facultative and obligate lithotrophs. Recent analyses of various
lithotrophic bacterial rbcL sequences and rbcL sequences from environmental DNA
indicate that they can use phylogenetic tools to distinguish between facultative
and obligate lithotrophs, thus allowing the PIs to answer questions about
lithotrophic community structure that could not be addressed previously. In
addition, these researchers will determine what relationships exist, if any,
between the structure and diversity of FL/M communities and microbial abundance,
cellular respiratory activity (ETS activity), and transformations of CO,
hydrogen, ammonium and thiosulfate. The broader impacts of the proposed study
will be derived from the investigator's efforts to train a postdoctoral research
associate, Ph.D. student and undergraduate students in aspects of marine
biogeochemistry, the physiology and ecology of specific groups of marine
microbes and in molecular microbial ecology. In addition, they will contribute
to a greater understanding of the Gulf of Maine and its near-shore ecosystems,
both of which are ecologically and economically important a regional scales.