* 0425527
* Eighth Conference of the Canadian Number Theory Association; June 20-25, 2004; Toronto, Canada
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Kannan Soundararajan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 04/30/2005
* USD 10,000.00

The Canadian Number Theory Association (CNTA) was founded in 1987
at&lt;br/&gt;the International Number Theory Conference at Laval University.
The&lt;br/&gt;purpose of the CNTA is to enhance and promote learning and
research in&lt;br/&gt;Number Theory. To advance these goals the CNTA organizes
major&lt;br/&gt;international conferences, with the aim of exposing students
and&lt;br/&gt;researchers to the latest developments in number theory. The
previous&lt;br/&gt;meetings have been held in Ban(r) (1988), Vancouver (1989),
Kingston&lt;br/&gt;(1991), Halifax (1994), Ottawa (1996), Winnipeg (1999) and
Montreal&lt;br/&gt;(2002). These have been conferences of extremely high quality
which&lt;br/&gt;have received generous financial support and enjoyed wide
participation&lt;br/&gt;by the international number theory community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a number of the previous meetings a component of that
support has&lt;br/&gt;been provided by the National Science Foundation
explicitly dedicated&lt;br/&gt;to the coverage of expenses for participation by
graduate students,&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral fellows, and early career mathematics
faculty who are&lt;br/&gt;resident in the United States. This award will support
the&lt;br/&gt;participation of young American academics at the CNTA Conference.
&lt;br/&gt;