* 0425897
* NSEC: Center for Probing the Nanoscale
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Kathryn Moler, Stanford University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Houghton Pratt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 7,620,029.00

The Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center at Stanford University on Probing
the Nanoscale (CPN) addresses the development of novel nanoprobes and
application of these probes to answer fundamental questions in science and
technology. The Center, which is a partnership between Stanford and IBM, has 13
participants from 5 departments, including 3 participants from IBM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of novel probes with revolutionary capabilities
that will be developed include: &lt;br/&gt;a scanning tunneling potentiometer
which can make electrical transport measurements on 10-nm length scales; a
scanning Hall probe microscope with 30-nm spatial resolution; a near-field
scanning optical microscopes with a thousand fold improvement in throughput;
SQUIDs with sub-micron spatial resolution and sensitivity approaching the
quantum limit with the ability to detect the spin of a single electron; a
scanning tunneling microscope which can conduct electron spin resonance
experiments at cryogenic temperatures; a magnetic resonance force microscope
that can detect the spin of a single electron, specify the location of the
electron, and measure the quantum mechanical state of the spin. These probes
will be applied to answer many fundamental questions such as these: What is the
length scale over which quantum mechanical behavior crosses over to become
classical diffusive transport? How does the spin state of an electron vary over
time and distance? How do the spins of electrons behave when the electrons cross
a planar interface? What are the mechanisms of pinning in high-temperature
superconductors? The Center also supports high risk, potentially high pay-off
projects through a seed program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center is expected to
have broader impact through its industrial and education outreach programs and
its study of societal and ethical issues of nanoscale science and engineering.
The Center expects to enhance the capabilities of the nanotechnology community
to measure, image, and control nanoscale phenomena. Specific connections to
users and manufacturers of nanoprobe instrumentation will be utilized to rapidly
transfer technological advances. The Center is committed to educating the next
generation of scientists and engineers regarding the theory, practice, and
implications of novel nanoprobes. The Center has an active undergraduate
research program, including undergraduate research opportunities at IBM. The CPN
Fellows Program will support graduate students, postdocs, and visitors engaged
in nanoprobe research and education. A Summer Institute for Middle School
Teachers is anticipated to touch thousands of middle school students each year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;