* 0425734
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Demand for Diversity: The Globalization of Asian Fruit and Vegetable Production for New York City Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Christine Padoch, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

New York City presents an enormous and ever-changing market for a large variety
of fruits and vegetables. Some products are produced regionally, most come from
distant corners of the world. Recent studies on agricultural commodity chains in
the United States suggest that homogenization and corporate appropriation are
associated with spatial expansion. Yet within New York City methods of food
procurement are continually remade. East Asian immigrants in New York City have
developed a diverse and dynamic system to satisfy the demands of their ethnic
groups. Although the Asian food system is rapidly undergoing geographic
expansion, it displays characteristics apart from other global food systems.
Trade networks based in social relations, diverse cropping systems, and family
owned and operated firms constitute the Asian food system. The seemingly unique
nature of this food system leads to the main research questions, how is the
distribution and production of Asian fruits and vegetables organized? Is it
different than corporately controlled, globalized agriculture? Does it have
different social and environmental impacts? Tying together previous studies on
the globalization of agriculture, alternative food systems and studies on
agrobiodiversity, this project will describe and analyze the cultivation and
marketing of Asian fruits and vegetables on a newly emergent global scale. The
project will be multi-sited and include New York City as the market destination,
southern Florida as a well-established point of production and distribution, and
Honduras as a newly emergent site of production. This project will combine
standard ecological surveys and spatial analysis with semi-structured interviews
to examine how the relationship between consumers, distributors and producers
ultimately influence the use of plant resources in a food system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on a food system broadly distinguished by
ethnicity, this research will describe how immigrants not only create new market
demands, but concurrently create new systems of resource use to satisfy their
demands. This understanding is significant in a world of highly mobile people
and commodities. This project will build on the tradition of research within
geography that looks at the influence of political and economic structures on
natural resource use, while taking a new approach that integrates this tradition
with research on global agricultural systems. Research results will include
impact analysis of a poorly-studied system of production and distribution and
will generate suggestions for market-based agricultural development and trade
regulation. High school students in New York City are included in the project as
interns, providing them with scientific training. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award will enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career. &lt;br/&gt;