* 0425785
* Collaborative Research: Petrology and Geochemistry of Gakkel Ridge Basalts
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Charles Langmuir, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 07/31/2007
* USD 198,522.00

Intellectual Merits: The Gakkel Ridge provides rich research opportunities as
the slowest spreading end member of the global system of ocean ridges, with the
spreading rate decreasing progressively towards the east. As the spreading rate
decreases, the thickness of the overlying lithosphere increases. This phenomenon
permits examination and possibly resolution of two major questions pertinent to
the formation of the ocean crust. First, is what the relative importance of
lithospheric thickness and mantle temperature on the genesis of ocean ridge
basalts? If ocean ridge basalts record mantle temperature, they will provide a
valuable record of current and past mantle temperature variations. Second, are
ocean ridge basalt isotope and trace element compositions controlled by
preferential sampling of a "veined mantle" component at small extents of
melting? Resolution of this question has implications for interpretations of the
entire trace element and isotope record of oceanic volcanics. The Arctic Mid-
Ocean Ridge Expedition (AMORE) in 2001 produced the first high resolution map of
the ridge and basement rocks from over 200 stations. Preliminary analyses for
major elements, trace elements, and strontium, neodymium, and lead isotopes
demonstrate the importance of an unexpected discovery-the existence of a mantle
domain boundary that occurs in a "sparsely magmatic zone" part way along the
ridge, where magmatism drops to zero and peridotites are emplaced at the
spreading axis. Samples to the west are similar to the Indian Ocean, while those
to the east are similar to the Pacific. Despite these complexities, the
predicted signal of low extents of melting in the eastern region is clear in
both major and trace elements. Coherent data sets on the large suite of samples
available will permit a separation of variables-the relative roles of mantle
composition, spreading rate, and mantle temperature. The Principal Investigators
will undertake a major analytical and modeling program: to complete the
geochemical program to precisely define the location and sharpness of the mantle
domain boundary, to model the melting process using existing and new major and
trace element data, to model the trace element and isotope evolution of both
domains, and to make detailed comparisons of the Arctic Basin signal to other
ocean basins. The new data and modeling will permit a clear comparison between
the effects of increasing lithospheric thickness and the global variations
observed elsewhere. Are they distinguishable, and do these differences accord
with model predictions? Important new approaches will include using hafnium
isotopes to evaluate the importance of garnet in the melting process, and laser
ablation ICP-MS analysis of melt inclusions to gain insights into processes of
melting and melt segregation and how they vary along the ridge. The new maps and
well located samples also give the opportunity to test models of magmatic
segmentation, and whether clearly defined and isolated volcanic centers are the
result of mantle heterogeneity, focusing of mantle flow, or melt focusing of
uniform flow. This work will continue the collaboration with Dr. Peter Michael,
University of Tulsa, who will also do analytical work on volatile elements, with
Dr. David Graham, Oregon State University, who is measuring noble gasses, and
with colleagues working on the peridotite samples recovered from this region.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Implications: This work addresses two of the most significant
issues pertinent to the ocean crust and mantle-the distribution of mantle
temperature and the nature of mantle heterogeneity, which have broad importance
across many disciplines. It has had, and will continue, to have an important
component of education and outreach. Students were involved in the sea-going
expedition, the work will involve participation by both graduate and
undergraduate students at two institutions, and there will be a series of public
lectures to expose more of the community to the historic discoveries made
possible by the new U. S. ice-breaking capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;