* 0425499
* Physiological ecology of intertidal development: linking embryo performance and adult reproductive ecology
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Robert Podolsky, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2006
* USD 341,544.00

Physiological ecology of intertidal development: &lt;br/&gt;linking embryo
performance and adult reproductive ecology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among marine
habitats, intertidal areas are extreme in their variability: tides create a
suite of &lt;br/&gt;physical changes that alter not only the mean and variance
of environmental conditions, but also the frequency of exposure to stress. For
species that develop in these habitats, survival and growth depend on
biochemical defenses mounted by embryos or on the selective timing or location
of reproduction by adults. Fitness consequences of spawning vary in time and
space, but adults have imperfect information about future conditions that
embryos will face. While adult responses are well-characterized, we know
relatively little about consequences of variability or stress for early stages,
which are especially sensitive to physical conditions and often represent a
life-history bottleneck. This project is an integrative research program in the
physiological ecology of intertidal reproduction and development. Egg masses of
the mollusc Melanochlamys diomedea are tethered in tide pools on the surface of
sand flats, where they experience developmental conditions that are highly
variable within and between tidal exchanges. This species provides a sensitive
and tractable system to relate embryo physiology, growth and survival, in both
the lab and field, to conditions of environmental variability and stress. In
addition, the ability to track adult reproductive output relative to
environmental conditions allows tests of whether reproductive patterns are
plastic and adaptive. Specifically, (1) To resolve developmental and ecological
conditions for embryonic stress protein expression. Temperature thresholds and
the developmental onset of stress protein induction in embryos collected in
different seasons and from thermally distinct habitats will be determined. (2)
To measure effects of temperature variability and stress on developmental
performance. Embryos will be exposed to controlled temperature profiles to
distinguish the contributions to performance of temperature mean, variance,
stress level, and rate of change. (3) To estimate the developmental consequences
of temperature variability under field conditions. Short-term exposure of egg
masses to field conditions and manipulation of UV will be used to model the
developmental consequences of natural variation in temperature and UV. (4) To
evaluate the contribution of adult reproductive timing to developmental success.
Adult reproductive patterns in the field will be used to test the hypotheses
that the timing of reproduction is non-random, correlated with environmental
conditions, and beneficial to offspring. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit.
Intertidal habitats offer a unique arena for understanding the impact of
ecological conditions on marine development and life-history evolution. Because
early stages are sensitive to physical conditions, and often represent a
bottleneck in marine population dynamics, populations that reproduce in
intertidal areas may be especially vulnerable to environmental challenges. This
project develops a unique approach to understanding the intersection of
environmental variability, developmental physiology, and reproductive ecology in
a highly relevant marine environment. It integrates information on mechanisms of
stress protection, developmental performance, field conditions, and reproductive
timing to understand responses to variability and stress at two distinct but
functionally-linked phases of the life cycle. By modeling development as a
function of variation in natural conditions, it makes and tests explicit
predictions about the fitness consequences of adult reproductive decisions.
Because temperature stability is the dominant paradigm in marine development,
research on responses to natural variability will further our understanding of
both basic developmental biology and the physiological ecology of marine early
life histories. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. The proposed research and
educational goals create opportunities for students at several stages of
education to participate in integrative research. Involvement with the FHL
Blinks Mentorship program will allow regular participation of minority students
in the PI's lab and in the department honors research program. Work with the
K-12 education coordinator at FHL will provide an opportunity to develop
experimental, inquiry-based and environmentally-focused primary school learning
exercises. Finally, participation in the community of developmental biologists
and marine ecologists at FHL will help the PI and graduate students to promote
intellectual exchange, synthesis, and teaching about marine development in an
ecological context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Edited 6/3/04 - JRP&lt;br/&gt;