* 0425261
* Dissertation Research: Dividing the Waters: Data, Models, and Environmental Policy in the American Southwest and U.S.-Mexico Border Region
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Robert Horwitz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 7,959.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant explores the
changing place of large-scale computer simulations within regimes of
environmental governance in the American Southwest and U.S.-Mexico border
region. Since the early 1990s, changes in model design (a shift towards
software-based and object-oriented strategies) and scale (a secular increase in
funding and expansion to new geographic locales) have pushed computer
simulations closer to the heart of environmental management, policy and
controversy. This has produced contradictory effects: on one hand, models enjoy
a new and growing prominence in the practice and politics of regional water
management; on the other, their very success has provoked widespread debate
among planners, policymakers and various environmental publics over their
fundamental nature and epistemic status: What sort of knowledge do models
produce, and how are we to credit this knowledge? How are relations of
uncertainty, credibility and trust expressed, managed and adjudicated at the
level of model design and use? What work can and should models do in mediating
public environmental controversies? This study traces a particular art of
environmental fact-making through its wider institutional and social context,
exploring the infrastructural work of model builders, users and publics
operating under the frequently intense spotlight of regional water politics. The
study methodology is comparative and ethnographic, drawing on original fieldwork
into three primary cases: the CALSIM II process undertaken by the California
Department of Water Resources and the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, originally
designed to model the interaction of the State Water and Central Valley
Projects, but increasingly &lt;br/&gt;being deployed as a general predictive
model for the state-wide system as a whole; RiverWare, a modeling environment
developed by the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation and the Tennessee Valley Authority
for decision support on the Colorado, Tennessee and other heavily-managed
basins; and Border+20, a group-based modeling exercise sponsored by the
Congressionally-funded Southwest Center for Environmental Research
&lt;br/&gt;and Policy that attempts to establish credible 20-year futures as a
basis for binational environmental policy and cooperation along the U.S.-Mexico
border. Funds will be used primarily to support travel to conduct interviews,
ethnographic observation and archival research with model developers and users
in California, Colorado, and Northern Mexico. Within the field of STS, the study
will contribute to emerging research on the role of distributed and computer-
based data systems in the mutual construction of the earth &lt;br/&gt;sciences
and public policy. Beyond its relevance for STS scholars, the study will speak
to pressing concerns faced by earth scientists, policy makers and environmental
publics as new data and information technologies and new modes of practice are
deployed throughout the environmental field. Most concretely, the study will
suggest empirically-grounded lessons concerning the appropriate design and use
of large-scale computer &lt;br/&gt;simulations in their ecological,
institutional, and political contexts.