* 0425977
* The Science of Nation Building
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Steve Stein, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant will fund
research on the connections between scientific expeditions and the processes of
nineteenth-century Colombian nation-state formation. The research project
focuses on the origins, execution, results, and legacy of the Chorographic
Commission, led by Italian cartographer and mercenary Agustin Codazzi. The
Commission represented the first attempt by the newly independent New Granada
national government (as Colombia was then called) to use European scientific
knowledge to define, order, represent scientifically, and thereby legitimize its
domination over the national territory and its populations. From 1850-1859 this
expedition studied a geographic surface area of about one million square
kilometers, or what would equal the landmass of France, Germany, and Portugal
combined. This region-by-region mapping and census-taking scientific expedition
of New Granada will be placed at the intersection of two historical contexts:
the efforts of Colombian elites to build a nation-state and European scientific
expeditions to colonial possessions in the Americas. Such an approach
&lt;br/&gt;generates two related questions of comparative and interdisciplinary
significance: How did New Granada elites use European scientific practices to
legitimize state power and shape how New Granada, and eventually Colombia,
should be imagined as a nation? And, how did Commission members gather, present,
and disseminate information on the Colombian regional territory and populations?
Based on initial findings and experiences living and conducting research in
Colombia, the co-principal investigator requests to use the one-year period of
funding from the NSF to conduct research in the archives, libraries, and private
collections of Bogota, Medellin, and Popayan. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research is that it will advance knowledge and understanding of the
interactions between scientific expeditions and state formation during the
nineteenth century in Colombia. First, this investigation speaks to overarching
theoretical concerns about science as it developed in the periphery. Second it
speaks to theoretical questions about race, gender and scientific
representations. By placing the Commission in its international, national and
regional contexts this project will reveal the links between scientific
knowledge, power, and the formation and fragmentation of New Granada state at
the national and regional levels. This study will shed new light on existing
discussions about state formation as developed in various disciplines and will
fill a major void in the analysis of nineteenth-century New Granada state
formation. The broader impacts of this project are not limited to archival
research. The co-principal investigator has established contact with Colombian
scholars at the Universidad de los Andes, Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, and
Universidad Nacional. The rich intellectual environment in Bogota will allow her
to bear out her research findings, discuss methodological and theoretical
approaches, and connect with scholars working on topics similar to hers. This
intellectual interaction and the resulting dissertation should contribute to
both Colombian and United States scholarship on the relationship between
scientific practice and political power. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;