* 0425445
* Regulation of Circadian Rhythms in and by Glia
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Erik Herzog, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 11/30/2008
* USD 460,000.00

The discoveries of specific molecules, cells, and brain areas that mediate daily
behaviors have made circadian biology one of the fastest growing and most
integrative fields in neuroscience. In mammals, the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN)
of the hypothalamus regulate rhythms in physiology and behavior. Recently, our
lab and others have also found other circadian oscillators in the brain and
body. We are now poised to identify the cells capable of circadian pacemaking,
the molecular mechanisms underlying their rhythmicity, and the signaling
pathways that synchronize them to coordinate behavior. This proposal focuses on
glia as a system to test the role of specific genes and molecules in circadian
rhythm generation and communication. Although glia far outnumber the
approximately 10,500 neurons in the SCN, they are seriously understudied. Recent
studies on glia have challenged traditional neurobiology. Glia communicate with
one another and with neurons through conventional and novel chemical signals.
Glia can regulate synapse formation, control synaptic strength and, under
specific conditions, differentiate into neurons. Conversely, neural impulse
activity regulates a wide range of glial activities, including their
proliferation and differentiation. It is not known whether glia are circadian
pacemakers, precursor pacemaker cells, targets for pacemakers, or support cells
to pacemakers. These features emphasize the importance of studying neural-glial
interactions in the circadian system. Glia will be studied as model circadian
oscillators, first as targets for SCN signaling and then as potential modulators
of circadian timing. Transgenic mice expressing firefly luciferase under the
control of either the Period1 or Period2 promoter will allow real-time
observations of core clock mechanisms of different cell types. Co-cultures of
SCN explants with pure glia will test when and which SCN cells secrete timing
signals that are sufficient to synchronize rhythms in target cells. Replacing
the SCN with other brain regions in these co-cultures will test whether the SCN
are uniquely capable of imposing periodicity on other cells. Pharmacological
blockade of candidate transmitter pathways will test their necessity for this
neural-to-glia coordination. The capacity of glia to modulate neural function
will be examined in three ways. Recording bioluminescence from transgenic SCN
explants co-cultured with glia of different circadian phenotypes will test
whether glia secrete factors that influence SCN periodicity. Long-term,
multisite electrical recording from SCN neurons will specifically assess the
role of glia in neural rhythmicity. Finally, locomotor recording from SCN-
lesioned and -chimeric animals will test the possibility that transplanted glia
regulate behavioral rhythmicity. The proposed research will reveal mechanisms
that may coordinate activity across the brain. By examining circadian timing in
glia and the modulation of circadian timing by glia, this work makes testable
predictions about neuron-glia interactions. The findings will be relevant to
daily physiology and intercellular signaling. The impact of this work will be
broadened with the generation and distribution of transgenic, circadian mutant
mice and the recruitment of new scientists, including those traditionally
underrepresented. Students will become involved in the research through hands-on
research internships, outreach programs, two undergraduate courses and two
graduate courses.

