* 0425902
* U.S.-Turkey Collaborative Research: Very Low Frequency Remote Sensing of the Lower Ionosphere
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Umran Inan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2009
* USD 25,900.00

0425902 &lt;br/&gt;Inan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a cooperative project by the Dr. Umran Inan, Department of Electrical
Engineering at Stanford University, Palo Alto, California and Drs. Esat Guzel
and Ali Yesil, of the Physics Department, Firat University, Elazig, Turkey. They
propose to develop a quantitative comparison of lightening-induced disturbances
of the ionosphere and the radiation belts in the American and European sectors.
The funds will allow for travel of Stanford scientists and visitors from FIRAT
University in Turkey for collaborating in these ionospheric remote sensing
activities. The investigators seek to provide a basis for quantitative
comparison of lightning-induced disturbances of the ionosphere and the radiation
belts in the American and European sectors. Most of the current data on such
phenomena has so far been obtained in the western hemisphere, and the weight of
scientific information indicates that lightning-induced effects at high
altitudes and in the radiation belts may dominate other processes on a global
scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The research program will facilitate the
establishment and conduct of VLF observations in the European sector, thus
providing a basis for comparison to facilitate global extrapolations and
conclusions. Under this award, Stanford University staff will partner with FIRAT
University, deploying one of their VLF receivers in the city of Elazig in
Turkey. With support from NSF's counterpart in Turkey (Scientific and Technical
research Council of Turkey, TUBITAK) FIRAT University provides the data
digitization and recording equipment to facilitate continuous acquisition of the
data. All data from the proposed program will be available for analysis over the
Internet, and a series of annual visits are planned to maximize interactions and
information exchange between the two institutions.&lt;br/&gt;