* 0425498
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Ideology or Workplace Policies:  A Cross-Cohort Analysis of How Women Make Decisions About Work and Family
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Eliza Pavalko, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

Perhaps the most significant social trend of the second half of the twentieth
century has been the rapid involvement of women, especially mothers, in the
labor market. Subsequently, patterns of childcare arrangements have changed
dramatically during this time period. Extant research has established that many
factors such as gender ideology, educational and career aspirations, and access
to family friendly workplace policies affect the choices women make about work
and family. However, it is less clear how these patterns have changed over time.
Through statistical analysis this research examines the impact of ideological
factors and the availability of workplace policies on mother's labor force
participation and choice of childcare arrangements for two cohorts of the
National Longitudinal Survey. This project will answer the following research
questions: 1) Are there cohort differences in the ways that women balance work
and family demands surrounding the birth of new baby? 2) How do ideological
factors and availability of workplace policies impact mothers' labor force
participation? 3) How are various work and family behaviors linked to past and
future choices? And 4) Do these processes operate in the same way for different
generations of women? This research makes a number of broader impacts to the
fields of gender and work. Although social scientists have documented women's
relative disadvantage in the labor force there has been limited exploration of
how these patterns are changing over time and what processes result in this
change. This research addresses these absences by documenting cohort differences
in work and family behaviors and by determining the relative influence of
ideology and opportunity on trends over time. A great deal of work addressing
gender differences in labor force participation focuses on how individual and
family decisions constrain women's labor market opportunities. Researchers pay
far less attention to the influence of labor market structures on women's
employment behaviors. This research provides an important step in balancing
attention to both individual and structural determinants by addressing the
impact of workplace policies on women's choices. The broader impacts of this
research lie in its contributions both to academic research on women's labor
market participation and to policy discussions on the efficacy of family
friendly policies for narrowing the gender gap in labor market behaviors.