* 0425465
* Integration of Data and Models to Assess Forest Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Pankaj Agarwal, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2008
* USD 499,907.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Forests can potentially support many species, but not all do.
Understanding why forests support different numbers of species and how forest
diversity can be threatened by climate change, land-cover change, and rising
atmospheric CO2 requires data and modeling approaches that account the for
complex interactions among species and with their environment. We must
assimilate information derived from many sources, including field experiments,
monitoring, and remote sensing. Current methods for prediction cannot take
advantage of the disparate types of information currently available, and they
necessarily ignore many of the important variables. They cannot be expected to
yield useful predictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to exploit
new computational methods to incorporate the many types of information available
and to assess the factors that affect biodiversity. To accomplish these goals
the project involves combining powerful new techniques in computational
statistics, algorithms, and data structures with extensive data on ecological
interactions. We integrate these new tools to test the assumptions that
diversity is maintained specific competitive relationships among species,
disturbance, or a combination thereof. We use the same models to predict
potential outcomes of current global change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of the proposed activity include new insight into the
factors that control diversity in nature (as opposed to in simple models), which
is a basic requirement for wise stewardship of forest resources and biotic
diversity. Moreover, the technical advances, particularly the integration of
modern computation with ecological process, will be of immediate application for
a range of environmental issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the proposed research will include understanding of forest management and
conservation, carbon sequestration, responses to climate change and rising CO2,
and invading species. Our research will also establish stronger links between
ecology and computer science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;