* 0425395
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory Investigations of Heat and Gas Transfer at an Air-Water Interface
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Christopher Zappa, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2008
* USD 81,718.00

0425305/0425395&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project
will produce an important advancement in knowledge and understanding within the
air-sea interaction community and more broadly in the area of air-water fluxes.
Modern instrumental techniques such as infrared imaging, digital particle image
velocimetry, laser-induced fluorescence, bulk gas flux, and air-side heat and
momentum flux measurement methods will be combined to perform a detailed study
of the hydrodynamics of air-water heat fluxes in a specially constructed
controlled-turbulence wind flume tank at the University of Washington.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the proposed research are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Conduct a detailed, controlled study of the hydrodynamics
governing air-water heat and gas fluxes and to evaluate the effectiveness of
active and passive infrared techniques to infer heat and gas transfer
velocities.&lt;br/&gt;2. Determine if heat can be used as a proxy tracer for
air-water gas transfer.&lt;br/&gt;3. Determine if surface penetration theory
provides a more accurate conceptual model of air-water heat and gas transfer
than surface renewal theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed activity will benefit society by contributing to our understanding of
the natural environment. This improved understanding will lead to better
parameterizations of air-sea fluxes relevant to global climate change and
numerical weather forecast modeling. The importance of air-sea fluxes to the
Earth's climate is well documented. Heat, in the form of latent heat released by
condensing water vapor, provides much of the energy driving global atmospheric
circulation. Gas transfer plays an integral role in biogeochemical cycling and
is of interest because of societal concerns about the effect of greenhouse gases
and anthropogenically induced global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will also promote teaching, training, and learning through participation
of a graduate student (recruited minority, see below), sending the graduate
student to scientific meetings to present results, and mentoring a current
junior staff member during her undergraduate studies. The activity will broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups by recruiting a minority graduate
student (using resources such as the ASLO Minorities in Aquatic Sciences
Program), employing a part-time female technician who is also a full-time
student in the oceanography program at the University of Washington, and by the
PI annually teaching in a middle school program at Seattle Girls School with a
high percentage of minority students. The activity will enhance infrastructure
for research and education by building a unique facility for studying air-sea
interaction that will be made available for use by others. The activity will
have broad dissemination of results to enhance scientific and technological
understanding thorough participation in the annual College of Engineering Open
House, establishment of a web site devoted to dissemination of data and results
from the project, and publications in peer reviewed journals..
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;