* 0425768
* Optimization-Based Decomposition and Integration of Systems in Engineering Design
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Thomas Keinath, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 03/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

By spending 11 months in Clemson University's Department of Mechanical
Engineering, the PI, a professor of mathematical sciences at Clemson University,
proposes to gain knowledge in the area of engineering design and manufacturing,
and subsequently develop a strong interdisciplinary research and education
program between Clemson's departments of mathematical sciences and mechanical
engineering. The science of design assumes a decision-making paradigm for the
product development process, which is substantiated by the application of
mathematical optimization as a tool for modeling and solving the underlying
decision problems, as well as for decomposition of systems into subsystems and
integration of optimal subsystem designs into the final overall design. The PI
will participate in three interdisciplinary projects in the area of
optimization-based decomposition and integration of systems in engineering
design : 1) Developing a decomposition and integration approach to optimization
of the dynamic performance of vehicles in the presence of multiple performance
indices and in multiple operating scenarios. The methodology, which will allow
the design of vehicles that perform satisfactorily in different driving
conditions, will be applicable to other design problems, such as product family
design or platform design; 2) Developing a packaging methodology for the
physical integration of vehicle components through optimization of component
configurations so that the vehicle dynamic and static performances are optimal
within design constraints. The methodology, which will allow the design of more
compact vehicles that perform better and are more prone to survival, will be
applicable to design of other products requiring packaging, such as satellites,
avionic systems, and miniature surveillance systems; 3) Applying novel,
performance-based decomposition and integration to engineering design of complex
systems that perform under uncertainty. The methodology will introduce a new
paradigm to the science of design. PI's educational activities will include
designing and teaching an interdisciplinary, graduate-level course on
decomposition and integration in engineering design; teaching a senior-level
capstone course on design; and advising graduate and undergraduate students.
Service activities will focus on developing an interdisciplinary, graduate-level
curriculum in mechanical engineering and mathematical sciences, organizing a
research seminar series, and conducting hands-on presentations in area high
schools. The expertise gained through this IGMS project will prepare the PI to
contribute to research and education activities through Clemson's new
International Graduate Center for Automotive Research, which will focus on
systems integration to address challenges associated with vehicle components
that are becoming increasingly computerized and complex. The proposed work will
provide opportunities to train students who can enter the workforce with both
mathematical skills and an understanding of science and engineering principles.
Special efforts will be undertaken to reach students from underrepresented
populations and pre-college level students.