* 0425937
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Transitioning Out of Homelessness in Two Global Cities-- Los Angeles and Tokyo
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Rebecca Jean Emigh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 07/31/2006
* USD 7,500.00

Over the past two decades, the emergence of sizeable homeless populations in
urban areas throughout the world's leading economies has roused considerable
public concern, policy debate, and social science research. Despite evidence
that most persons who experience homelessness escape the condition, the process
of transitioning out has been largely understudied, in favor of exploring how
persons lose their housing and adapt to their predicament. This research
proposal aims to fill gaps in existing research by developing explanations of
why homelessness is experienced differentially as a single time crisis,
episodically, or a chronic condition. The rise of mass homelessness in many
major urban areas throughout the world has drawn attention beyond local and
national scales towards trends associated with globalization such as economic
restructuring, income polarization, immigration, and decreased public spending
on social safety net protections. The proposed research will draw on and
contribute to the insights of this line of research by examining how processes
of globalization are filtered through national and local contexts to shape
individual efforts to transition out of homelessness in two "global cities"-Los
Angeles and Tokyo. The project will use a combination of qualitative research
strategies involving collection and analysis of three data sets in both cities:
1) an individual trajectories data set composed of longitudinal interviews over
a period of 10 months with 15 participants in transitional housing programs for
the homeless; 2) an institutional data set consisting of field notes from
participant observation in program settings and interviews with staff; 3) a data
set of publications and statistics on national and local labor and housing
markets, demographics of homeless and housed populations, public policy relating
to homelessness, and public attitudes towards homelessness. Qualitative
Comparative Analysis (QCA) will be applied to the "individual trajectories" data
set to discern how national, local, and institutional scale structural barriers
combine and interact with individual and institutional scale strategies to
produce various outcomes of efforts to escape homelessness. Inductive analysis
of the "individual trajectories" and "institutional" data sets will be used to
elucidate the nature of core components of the transitional process such as the
role of relationships between transitional program staff and participants.
Lastly, analysis of the secondary research data set will be used to attribute
differences revealed in QCA and inductive analyses to the ways in which process
associated with globalization are filtered through the national and local
contexts of the United States/Los Angeles and Japan/Tokyo. The broader impacts
of this research include the following. Research findings will be integrated
into instruction of undergraduate students in courses on social stratification,
globalization, sociological research methods, and other courses to be taught by
the graduate student researcher. The majority of the data will be collected at
transitional housing programs serving the homeless, creating a dialogue between
researchers, program staff, and clients about how to address homelessness as a
social problem. In addition to disseminating results through sociological and
multidisciplinary academic journals and conferences, research findings will be
presented to local and national policy bodies as well as at public colloquia
sponsored by community based organizations concerned with homelessness. Findings
will be presented in these outlets in both the U.S. and Japan (in Japanese),
allowing for an international, cross-disciplinary, and cross-institutional
exchange of ideas about how to aid individuals attempting to escape
homelessness.