* 0426582
* ITR  Collaborative Research:    ASE-DMC Computational Complexity of Interactive Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Moses Charikar, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2009
* USD 694,148.00

In the rapidly growing world of Internet infrastructures, we face many
challenging new problems. These arise in part because the usual assumptions made
in problems of this general type may no longer hold. For example, many typical
questions dealing with massive data sets often involve networks or graphs of
prohibitively large sizes. Only partial information can be obtained and in
addition, this information is changing dynamically. There is an increasing need
to develop the theoretical foundation for these myriad complex processes. In
particular, there are many unresolved fundamental issues regarding the
computational and informational-theoretic complexity of interactive computing,
both in the classical setting as well as other emerging computational paradigms.
In this proposal, we will investigate several&lt;br/&gt;inter-related areas
:&lt;br/&gt;- Major open problems in communication complexity.&lt;br/&gt;- Two
information-theoretic identification problems Guessing secrets and Finding
favorites.&lt;br/&gt;- Two directions in quantum information processing quantum
decision tree model and quantum communication complexity.&lt;br/&gt;- Using
techniques in the study of the so-called "power law model" for realistic
networks&lt;br/&gt;to develop new methods in the analysis of on-line algorithms.
Impact Interactive computing is prevalent in almost all areas of computing and
communcations with applications in numerous areas of science and engineering,
such as security, finance, information retrieval, bioinformatics and beyond.
However, the current state of the theoretical foundation for interactive
computation is quite primitive and far from satisfactory. The proposed study on
the computational complexity of interactive computation is meant to strengthen
our understanding and provide insight that is crucial for the design and
analysis of interactive algorithms. Because of the fundamental and far-reaching
nature of the proposed work, this study will help bring together different areas
and crossfertilization typically occur.