* 0426369
* Collaborative Research:  Crustal Accretion and Mantle Processes Along the Subduction-Influenced Eastern Lau Spreading Center
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2008,08/31/2014
* Spahr Webb, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2014
* USD 420,462.00

Wiens et al.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
combined active and passive seismic experiment along the Eastern Lau Spreading
Center to test the following hypotheses. 1. Circulation in the mantle wedge is
dominated by slab driven flow. 2. Interaction of the arc and backarc magma
production controls the character of the ridge by influencing melt flux,
petrology, and geochemistry. 3. Variations in the mantle melt supply control
ridge crest features such as morphology, thermal structure, and hydrothermal
venting. The passive experiment consists of 55 broadband ocean bottom
seismographs and five land seismographs deployed for 10 months to image the
larger-scale structure of the melt production region and the mantle flow
pattern. The active source experiment consists of 100 ocean bottom seismographs
deployed along a 250 km section of the spreading center extending from the
inflated Vala Fa region to the magma-starved northern Eastern Lau Spreading
Center where the axial melt lens is absent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In broader
terms this experiment addresses a first order problem in ridge dynamics in a
unique subduction zone setting and is essential for the stated goals of R2K
program. Graduate students will be supported by all four
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;