* 0426328
* NCLT:  A Center to Develop Nanoscale Science and Engineering Educators with Leadership Capabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2011
* Nicholas Giordano, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Gibbs
* 03/31/2011
* USD 16,688,074.00

The Nanoscale Science and Engineering Education (NSEE) Center for Learning and
Teaching (NCLT) would focus on the research and development of nano-science
instructional resources for grades 7-16, related professional development
opportunities for 7-12 teachers, and programs infused with nano-science content
for education doctoral students. The Center would bring together educators and
scientists from several areas of nano-science and engineering research to
collaborate with science teachers and doctoral candidates in education on both
the development of the resources and research on their efficacy. The PI has
prior experience as director of the Materials World Modules project, an NSF-
funded curriculum currently in use in several secondary schools across the
country. Lead partners in the proposed Center are Northwestern University,
Purdue University, University of Michigan, University of Illinois at Chicago and
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Additional partners include Argonne
National Laboratory, West Point Military Academy, Alabama A &amp; M University,
Fisk University, Hampton University, Morehouse College and University of Texas
at El Paso. The additional partners will widen the geographic range of the
project, expanding opportunities to reach a diverse and currently
underrepresented population of graduate students, teachers and ultimately
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM and Education faculty and researchers from
the partner institutions would participate in interdisciplinary teams to address
the Center's mission:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Provide national education leadership
and resources for advancing NSEE &lt;br/&gt;Create and implement professional
development programs in NSEE&lt;br/&gt;Use innovative ideas in learning to
design instructional materials for grades 7-16&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conduct
research relating to integration of NSEE into science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) education.&lt;br/&gt;