* 0426677
* Fluctuations &amp; Broken Symmetries
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Mehran Kardar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2008
* USD 390,000.00

This grant supports theoretical research on condensed matter physics. Many
systems are composed of basic elements with relatively simple interactions; yet
their collective behavior can be quite complex and perplexing. Statistical
physics utilizes powerful tools to describe how the myriad phases of matter
emerge from the interactions of atoms. These methods may also shed light upon
collective phenomena in biological and social contexts. This research aims at
understanding the statistical basis of a diverse variety of phenomena in
polymers, cell locomotion, visual processing, and wetting
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluctuations are an inherent component of the
problems addressed in this research, necessitating the calculation of
probability distributions and their time evolution. Adapting the methods of
field theory, equations governing the variations of appropriate fields and order
parameters in space and time are constructed on the basis of simple
considerations such as symmetry and locality. The resulting collective behaviors
are then analyzed by standard methods such as perturbation expansions and
renormalization group. Numerical techniques, such as Monte Carlo simulations,
are also an essential complement to analytical tools. Many problems of interest
require creative use of these methods, and possible development of new
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific questions asked in this research include:
To what degree does the hydrophobicity of an amino acid sequence determine the
structure of a folded protein; Are topological entanglements (such as knots) in
polymers truly global entities, or forced to easily located configurations
because of physical constraints; How does polymerization of actin propel a cell
in a particular direction; What are the statistics of oriented segments common
in natural images, and what are the implications for visual processing
(artificial or biological); What are the forces that result from quantum
fluctuations of the electromagnetic field between deformed (and possibly moving)
plates; Are surface fluctuations responsible for the thinning of helium films as
they become superfluid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve students
and be closely linked to courses.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports
theoretical research on condensed matter physics. Many systems are composed of
basic elements with relatively simple interactions; yet their collective
behavior can be quite complex and perplexing. Statistical physics utilizes
powerful tools to describe how the myriad phases of matter emerge from the
interactions of atoms. These methods may also shed light upon collective
phenomena in biological and social contexts. This research aims at understanding
the statistical basis of a diverse variety of phenomena in polymers, cell
locomotion, visual processing, and wetting films. The research will involve
students and be closely linked to courses.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;