* 0426034
* CAREER: Interfacial Processes Impacting the Chemical Fate of Organic Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Dharni Vasudevan, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 05/31/2005
* USD 44,859.00

9984489 Vasudevan The overall objective of this grant is the development of an
integrated approach to teaching and understanding the role of abiotic
interfacial processes in contaminant attenuation and mobilization. This
fundamental knowledge will be directed toward prediction of contaminant fate,
site remediation, and design criteria for "green" chemicals. The objectives of
this project designed to achieve these long-term goals are: (1) to characterize
attenuation and mobilization of polar/ionogenic organic compounds (P/IOCs) as a
function of subsurface variability/complexity and contaminant structure and
physico-chemical properties, (2) to develop laboratory components,
demonstrations, design projects, interactive visualization techniques, case
studies and assignments that utilize results from the research and to implement
these tools using appropriate instructional, learning and evaluation methods and
(3) to initiate an effort to recruit young women into science and engineering by
providing opportunities for female high school students to discover the
excitement and challenges of environmental engineering. The interrelationships
between the chemical structure of a contaminant and its attenuation and
mobilization in the subsurface are relatively well established for hydrophobic
organic compounds, while similar relationships for P/IOCs are under development.
Such relationships provide valuable information about chemical behavior;
however, their use in describing contaminant fate and transport at the field
scale becomes limited by spatial variation in subsurface composition and
physico-chemical properties. P/IOCs may not be intentionally released for field
studies, hence, structurally related innocuous tracers such as Rhodamine WT
(RWT) may serve as valuable tools to scale laboratory based P/IOC research to
the field scale. At this time, RWT-subsurface interactions have not been
sufficiently characterized to allow for quantitative prediction of RWT fate.
Solute (RWT and test P/IOCs) and subsurface variables that are likely to
influence abiotic interfacial processes will be identified and quantified. Batch
tests, continuous flow stirred reactor tests and column experiments will be
conducted and results analyzed to identify operative interfacial processes and
measure related equilibrium and kinetic parameters as a function of contaminant
and solid-matrix properties. Experimental data will be analyzed using
chemometric techniques to identify key solute and subsurface variables impacting
interfacial processes, characterize interaction between variables, and develop
relationships between the variables and the derived kinetic and equilibrium
parameters. Extension of these relationships to fate and transport modeling will
be explored. With respect to education, the research results will be used as a
platform for laboratory exercises and demonstrations that illustrate
fundamentals of fate, remediation and design criteria. Concept maps, a spatial
learning strategy that emphasizes visualization of hierarchical relationships
and cross-links between concepts, will be introduced as a learning tool. Topical
assignments and related discussion sections will guide students with problem-
solving; case studies and design projects will be used to interface the
fundamental knowledge with applications to fate predictions and remediation of
contaminants. Female high school students will be invited to participate in
hands-on activities and research projects in the PI's laboratory. ***