* 0426925
* ITR: Collaborative Research: (NHS+ASE)-(dmc+int+soc): A Wireless Local Positioning System for Mobile Remote Monitoring
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Brian Mark, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract This ITR proposal focuses on developing wireless systems capable of
positioning mobiles remotely in complex mobile environments that are encountered
in emerging applications, such as homeland security, law enforcement, defense
command and control, multi-robot coordination, and traffic alert such as
vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-pedestrian collision avoidance. The proposed
wireless local positioning system (WLPS) has two main components: 1) a base
station deployed in a mobile (e.g., vehicles, robots or handhelds) that serves
as a Dynamic Base Station (DBS); and 2) a transponder (TRX) installed in
wireless mobile handhelds, robots and vehicles that act as Active Targets. Such
a framework offers attractive features including high probability-of-detection
performance, low-cost transceiver designs and infrastructure-less operation. The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity is to initiate a multi-disciplinary
effort to address the key challenges in wireless mobile positioning with
seamless network connectivity. Based on the DBS-TRX structure, various wireless
communications and networking technologies will be exploited to establish a
paradigm of contiguous, accurate and mobility-aware positioning with non line-
of-sight coverage. In addition, a laboratory will be set up to provide a cost-
effective tool to test and evaluate wireless positioning schemes in simulated
practical environments, as well as to assess the impacts of WLPS on location-
critical tasks such as wireless sensor network cooperation and routing. The
broader impacts of the proposed activity benefit location-dependent applications
that are critical to human welfare but hindered by the restrictive operation
conditions of current positioning systems. WLPS has multiple potential
applications that would benefit society, ranging from improved localization
technology for national and homeland security (NHS) to economic prosperity (ASE)
with better highway safety for both drivers and pedestrians. The laboratory
developed will serve as an educational test bed for engineering students and
researchers. With its broad range of applications, its rich technical components
and multi-disciplinary nature, the proposed WLPS research will help promote the
integration of research with education and outreach activities at all levels.