* 0426674
* ITR - (EVS+ASE) - (int+sim): Rapid Evaluation of User Interfaces in Multitasking Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Frank Lee, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,000,000.00

Over the past decade we have witnessed an astounding surge in computing devices
and interfaces off the desktop and into the multi-tasking environments of the
real world. In this project, the PI will develop a rigorous computational
architecture, the Task-Integrated-Modeling (TIM) architecture, and an associated
methodology for evaluating user interfaces in complex multitasking environments.
The TIM architecture centers on integrating cognitive models of behavior with
the interface in the context of the multitasking environment, using "cognitive
architectures" to represent and simulate user cognition and behavior. Based on
these models, the architecture allows a designer to rapidly evaluate new
interfaces through stages of rapid prototyping, task demonstration, integrated
model creation, and computational simulation. The theory behind the architecture
and the system itself will account not only for various aspects of human
multitasking but also of individual differences, facilitating robust modeling of
a range of user populations. As a test domain for the architecture, the project
will focus on the domain of driving, particularly the use of device interfaces
in the vehicle and the study of different driver populations (e.g., younger vs.
older drivers). The PI will implement a rapid development and evaluation system
for new in-vehicle interfaces that attempts to minimize potential driver
distraction from these interfaces. In addition, shared Internet libraries of
software applications, toolkits, and cognitive models will be created, for
dissemination to and use by academic researchers as well as industry designers
and developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Through collaborations
with academic researchers and industry experts, the PI will rigorously address
the problem of driver distraction (currently the leading cause of crashes in the
United States), helping to explore the sources of distraction and helping to
devise rigorous methods of improving the safety of our vehicles and roadways.
The computational infrastructure developed will not only advance our theoretical
understanding of human cognition, but also realize these theories in real-world
practical systems. The project will involve diverse populations, directly by
including under-represented groups in research work and summer workshops, and
indirectly by exploring how individual differences may affect interface use and
multi-tasking. Locally, the related education plan will result in new courses in
human-computer interaction, cognitive systems, and off-the-desktop computing at
Drexel University, providing a unified HCI curriculum for roughly 40-50 students
per year in the HCI track and even more across the Computer Science Department
and the University as a whole. The PI will also initiate an annual educational
and hands-on HCI workshop for high-school students in West Philadelphia,
focusing on the under-represented minority populations in these neighborhoods,
in the hope of exciting and inspiring these students to pursue further education
and careers in fields related to people and technology.