* 0426845
* CMG COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Improved Bayesian Estimators for Uncertainty in Climate System Properties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Chris Forest, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2008
* USD 106,466.00

The investigators are developing Bayesian statistical models for the study of
the distribution of climate system properties. The study is based on output from
the MIT 2DLO climate model as well as an estimation of the natural climate
variability from atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (AOGCM). The
statistical models account for all uncertainties by focusing on the estimation
of the main patterns of natural variability. This is achieved by building prior
distributions for the covariance matrix from ensemble runs of AOGCMs. Particular
attention is paid to the spectral decomposition of the covariance matrix. In
addition the statistical models are hierarchical in order to consider all
sources of errors in a comprehensive way. These errors include the interpolation
error due to the impossibility of evaluating climate models in a time short
enough to embed it within a Monte Carlo iterative estimation method.

The proposed research falls clearly into the ``Representing uncertainty in
geosystems'' theme of the NSF Program for Collaborations in Mathematical
Geosciences. The main focus is to improve the estimates of parameters that
govern the large-scale behavior of the climate system. The resulting analysis
will include an assessment of the uncertainty of those estimates. The research
is a collaborative effort between climate scientists and statisticians as it
requires the use of climate system models as well as analyzing climate
observational datasets. The broader aspect of this project is that the estimated
uncertainties in climate system behavior can be used for uncertainty analysis of
climate change projections. By enhancing the ability to analyze the risks of
climate change on society, this research will provide valuable input to
policymakers.