* 0426683
* ITR - (ASE+NHS) - (DMC+INT+SOC):    Resilient Storage and Querying in Decentralized Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Sudarshan Chawathe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2010
* USD 720,000.00

The goal of the proposed work is to build a foundation for enabling a rich set
of applications on entirely unstructured, decentralized, and distributed
networks. Recently, a number of different research applications have been built
on similar platforms in the context of peer-to-peer systems. While these
research systems offer great promise, we believe significant work is required in
order to build deployable applications over these systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is motivated by the open issues in this area,
and is organized into three major thrusts: (1) placement and lookup algorithms
that are robust against a range of adversarial failure models, and yet - in
contrast to, e.g., DHTs - do not require or assume any structure on the
underlying network topology; (2) efficient and resilient techniques for
sophisticated querying of P2P namespaces in unstructured environments; and (3)
methods that allow peers to explicitly incorporate individual trust and privacy
policies into protocol actions. The work is terms of four applications: (1) an
ad-hoc public key infrastructure; (2) a robust search and query application for
distributed data; (3) a censorship-resistant publishing application; and (4) an
application for efficient ad-hoc access to scientific
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;Individually, each of these applications are important
building blocks that exercise different aspects of our proposed work, and
directly advance the state of the art in the sciences, engineering, and national
security. Together, they form a compelling set of motivating examples for the
research to be conducted under this project.&lt;br/&gt;