* 0426558
* ITR:     Collaborative Research - \(ASE\) - \(DMC\):   DDDAS:    A Novel Grid Architecture Integrating Real-Time Data and Intervention During Image Guided Therapy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Simon Warfield, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2008
* USD 325,000.00

The project's research involves development and deployment of an integrated and
practical grid &lt;br/&gt;architecture for data driven intra-operative
volumetric simulation of brain deformation during &lt;br/&gt;image guided
therapy (IGT) and specifically for image guided neurosurgery (IGNS) to be
&lt;br/&gt;employed in the operating room of the future. Preliminary work has
resulted in a prototype &lt;br/&gt;dynamic data driven system, which resides
locally in the operating room for IGNS that integrates &lt;br/&gt;data
acquisition, surgical navigation, quantitative monitoring and enhanced real-time
control. The &lt;br/&gt;proposed project will enable improvement in the safety
and efficacy of brain tumor resection by &lt;br/&gt;extending the current system
with a tightly coupled capability for interactively steered and
&lt;br/&gt;adaptive data driven simulation of the dynamically shifting shape of
the brain. Such simulation &lt;br/&gt;capability, integrated with real-time
intra-operative data acquisition capability and real-time &lt;br/&gt;surgical
resection, requires on-demand low latency fault tolerant robust and reliable
access to &lt;br/&gt;remotely located significant compute capacity and data
management resources from the operating &lt;br/&gt;room. Recent advances in grid
infrastructure hold out the promise to pioneer such capability. The
&lt;br/&gt;overall objective of this projectl is the development of a novel grid
architecture integrating real- &lt;br/&gt;time data to allow intra-operative
surgical decision-making and navigation during IGT. In &lt;br/&gt;addition this
will provide database infrastructure for post-surgical analysis and modeling of
data &lt;br/&gt;and image repositories. The project's information technology
(IT) research is expected to have &lt;br/&gt;broad impact on clinical practice
within a period of a few years. &lt;br/&gt;