* 0426608
* ITR - (ASE) - (int):    CAD for Reducing Soft Error Failure Rates in Logic Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Nur Touba, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2009
* USD 350,000.00

Proposal ID: 0426608 &lt;br/&gt;P I: Touba, Nur &lt;br/&gt;Organization:
University of Texas at Austin &lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR - (ASE) - (int): CAD for
Reducing Soft Error Failure Rates in Logic Circuits &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Reducing the soft error failure rate for logic
circuits is more expensive and difficult than for memories and is expected to
emerge as a very important problem in the future for mainstream low-cost
electronics as technology continues to scale. Currently, there is a lack of
computer-aided design (CAD) tools and techniques for addressing this problem in
a cost-effective manner. This research project involves developing a new
paradigm for designing logic circuits with protection from soft errors to reduce
the soft error failure rate. A fine-grain quantitative approach will be
investigated where the susceptibility of the logic circuit to soft errors is
estimated at each step of the design process and fault tolerance features are
incorporated as needed in a cost effective way to satisfy soft error failure
rate requirements. One of the key ideas in this research is to exploit the
asymmetric soft error susceptibility of internal nodes in a logic circuit to
direct the insertion of fault tolerance features. Unlike memories where the
probability of a soft error in each cell is equally likely, in logic circuits
upsets at some internal nodes can have orders of magnitude greater probability
of being latched and causing a soft error than at other nodes. By focusing error
detection and/or error masking capability towards the nodes that are most
susceptible to soft errors, the soft error failure rate in logic circuits can be
significantly reduced at a fraction of the cost of existing techniques which try
to guarantee coverage of all nodes. The objectives of this project include
developing efficient procedures for estimating soft error susceptibility,
developing CAD algorithms for cost-effective insertion of fault tolerance
features, and developing soft error protection schemes that minimize impact on
timing and power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;