* 0426019
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Globalizing the Gospel: The Technology of American International Religious Broadcasting, 1931-1980
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* John Krige, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2006
* USD 5,267.00

In the three decades following WWII, American evangelical broadcasters rose to
positions of global prominence, supplanting commercial firms and passing state-
run services in the number of program languages, transmission hours, and letters
received. Drawing on archives that scholars have not consulted, this STS
Dissertation Improvement Grant, provides a previously untold history of this
phenomenon. The project begins with the establishment of the first Protestant
station overseas in 1931 and charts the rise of four major evangelical
broadcasters from the early 1950s to the dawn of the global era. The
dissertation compares missionary radio with the activity of the Voice of
America, which adopted religious broadcasts in 1950 for propaganda purposes.
Contrary to widespread conceptions, evangelical broadcasters did not function as
backward-looking reactionaries, but acted as dynamic technological users,
selectively appropriating modern technological systems to creatively proselytize
their traditional message around the world. Employing a social constructivist
approach, the project demonstrates how evangelical and VOA broadcasters
constructed listening audiences in the 1950s through projects to build and
distribute pre-tuned "Portable Missionary Receivers" in remote rural areas of
developing countries. Engaging a collection of letters from listeners in
broadcaster archives, the study provides insight into the how broadcasters
perceived their listening public and how radio broadcasts were publicly received
by an important subset of enthusiastic listener converts. "Globalizing the
Gospel" shows how evangelical American broadcasters responded effectively to
changing political and technological conditions in the developing world
beginning in the 1970s by localizing their mission and practice. Rather than
build a single global "virtual" community, evangelical world radio in the late
twentieth century fostered a mosaic of communities based on overlapping
religious, national, and ethnic identities. Setting missionary radio against the
backdrop of the global revival of the church in Asia, Africa, and Latin America
which began in the 1970s, the project demonstrates the "stamina of local
culture" against the hegemony of Americanized religion and the distancing
effects of global technology. This study will add significantly to existing
scholarship on international broadcasting by exploring new subject matter,
examining hitherto largely unused source material, and adopting a novel
private/public comparative framework. Working at the intersection of religion
and radio, the project will open up an under-appreciated but important source of
American cultural influence abroad, American evangelical religion, tracing its
effects on institutions and individuals overseas. This project will use
international religious broadcasting as a case study to broaden scholarly
understanding of the ways in which traditional groups accommodate modern life
through the appropriation and mediation of technology.

