* 0426181
* Biomolecular Materials and Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2009
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This project will fund an assessment of research opportunities in the
interdisciplinary field of "biomolecular materials" -- the interface of
materials science and biology. Biomolecular materials are structured or
processed in a way that is characteristic of biological materials, but they are
not necessarily of biological origin. The challenges in this field lie not only
in learning from and mimicking nature, but also in building a more thorough
understanding of the production processes and the functionality of biomolecular
materials. Better understanding of these principles, coupled with new advances
in physics, biology, chemistry, and genetics, researchers will enable design of
new tools and processes to meet specific needs. These principles will also give
us a deeper understanding of the mechanisms in living systems. A National
Research Council study committee, composed of about 15 leading experts in the
field, will meet three times over a period of 18 months to prepare a report on
this field. The first phase of the study will provide an authoritative
assessment of progress in the field. The second phase will develop an outlook
for the future and make recommendations aimed at enabling the development of a
U.S. strategy to achieve leadership in the study of biomolecular materials. The
report of the committee, published by the National Academy Press, will be made
available on the Academies' website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fund
an assessment of research opportunities in the interdisciplinary field of
"biomolecular materials" -- the interface of materials science and biology.
Biomolecular materials are materials designed and engineered by humans that have
been inspired by the wealth of molecules in biological systems. Because of their
diversity, versatility, and unusual combinations of properties, biomolecular
materials offer promise for application in virtually all sectors of the economy-
including security, energy, agriculture, health, and environmental technology. A
National Research Council study committee, composed of about 15 leading experts
in the field, will meet three times over a period of 18 months to prepare a
report on this field. The first phase of the study will provide an authoritative
assessment of progress in the field. The second phase will develop an outlook
for the future and make recommendations aimed at enabling the development of a
U.S. strategy to achieve leadership in the study of biomolecular materials. The
work of the committee will be widely disseminated to improve public
understanding of this area of science and to inform decision makers in
Washington as they formulate the Nation's research programs. The report of the
committee, published by the National Academy Press, will be made available on
the Academies' website.&lt;br/&gt;