* 0426341
* Southeastern Europe, USA, Japan, and European Community Workshop on Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* William Levine, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2005
* USD 18,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks NSF support for twelve controls and
signal processing researchers&lt;br/&gt;and teachers from the U.S.A. to attend a
joint Balkan/USA/EC/Japan workshop on&lt;br/&gt;research and education in
control and signal processing. Similar proposals have been&lt;br/&gt;submitted
to the EC and Japan to support attendance by members of those
communities.&lt;br/&gt;Approximately three-dozen attendees from the Balkans are
expected.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of having a delegation of twelve
Americans participate in such a&lt;br/&gt;workshop is in the opportunities to
learn from the other participants and in the&lt;br/&gt;opportunities to teach
them. There will be many attendees who are outstanding in
their&lt;br/&gt;specialties. Because of the recent troubles in the Balkans, many
of their excellent&lt;br/&gt;researchers have been isolated from the rest of the
research community. This will be an&lt;br/&gt;opportunity for us to learn of
their work and for them to catch up with what we have
been&lt;br/&gt;doing.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of such a joint workshop are
large. First, the Balkan countries have&lt;br/&gt;been a source of many
outstanding researchers in the past. The workshop will help
bring&lt;br/&gt;younger researchers and students from the Balkans into the
broader international research&lt;br/&gt;community. Second, the meeting itself
will help foster further collaboration between the&lt;br/&gt;participants, their
institutions, and their countries. Lastly, such meetings
generally&lt;br/&gt;contribute to broader understanding among people and
nations.