* 0426945
* ITR:   Collaborative Research:   -\(NHS+ASE)-\(int+dmc\):   Networks of Robots and Sensors for First Responders
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Sanjiv Singh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 08/31/2009
* USD 673,250.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Collaborative Research (NHS + ASE) (int +
dmc):&lt;br/&gt;Networks of Robots and Sensors for First
Responders&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Daniela Rus, MIT&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Vijay
Kumar, U. Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Sanjiv Singh,
CMU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative ITR project addresses the
development of proactive networks of sensors and robots that perceive their
environment and respond to it, anticipating information needs by the network and
by users of the network, repositioning and organizing themselves to best acquire
and deliver the information. Such networked systems combine the most advanced
concepts in perception, communication, and control to create computational
systems capable of interacting in meaningful ways with the physical environment,
extending individual capabilities of each component and user to encompass a much
wider area and range of&lt;br/&gt;data. The PIs envision a physical analog to
the Internet-- networks of computers that can actively sense, physically
interact with, and reason about the world. While the Internet allows transparent
access to information already online, this research will extend the paradigm by
allowing users to "google" for physical information, setting into motion robots
and sensors that team together to acquire information and act on it.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program
will be make significant contributions to networked multi-agent systems:
control, self-organization, adaptation, and perception. The work will focus on:
(1) Control for communication and sensing: the control of robotic agents to
maintain communication links or establish new ones, while obtaining the required
sensory information and tracking sources; (2) Communication for sensing and
perception: the fusion of information from heterogeneous sensors over the
network, providing the required information for each agent to plan and control
its mobility and providing remotely located human rescue workers with
information through immersive displays; and (3) Communication networks for
sensing and control: the grouping, scheduling and routing of nodes to adapt to
changing, adverse conditions while maintaining guarantees for control of
mobility and for sensor fusion and integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will enhance national and homeland
security by providing first responder with information about areas that are
unsafe and hard to reach for humans in three ways. First, it will speed up the
response time by helping in assessment, by augmenting human perception for
command and control. Second, it will help in suppression and containment. Third,
it will play a role in recovery, as in identification of victims and location of
responding personnel. The collaboration with practitioners at the Allegheny Fire
Training Academy will ensure that the research is grounded in the real world and
has impact in the emergency response community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;