* 0426597
* NSF-ITR-(ASE)-(sim+int+dmc) "Geometry, Order and Packing:  New Computational and Analytical Tools"
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Alex Travesset, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2008
* USD 255,000.00

This award was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials
Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012.
Research activities covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area,
"Advances in Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Areas,
"Innovation in Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research" and "Innovative
approaches to integration of data, models, communications, and Integration of
computing and human-computing interfaces."&lt;br/&gt;This awards supports
computational research and education to develop computational and analytical
tools for investigating various interdisciplinary problems involving geometry,
order and packing. This will be accomplished by leveraging the power made
available by information technology research tools. The PI will develop high-
confidence, extensible and reusable software that will be applied to study:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Ground states of crystals on representative geometries: torus,
spherical cap, minimal surfaces, and under different external conditions
(pressure, clamped ends, etc..).&lt;br/&gt;2. Folding of crystalline Langmuir
monolayers under compression.&lt;br/&gt;3. Transformation pathways of the HK-97
virus.&lt;br/&gt;4. Effects of internal disorder in two-dimensional crystals,
with Sphingomyelin monolayers as a concrete paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also
apply differential geometry tools from the theory of topological defects to
develop a new analytical description for problems involving order and geometry.
This will be applied to the problems above, as well as to obtain an analytical
characterization of crystalline ground states in the limit of large number of
particles.&lt;br/&gt;Integration of research and education: The research
proposed in this project is naturally linked to the following broader impact
activities:&lt;br/&gt;o Opportunities for students in a field where traditional
boundaries between disciplines have been removed: Students will join an
interdisciplinary environment that will train a workforce with strong, yet
transferable skills.&lt;br/&gt;o Opportunities for undergraduate students in
research, with special emphasis on first generation and rural background college
students: The PI will commit to having at least two undergraduate students
permanently working in the group.&lt;br/&gt;o Developing course-work material:
Multimedia material describing aspects of the mechanical properties of solids
for undergraduate and graduate education will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;Enhance
Infrastructure for Research and Education: The PI will establish a permanent
collaboration with the Ames laboratory and introduce start-of-the art
information technology tools.&lt;br/&gt;Broad dissemination to enhance
scientific, technological impact and benefits to society at large: The PI will
provide new powerful software available to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a proposal submitted
to the Division of Materials Research under the Information Technology Research
solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities covered by this award fall under
the National Priority Area, "Advances in Science and Engineering," and the
Technical Focus Areas, "Innovation in Computational Modeling or Simulation in
Research" and "Innovative approaches to integration of data, models,
communications, and Integration of computing and human-computing
interfaces."&lt;br/&gt;This awards supports computational research and education
to develop computational and analytical tools for investigating various
interdisciplinary problems involving geometry, order and packing. This will be
accomplished by leveraging the power made available by information technology
research tools. This work is motivated by the study of how particles arrange
themselves in ordered ways on curved surfaces. This leads to crystalline
structures with topological defects. The PI plans to study specific realizations
of crystals on curved surfaces, including: the structure and structural
transformations of virus protein coats, the folding and bending of single
crystalline layers and model systems for biological membranes. The research
program combines visualization, algorithm design, structural biology and
condensed matter physics. The PI aims to create computational and visualization
tools that will allow detailed quantitative predictions on a variety of
problems, like those above, for which no efficient techniques are currently
available. &lt;br/&gt;Integration of research and education: The research
proposed in this project is naturally linked to the following broader impact
activities:&lt;br/&gt;o Opportunities for students in a field where traditional
boundaries between disciplines have been removed: Students will join an
interdisciplinary environment that will train a workforce with strong, yet
transferable skills.&lt;br/&gt;o Opportunities for undergraduate students in
research, with special emphasis on first generation and rural background college
students: The PI will have at least two undergraduate students permanently
working in the group.&lt;br/&gt;o Developing course-work material: Multimedia
material describing aspects of the mechanical properties of solids for
undergraduate and graduate education will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;Enhance
Infrastructure for Research and Education: The PI will establish a permanent
collaboration with the Ames laboratory and introduce start-of-the art
information technology tools.&lt;br/&gt;Broad dissemination to enhance
scientific, technological impact and benefits to society at large: The PI will
provide new powerful software available to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;