* 0426021
* CRCD/EI:     Adaptive Explanatory Visualization for Learning Programming Concepts
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Spring, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Jose L. Munoz
* 08/31/2008
* USD 220,000.00

0426021 &lt;br/&gt;Peter Brusilovsky &lt;br/&gt;University of Pittsburgh
&lt;br/&gt;$220,000&lt;br/&gt;'CRCD/EI: Adaptive Explanatory Visualization for
Learning Programming Concepts' &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, involving a
partnership between the University of Pittsburgh and Ramapo College, engages in
an exploration of adaptive explanatory visualization as a technology to teach
programming concepts. Interactive visualization provides a visual metaphor for
understanding complicated concepts and uncovering the dynamics of processes that
are hidden. An emerging and active application area for visualization research
is visualization of program execution in Computer and Information Science (CIS)
education, particularly in the context of machine level languages, high-level
languages, and algorithms and data structures. This project focuses on promising
approaches to useful visualization called engaging visualization, explanatory
visualization, and adaptive visualization and attempts to answer the following
research questions pertaining to visualization: What is the value of adaptation
and explanation in the context of program visualization? Will visualization
enhancement technologies produce better understanding of programming concepts?
Can recent advancements in model-based generation and centralized student
modeling produce efficient and scaleable adaptive explanatory visualization? Can
adaptive explanatory visualization help teach the most challenging parts of
programming-oriented courses? Starting with a proof-of-concept system the
research team develops a set of practical tools based on adaptive explanatory
visualization and examines their effectiveness in classroom studies at both
partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;