* 0426753
* A Workshop to Set Priorities for the U.S. GEOTRACES Program
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2006
* USD 86,499.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0426753&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
provide funds to the Lamont-Dougherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University
to convene a National Planning Workshop to set priorities for the US
contribution to a coordinated international study of the marine biogeochemical
cycles of trace elements and isotopes known as GEOTRACES. An international
planning workshop held in April 2003, established broad community support for
GEOTRACES, and identified a number of scientific topics that are of high
priority. That workshop also produced a general framework under which GEOTRACES
research would be carried out, consisting of basin-scale sections anchored by a
few specific process studies, together with modeling efforts and experimental
research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Planning for international GEOTRACES will
proceed via the following sequence of activities: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1)
National and regional planning groups will hold workshops to define their
priority areas of research, and to identify specific contributions to the
overall objectives of the GEOTRACES program; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;2) National
and regional planning groups will develop independent Implementation Plans that
are consistent with national/regional research priorities, and with available
funding sources;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;3) An international Planning Group with
support from SCOR (Scientific Committee on Ocean Research) will build upon the
output of the national and regional planning workshops to create an
International GEOTRACES Science Plan; and &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;4) An
International Science Steering Committee will coordinate the activities of the
various national/regional efforts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Accordingly, this
award will support the initial development of the US component. Specifically,
funds will be used to convene a US GEOTRACES workshop to fulfill the objectives
in item (1) above, and to begin to develop a US GEOTRACES Implementation Plan
(item #2 above). The workshop will be held in late May 2004, in order to provide
input to the SCOR group that will prepare a draft international Science Plan in
June 2004. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed planning
workshop follow directly from those associated with research on the marine
biogeochemical cycles of trace elements and isotopes. With an improved
understanding of (1) factors and processes controlling chemical fluxes between
various geochemical reservoirs (e.g., continent, ocean, sediment) and (2) the
internal cycling of these chemical species within the ocean, the oceanographic
community will be able to exploit these species more reliably. This will aid
investigations in many aspects of oceanography including, but not limited
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; ocean circulation;&lt;br/&gt; marine ecosystem
structure and its sensitivity to changing environmental parameters;&lt;br/&gt;
the role of the biological pump in the ocean carbon cycle;&lt;br/&gt; past
changes in weathering inputs, in the chemical state of the ocean and in
biological productivity under climate boundary conditions that differ from those
that exist today; and&lt;br/&gt; the fate of anthropogenic substances introduced
to the ocean. &lt;br/&gt;