* 0426288
* Student Travel Support for the 14th International Workshop on Network and Operating System Support for Digital Audio and Video, June 2004; Kinsale, Ireland
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2006
* Kevin Almeroth, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Darleen L. Fisher
* 03/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide travel support for approximately ten graduate students
to attend the 14th International Workshop on Network and Operating Systems
Support for Digital Audio and Video (NOSSDAV) to be held June 16-18, 2004 in
Kinsale, County Cork, Ireland. NOSSDAV brings together researchers, developers
and practitioners from academia and industry to present and discuss new ideas
and future directions in networking and operating systems support for all forms
of networked human interaction. From large immersive environments to portable
wireless multimedia devices, NOSSDAV covers a broad spectrum of cutting edge
multimedia research that strongly impacts infrastructure and the human
experience. The travel award will target graduate students, since attending
conferences is an important part of their educational experience, and they often
have limited funds. An important aspect of this grant is independently
requested, but synchronized support of the National Science Foundation, VA, and
the Science Foundation Ireland (SFI). The latter has given NOSSDAV 2004 a grant
to cover a variety of items related to the graduate student participation. This
travel support thus contributes to initiate, develop, and foster relationships
with leading international groups undertaking research in the related technical
areas.