* 0426056
* SGER:    Multi-scale Modeling for Homeland Security and Supply-Chain Logistics Efficiency
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Jye-Chyi Lu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 12/31/2005
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) formulates multi-scale
&lt;br/&gt;spatial modeling procedures for handling data in various details to
support &lt;br/&gt;solution of complex logistics optimization problems. The
investigators &lt;br/&gt;develop reliability concepts useful in the logistics
field for solving &lt;br/&gt;homeland security related problems. Finally, this
project integrates &lt;br/&gt;probability and statistical models with operations
research tools to &lt;br/&gt;improve seaport container-operation efficiency to
meet the needs of &lt;br/&gt;security
inspections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation and design of secure and reliable
supply-chain logistics &lt;br/&gt;networks are of critical importance to the
modern U.S. economy. In &lt;br/&gt;particular, balancing security and efficiency
objectives in the design and &lt;br/&gt;operation of transportation logistics
systems and seaport container &lt;br/&gt;inspections is vitally important, and
to do so presents unique mathematical &lt;br/&gt;and statistical modeling
challenges. This interdisciplinary team of &lt;br/&gt;statisticians and
logisticians will bring years of experience in research &lt;br/&gt;and education
to explore the potential in this field. The key scientific &lt;br/&gt;impact of
this project is that the theory and methods developed in this &lt;br/&gt;project
serve as the foundation for advances in multi-scale data modeling &lt;br/&gt;and
hierarchical decision-analysis tools. This project also provides
&lt;br/&gt;several broader impacts required by the NSF, e.g., collaboration with
&lt;br/&gt;industry for disseminating research results, education of high-
quality &lt;br/&gt;students through thesis advising and class teaching (with
case studies &lt;br/&gt;explored in this project), and support of summer
research experience for &lt;br/&gt;students from underrepresentated
groups.&lt;br/&gt;