* 0426149
* Fundamental Issues in Quantum Gases
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Tin-Lun Ho, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

This grant supports theoretical research on quantum gases. Topics include
strongly interacting Fermi gases, quantum gases with large angular momentum, and
the dynamics of spin-one and spin-two Bose gases. These studies are directly
related to current experiments in this interdisciplinary field. At the same
time, this research explores new directions.

The projects address three fundamental issues in quantum gases: effect of strong
interactions; destruction of Bose condensates due to large degeneracy; and
quantum dynamics of bosons with internal degrees of freedom. The projects on
Fermi gases focus on the effect of strong interaction on the ground state
properties of the systems, the signature of superfluidity in the strongly
interacting regime, and the new superfluid phases of molecular condensates with
finite angular momentum. The projects on fast rotating Bose gases study the
breakdown of superfluidity due to large orbital degeneracy, the signature of
strongly correlated ground states, and the emergence of new quantum Hall states
in various environments. The projects on spin-one and spin-two Bose gases
investigates the validity of mean-field dynamics and the general properties of
quantum (non-mean-field) dynamics. All of these projects aim at advancing our
conceptual understanding of the fundamental properties of quantum gases. While
exploring the properties of quantum gases under current experimental conditions,
they also explore possible new phases.

Students and postdoctoral associates will participate in these studies. These
projects will provide solid training in many different areas including condensed
matter physics, atomic physics and quantum optics. Collaborations have been
established in Europe, Japan and China. %%% This grant supports theoretical
research on the properties of gases of ultracold atoms. This area of research is
at the intersection between condensed matter physics and atomic physics. The
experimental verification of the so-called Bose-Einstein condensation has
resulted in two recent Nobel prizes. While research into these gases is
challenging and fruitful in its own right, studies of these gases provide unique
insight into properties of condensed phase systems. The research provides an
excellent training for students. ***

