* 0426112
* Ocean Circulation Features Forced by Strong Topographically-Induced Wind Stress Curl
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Eric Firing, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2009
* USD 152,130.00

The PI proposes to analyze the impact of the wind stress curl anomalies induced
by high-topography islands or coastal mountains on the global ocean circulation.
To accomplish this, a semianalytical model will be developed to explore the
parameter space of the problem (distance of the island from boundaries,
direction of mean flow impinging on the island, direction and intensity of the
anomalous wind wake) and classify the different possible oceanic responses. They
will explore existing observations for all geographic areas of interest to
search for the predicted features and provide solid grounds for the validity of
the proposed dynamical mechanisms. A numerical model with increasing complexity
will help interpret possible differences between analytical predictions and
actual observations, and provide a deeper dynamical understanding of the
problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses issues seminal to the effort of understanding and predicting
atmosphere-interactions in complex geometric settings, and has implications in
ecosystem and fisheries dynamics. It will advance knowledge while promoting the
training of a graduate student. The results will be used to improve the material
of the undergraduate course \Global Environmental Data Analysis", taught by the
principal investigator in the framework of the new undergraduate Global
Environmental Science degree. It will also stimulate and motivate further
observations and field programs, especially in ecology and fisheries. The
results will be broadly. &lt;br/&gt;