* 0426245
* Third Party Certification in Food and Agriculture: A Study in Values and Science
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Lawrence Busch, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 06/30/2007
* USD 250,000.00

This proposal addresses the scientific and ethical dimensions of Third Party
Certification (3PC) of standardized agricultural processes and products in a
scientifically dynamic and socially contested global agrifood system. Third
party certifiers are (private or public) organizations that use scientific
theories, tests, and data as well as technical artifacts to independently verify
production and product quality and safety claims. They are usually distinguished
by their claimed independence from both buyer and seller. Third party certifiers
play an increasing role in negotiating issues of risk in society; yet, little is
known about the emerging forms, tools, and functions of third party certifiers
in the agrifood sector, much less the scientific and ethical issues 3PC
engenders. While it has existed for some time, in recent years 3PC has grown
considerably. In particular, 3PC has grown concomitantly with the development of
what has been called an economy of qualities. This economy of qualities is
marked by (1) oligopolistic markets in which firms avoid price competition and
focus instead on product differentiation, (2) a growing global middle class, the
members of which are eager to distinguish themselves through fashion, and (3) a
plethora of New Social Movements that place a variety of demands on industry for
credence goods such as environmental and worker protection, food quality, and
minimized pesticide residues. Under these conditions, many governments and firms
have taken advantage of the flexibility and responsiveness to rapid change that
3PC permits. Moreover, certifiers appeal to technoscientific values such as
independence, objectivity, consistency, competence, transparency, and
effectiveness in an effort both to increase trust and public consent and limit
liability. Under these conditions 3PC claims to stabilize technoscientific
devices and processes so as to reduce decision-stakes and resolve social
conflict pertaining to standards. Still, it is unclear whether the shift from
direct to mediated interaction (i.e., increased use of 3PC) resolves disputes
arising from these issues among actors in the food supply chain, or whether it
simply presents a changed social context for their continued contention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In theoretical terms, if social conflict lies at the root
of scientific uncertainty in the food and agricultural standards process, then
3PC should be a relatively ineffective arbiter of conflict because it is not
designed to address social structural issues. Conversely, if social conflict
over food and agricultural standards arises from high degrees of scientific
uncertainty, then 3PC should be a highly effective arbiter of social conflict
because it claims to stabilize the technoscientific devices and procedures that
are presumed to lie at the root of that conflict. Using social theories of risk,
we will examine 3PC in agrifood management contexts that raise interrelated
empirical and ethical/value questions associated with the tension between
science and society. These questions address the emergence, legitimation, and
structure of 3PC as it mediates the apportionment of risk and information among
affected populations. Central to these questions are ethical and value concerns
involving the utility, fairness, and conflicts of interests associated with the
rising importance of 3PC in the management of the global agrifood sector. We
examine variance among these questions through a comparative analysis of 3PC
applied in five exemplary cases of agrifood management: (1) Euro-Retailer
Produce Working Group Good Agricultural Practices (EUREPGAP), (2) Non-
Genetically Modified Grains, (3) National Organic Standards for Crops, (4)
Microbial Contamination of Blueberries, and (5) Animal Welfare in the Fast Food
Industry. Our study utilizes a multi-method approach involving the following
research activities: (a) review of historical studies and primary documents; (b)
interviews with persons involved in the creation, modification, execution and
enforcement of 3PC; (c) a content analysis of the technical literature so as to
understand the scientific claims made by 3PC; (d) observation of training and
certification processes to understand how 3PC is implemented and how
ambiguous/disputed cases are handled; and (e) philosophical analysis of the
empirical data collected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;