* 0426764
* SGER:  Using Portable Ultrasonography to Quantify Life History Traits and Energetic Status of Small Animals in the Field
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Blair Wolf, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 05/31/2006
* USD 56,492.00

Biologists that study animal evolutionary ecology and ecological energetics
often want to quantify the timing of reproduction and the energetic investment
made by animals living under varying environmental conditions. Many researchers
are also interested in quantifying the energy stores that are accumulated as
discrete fat bodies contained within the abdomens of small animals such as
lizards. Traditionally, these characteristics have been measured destructively
by removing a number of individuals from a population and measuring egg size,
number, and fat body mass in specimens after they have been euthanized. The
current methodologies place limits on our ability to understand animal
evolutionary ecology and energetics because a single individual can only be
sampled once, which prevents following the reproductive performance of
individuals through a reproductive season or across years. This research
addresses the critical issue of how can we accurately measure the same animal's
reproductive effort over the course of a single reproductive season or the
animal's lifetime. This project validates the use of portable ultrasound imaging
systems for quantifying the reproductive effort and energetic status of small
animals such as lizards. During this project, the methodology will be developed
for using ultrasound imaging to obtain highly repeatable field measurements of
small structures such as eggs and fat bodies in small animals and see how
strongly these measurements can be correlated with the energy content of these
structures. This study will engage at least one undergraduate student in the
research enterprise from study design and implementation through data
collection, synthesis and presentation.