* 0426557
* ITR - (ASE+NHS) - (dmc):     Fields as Objects in Geographic Information Systems,  Applications to Ground Water
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Matthew Becker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 373,584.00

Field phenomena are ubiquitous in nature (e.g. temperature, wind speed,
hydraulic head, ocean current velocity) and can be represented by physically
based equations constrained by mathematical boundary conditions. Field data are
usually stored in computer databases by gridding the solutions of these
equations. This approach is inefficient with respect to computer memory and
reduces the flexibility of the data with respect to spatial scale. The objective
of this project is to create a new Geographic Information System (GIS) database
paradigm in which fields are represented by storing three object data types that
constitute a mathematical model of the field: (1) a physically-based system of
equations; (2) boundary conditions for those equations; and (3) a solution
engine for the equations. If the mathematical solution to the system of
equations is unique, then solving for the field represented by the mathematical
model is equivalent to storing the field itself.

The test application for this method is a GIS database for ground-water
protection. Shallow ground-water flow is driven by hydraulic boundaries (lakes
and streams) and guided by the Darcy Equation. A ground-water hydraulic
potential field (head) can be represented by storing lake and stream features
along with flow equations. The mathematically exact Analytic Element Method
(AEM) is used to solve the flow equations, so that the potential field can be
retrieved at high precision, at any resolution, over any area in the database
domain. The result will be a suite of GIS tools coupled to a numerical ground-
water flow model and an object-oriented GIS database.

This project will produce a new archetype for storing, manipulating, and
conceptualizing spatially distributed earth science data. It encourages an
object-oriented rather than grid-oriented approach to natural fields. To promote
broader dissemination of this approach, a specialist meeting will be held and a
graduate course will be offered to students in the existing NSF IGERT program at
the University at Buffalo.