* 0426227
* Neural Coding in Visual and Auditory Systems for Natural Stimuli: Mathematical Modeling based on Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2006,07/31/2007
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

Neuroscience is the study of the nervous system, including the brain, spinal
cord, and peripheral nervous system. Its goal is to define and understand the
continuum from molecule to cell to behavior. Neuroscience is especially
important now because in addition to our intrinsic interest in the nervous
system, the field has been collecting rich data at an unprecedented rate (e.g.
fMRI, electrode measurements with natural stimuli), and can benefit from
rigorous tools for mathematical and data analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
Dr. Yu is a Professor of Statistics at UC Berkeley which has a very strong
neuroscience group at&lt;br/&gt;the Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute. She
recognizes the importance of data-driven mathematical modeling in neuroscience
at this point in time, and is very experienced with mathematical modeling based
on data.&lt;br/&gt;The hosts for the IGMS grant are Professors Jack Gallant and
Frederic Theunissen at the Helen Willis Neuroscience Institute. They study the
visual and auditory nervous systems of macaques and songbirds, respectively. The
hosts will provide the invaluable neuron recording data with natural stimuli
and&lt;br/&gt;provide access to the data collection process for the IGMS
research of the PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the IGMS research is to
acquire the indispensable neuroscience knowledge and understand available data
from the host labs to construct biologically meaningfulmathematical models to
relate natural stimuli and responses (neuron firing rates) at different layers
of the visual and auditory pathways of animals and humans. It is well-known from
physiological and psychophysical experiments that some cells at lower levels of
the pathways are linear and other cells at higher levels of the pathways are
non-linear. Hence both linear and nonlinear stimulus-response models are
relevant. Based on data from the host labs, the PI plans to &lt;br/&gt;1) apply
model selection techniques such as gMDL in linear neural coding models, and
compare with existing linear methods;&lt;br/&gt;2) construct biologically
meaningful non-linearmodels in the frameworks of boosting and Support Vector
Machines from machine learning;&lt;br/&gt;3) select biologically meaningful
features based on Independent Component Analysis (ICA) using natural phase
images and complex wavelet transforms, and use them in linear or non-linear
models from parts&lt;br/&gt;(1) and (2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of
this IGMS grant, the PI will be able to provide a unique opportunity for
students of statistics/mathematics to pursuit a Ph.D. with applications in
computational neuroscience. UC Berkeley has an incredible potential for a
program in computational neuroscience since it has very strong departments both
in neuroscience and in the physical sciences. Members of the faculty from these
departments want to develop a formal interdisciplinary graduate training program
in theoretical/computational neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;The IGMS grant will enable
the PI to be part of this new program and therefore help train the next
generation of researchers at the interface of neuroscience and mathematics, or
computational neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training of graduate
students in computational neuroscience will benefit society both by advancing
our understanding of the brain and by inspiring advanced engineering
applications. In particular, the research results will give us insight on how
natural stimuli are processed in the visual and auditory system of animals and
humans. Understanding how biological systems process natural stimuli might
inspire the development of novel algorithms in engineering applications for
image/sound compression, speech recognition and image/sound pre-processing for
hearing or vision aids and neural prosthetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover,
the IGMS grant will open up the field of neuroscience for the PI to solve
problems in the field on one hand and on the other hand infuse new ideas into
the PI's research in machine learning and data mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences
(DMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;