* 0426838
* ITR:   Collaborative Research:   -\(NHS+ASE)-\(int+dmc\):   Networks of Robots and Sensors for First Responders
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Daniela Rus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas C. Henderson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 673,259.00

ABSTRACT

ITR: Collaborative Research (NHS + ASE) (int + dmc): Networks of Robots and
Sensors for First Responders

PI: Daniela Rus, MIT Co-PI: Vijay Kumar, U. Pennsylvania Co-PI: Sanjiv Singh,
CMU

This collaborative ITR project addresses the development of proactive networks
of sensors and robots that perceive their environment and respond to it,
anticipating information needs by the network and by users of the network,
repositioning and organizing themselves to best acquire and deliver the
information. Such networked systems combine the most advanced concepts in
perception, communication, and control to create computational systems capable
of interacting in meaningful ways with the physical environment, extending
individual capabilities of each component and user to encompass a much wider
area and range of data. The PIs envision a physical analog to the Internet--
networks of computers that can actively sense, physically interact with, and
reason about the world. While the Internet allows transparent access to
information already online, this research will extend the paradigm by allowing
users to "google" for physical information, setting into motion robots and
sensors that team together to acquire information and act on it. Intellectual
Merit

The proposed research program will be make significant contributions to
networked multi-agent systems: control, self-organization, adaptation, and
perception. The work will focus on: (1) Control for communication and sensing:
the control of robotic agents to maintain communication links or establish new
ones, while obtaining the required sensory information and tracking sources; (2)
Communication for sensing and perception: the fusion of information from
heterogeneous sensors over the network, providing the required information for
each agent to plan and control its mobility and providing remotely located human
rescue workers with information through immersive displays; and (3)
Communication networks for sensing and control: the grouping, scheduling and
routing of nodes to adapt to changing, adverse conditions while maintaining
guarantees for control of mobility and for sensor fusion and integration.

Broader Impact

The research will enhance national and homeland security by providing first
responder with information about areas that are unsafe and hard to reach for
humans in three ways. First, it will speed up the response time by helping in
assessment, by augmenting human perception for command and control. Second, it
will help in suppression and containment. Third, it will play a role in
recovery, as in identification of victims and location of responding personnel.
The collaboration with practitioners at the Allegheny Fire Training Academy will
ensure that the research is grounded in the real world and has impact in the
emergency response community.

