* 0426761
* ITR - (ECS+ASE+NHS) - (dmc):    Richer Understanding of the Complexity of Election Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Lane Hemaspaandra, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2010
* USD 261,929.00

The overall theme of this grant is to bring the tools and power of theoretical
computer science to bear on the study of electoral systems (i.e., one-round
social choice systems-ways of so reaching a decision from a collection of
inputs). We will do so in a way that jumps far beyond the analyses of language-
complexity-of-winner in specific electoral systems research done by the proposer
and many others; rather, our core focus is on the following two themes: (a)
understanding the reasons for and sources of complexity in electoral systems,
and (b) providing ways of circumventing such
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Let us speak of each of these two related
themes in turn. Regarding (a), to get at not the what but the why of the high
complexity levels that by now have been found in various specific electoral
systems that are considered nice in terms of their fairness-type properties, we
will study the extent to which fairness inherently requires high complexity.
That is, we will obtain theorems of the form: Any system satisfying the
following fairness axioms will have a winner-computation problem that is hard
for the following complexity class. The goal of this part of the research is to
fund what types of fairness property collections are inherently precluded, and
what types are not-information that is very useful in the design and choice of
electoral (decision) systems. That is, just as Arrow's Impossibility Theorem
[Arr63] made clear that some natural fairness/niceness property collections
outright preclude the existence of systems having those properties, we wish to
use not existence but (the more demanding standard of) tractability as a guide
to what property collections can and cannot be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;(We also will, via studying the complexity of the central score
functions involved in electoral systems, determine whether the standard
simplification to languages has obscured insights into electoral complexity, and
we will also study the complexity of manipulating electoral systems, and their
resistance to manipulation.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regarding (b), the core ideas
explored will be: Since real elections typically have small numbers of
candidates, for complex electoral systems (both specific ones and broad classes
of systems), what is their complexity when viewed as parameterized by the number
of candidates; and can the scoring functions underlying electoral systems having
high complexity be well-approximated, or can it be proven that they cannot; and
in informal everyday practice can they be well-attacked with heuristic
methods?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts This proposal involves a wide
range of broader impacts, including information dissemination, international
collaboration, collaboration with a non-PhD-granting school, enrichment of local
community, training of students and post-docs, and service to the theory
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These activities are outlined in more detail
throughout the proposal: in the Broader Impacts part of the Proj. Description,
in the Human Resources and Service to the Community parts of the Prior Work
section, in the Synergistic Activities part of the Biog. Sketch, and in the
Grad. Student Justification part of the Budget Justification. Another broader
impact is via the research itself. The research's most important goal is to
determine which combinations of electoral fairness/niceness conditions
inherently do/don't induce computational complexity. This goal is exceedingly
natural, as it seeks to identify what types of electoral-system fairness goals
don't crash into the wall of complexity-theoretic limitations (basically, an
analog of Arrow's Impossibility Theorem, yet enforced not by mathematical
impossibility but rather by the limitations of computation). As to other parts
of the research, the study of power-fairness will research the issue of which
apportionment algorithms amplify or shrink the power of small voting blocks
within a society; the study of manipulation will seek to learn what makes a
system easy to evaluate yet simultaneously hard to manipulate; the study of
fixed-parameter complexity of seemingly computationally complex systems will
seek to fund when even such systems can be feasible on \reasonable" numbers of
candidates. (Regarding ECS/ASE/NHS, looking at the detailed descriptions of them
in the program solicitation, it is clear that all three are deeply affected by
the importance of the issue of coming fairly and efficiently to decisions based
on the preferences of separate entities. NHS is additionally supported by the
studies of manipulation and control. And the Technical Focus dmc is supported by
decision-making, which is an explicit part of the description of the dmc focus
area.)&lt;br/&gt;