* 0426913
* SGER: Exploration of the Mechanism of ATP-dependent Proteases by Force Measurements Using Single Molecule Techniques
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Carlos Bustamante, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 03/31/2006
* USD 99,128.00

Protein unfolding in the cell is an important step in several processes, most
clearly protein translocation across some membranes and protein degradation by
ATP-dependent proteases. The mitochondrial protein translocase and ATP-dependent
proteases catalyze unfolding by sequentially unraveling their substrates.
Differences in the susceptibility of substrate proteins to unfolding appear to
contribute significantly to the specificity of translocation and degradation.
The novel hypothesis to be tested here is that mitochondria and ATP-dependent
proteases catalyze protein unfolding by physically pulling at the polypeptide
chain. Unfolding by pulling would be a new mechanism of action for a cellular
process and would have important consequences for understanding of many
molecular machines. A pulling mechanism would be consistent with the
experimental observations but the image is based on analogies to the experiences
in the macroscopic world and it is not immediately clear whether this image can
be transferred to the molecular events under discussion. It is now possible, at
least in principle, to address these questions experimentally. The last five
years have produced the methodology to measure small physical forces produced by
biological machines using atomic force microscopy and optical traps. The long
term goals of this project are to address the following three broad
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1) To establish for one ATP-dependent protease, ClpAP,
whether it produces a physical pulling force. The pulling force and its effect
on the substrate will be characterized by measuring the maximum amount of force
that the protease can generate, the translocation rates, and the step size of
the motor that generates the force. &lt;br/&gt;2) To determine whether and how
the pulling forces depend on the sequence of the substrate. Preliminary evidence
suggests that low complexity regions, such as glutamine repeat regions and
glycine repeat regions in substrates attenuate the unfolding activity of the
proteasome. The hypothesis here is that the repeat sequences affect the manner
in which the translocation motor in the protease interacts with the
substrate.&lt;br/&gt;3) To compare the forces produced by the different
proteases and to determine what properties are intrinsic to all proteases and
what properties vary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immediate goal of this SGER
project is to setup the biochemical groundwork for the experiments described
above. The protease ClpAP will be cross-linked to polystyrene beads and activity
of the protease will be ensured. A suitable protease substrate will be
constructed. It should be long enough to allow monitoring of the forces and
displacement of the substrate during degradation. The substrate will be cross-
linked to the polystyrene beads and determine whether the substrate remains
accessible to protease. Once completed, the system will be ready for use in
determination of physical forces during protein unfolding using atomic force
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The concepts to be explored in
this high-risk project are novel. If the concepts were proved correct by this
work, an unprecedented mechanism for the action of a biological machine will be
established. This will have consequences in the use of molecular machines in
nanobiotechnology applications. The project will also involve student training
activities.