* 0426575
* Testing Models of Magma Movement along the East Pacific Rise Using Combined Geoditic and Numerical Experiments
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2004,03/31/2012
* Spahr Webb, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2012
* USD 802,818.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract (0426575) - Cormier&lt;br/&gt;This is a five-year program
that will deploy of an array of 20 pressure sensors for four years to monitor
magma injection at the NSF-funded RIDGE2000 integrated study site at the East
Pacific Rise (9'-10'N). Pressure sensors can successfully detect small (cm) to
large (m) vertical motions on mid-ocean ridges. They are also relatively
inexpensive and can record data for long periods of time without service. In
support of the field program, two modeling efforts will be carried out. The
first will interpret measured vertical seafloor displacements that will
incorporate the pressure sensor data from the field site. Numerical models of
coupled dike intrusion and sill emptying will be developed that include
algorithms that take into account the rheological structure of the seafloor at
the study site. The second set of models will examine the feasibility of using
repeat microbathymetric surveys to constrain surface deformation patterns across
a section of a plate boundary. Scientific objectives include discrimination
between the two competing models of magma delivery along fast-spreading mid-
ocean ridges, the first being where melt is supplied nearly vertically along the
ridge axis and the second being where melt is provided at ridge segment centers
and propagates toward the segment ends. In the first case, uniform vertical
deflections of the pressure sensor network would be expected along the part of a
segment cut by a dike, and in the second, pressure sensors would detect
significant subsidence near the segment center. &lt;br/&gt; Motivation for this
study comes from the fact that earthquakes and volcanoes are concentrated on
active tectonic plate boundaries, however, nearly 80% of these boundaries occur
under the sea and therefore processes occurring there cannot be directly
observed. This project, being carried out by researchers at the Woods Hole
Institution of Oceanography, will detect, characterize, monitor, and model magma
injection episodes along a plate boundary marked by rapid and repeated magma
injection events and spreading of the seafloor. &lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts of
this work include development of a novel magma injection seafloor monitoring
system and accompanying modeling tools which have the potential for application
to other plate boundaries, student education and training, and making
information on the project available to the public and K-12 in a meaningful way
through collaboration with the RIDGE2000 outreach program. Development of the
bathymetric survey tools also supports the emerging field of marine
geodesy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;