* 0426737
* ITR - (ASE+NHS) - (SIM+SOC):  Characterizing the Dynamics of Complex Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2008
* USD 668,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education and is
made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials Research under the
Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities
covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area, "Advances in
Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation in
Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." It may also contribute to the
National Priority Area, "National Homeland Security" and the Technical Focus
Area, "Interactions and Complex Interdependencies of Information Systems and
Societal Systems."

The complex interdependencies characterizing natural, informational and
communication systems not only impact all aspects of human activity, but offer a
series of novel challenges for contemporary science. The increasing evidence
that complex networks are shaped by quantifiable organizing principles has
generated interest in all research fields where networks play a role, from
statistical mechanics to computer science and biology. Yet, to fully understand
the impact of interconnectivity, it must be recognized that each network has a
purpose, facilitating material or information transfer between the nodes. These
processes assign to each node and link a dynamical variable characterizing their
time-dependent activity and force us to view networks as dynamical systems.
While the understanding of network topology has significantly improved in the
past four years, the characterization of network dynamics and transport is still
in its infancy.

The goal of the present award is to develop an integrated research program
addressing the dynamical implications of networks in various complex
technological, natural and social systems. The interplay between network
topology, dynamics and function will be investigated through a series of
extensive measurements, recording for several communication and social networks
the detailed time-dependent activity at each node and link. Building on these
multi-channel measurements, the research program will explore the basic
mechanisms that govern the dynamics of complex networks; study the development
of localized high activity regions or "hot spots"; explore the dynamical
correlations between the system's components and study the impact of groups and
communities on network dynamics; address the dynamic vulnerabilities of complex
networks, studying various topological and dynamical avenues to limit the impact
of component failures. Finally, a series of models and analytical methods will
be developed, aiming to turn the empirical results into predictive tools.

The research program will involve the participation of postdoctoral associates,
graduate students and undergraduate students. Educational activities will be
further integrated with research activities by conducting an intensive weeklong
summer school for undergraduate and graduate students on the fundamental aspects
and applications o network theory. Also, a series of web-based lecture notes
will be developed, designed to be used both in specialized network courses and
as modules in existing physics, computer science or biology courses that require
network analysis. %%% This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education and is made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials
Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012.
Research activities covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area,
"Advances in Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation
in Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." It may also contribute to
the National Priority Area, "National Homeland Security" and the Technical Focus
Area, "Interactions and Complex Interdependencies of Information Systems and
Societal Systems."

The complex interdependencies characterizing natural, informational and
communication systems not only impact all aspects of human activity, but offer a
series of novel challenges for contemporary science. The increasing evidence
that complex networks are shaped by quantifiable organizing principles has
generated interest in all research fields where networks play a role, from
statistical mechanics to computer science and biology. Yet, to fully understand
the impact of interconnectivity, it must be recognized that each network has a
purpose, facilitating material or information transfer between the nodes. These
processes assign to each node and link a dynamical variable characterizing their
time-dependent activity and force us to view networks as dynamical systems.
While the understanding of network topology has significantly improved in the
past four years, the characterization of network dynamics and transport is still
in its infancy.

The goal of the present award is to develop an integrated research program
addressing the dynamical implications of networks in various complex
technological, natural and social systems. The interplay between network
topology, dynamics and function will be investigated through a series of
extensive measurements, recording for several communication and social networks
the detailed time-dependent activity at each node and link. Building on these
multi-channel measurements, the research program will explore the basic
mechanisms that govern the dynamics of complex networks; study the development
of localized high activity regions or "hot spots"; explore the dynamical
correlations between the system's components and study the impact of groups and
communities on network dynamics; address the dynamic vulnerabilities of complex
networks, studying various topological and dynamical avenues to limit the impact
of component failures. Finally, a series of models and analytical methods will
be developed, aiming to turn the empirical results into predictive tools.

The research program will involve the participation of postdoctoral associates,
graduate students and undergraduate students. Educational activities will be
further integrated with research activities by conducting an intensive weeklong
summer school for undergraduate and graduate students on the fundamental aspects
and applications o network theory. Also, a series of web-based lecture notes
will be developed, designed to be used both in specialized network courses and
as modules in existing physics, computer science or biology courses that require
network analysis. ***