* 0426309
* Travel Support for U.S. Participation in the 2004-2005 Association Assemblies of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG)
* GEO,GEO
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Catherine O'Riordan, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Louis B. Brown
* 12/31/2007
* USD 109,750.00

The American Geophysical Union (AGU) will support participation by around 95
young U.S. students and scientists in six Assemblies of eight Associations of
the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG) in 2004 and 2005. These
Assemblies are those of the: International Association of Volcanology and
Chemistry of the Earth's Interior (IAVCEI), 14-19 November 2004, Pucon, Chile;
International Association of Hydrological Sciences (IAHS), 4-9 April 2005, Foz
de Iguassu, Brazil; International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy
(IAGA), 18-29 July 2005, Toulouse, France; International Association of
Meteorology and Atmospheric Sciences (IAMAS), 2-11 August 2005, Beijing, China;
(the Joint Assembly of the) International Association of Geodesy (IAG); the
International Association for the Physical Sciences of the Oceans (IAPSO) and
the International Association for Biological Oceanography (IABO), 22-26 August
2005, Cairns, Australia; and International Association of Seismology and Physics
of the Earth's Interior (IASPEI), 2-8 October 2005, Santiago, Chile.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;These Assemblies will provide extraordinary opportunities for the
next generation of geophysical scientists from the United States to meet and
interact with scientists from throughout the world. Young scientists from the 76
IUGG member nations and from some non-member countries will exchange
observations and ideas and to plan future cooperative
efforts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGU will announce widely in the U.S. scientific
community the opportunity for young U.S. scientists to apply for these travel
grants. The grants will be restricted to U.S. citizens and foreign citizens who
are permanent resident scientists working at U.S. institutions, but membership
in AGU will not be required. Prior to receiving their grants, all successful
applicants will designate in writing that they accept the travel funds, that
they will attend the entire meeting, that they will travel by a U.S.-flag
carrier in accordance with appropriate USG policies and regulations, that they
will provide receipts for all claimed expenses, and that they will provide to
the AGU a written report of their participation in the Assembly. The AGU will
analyze these reports and make such analyses available as
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;