* 0426151
* Syntactic and Composite Foams Conference; Banff, Canada; August 1-5, 2004
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Krishan Chawla, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 05/31/2005
* USD 5,000.00

This award by the Division of Materials Research provides partial support to
Engineering Conferences International (ECI), which is sponsoring an
international conference on "Syntactic and Composite Foams" to be held August
1-5, 2004 in Banff, Canada. The objective of this conference is to provide a
unique forum for discourse among scientists and engineers from varied
backgrounds on the growing field of composite foams. These foams are typically
used in applications that take advantage of their very high specific properties,
pore structure, energy absorption characteristics, and flame retardant
properties. The sessions are divided into five broad categories: reinforcement
characterization, foam characterization, fabrication, modeling, and future
directions. The scope of the conference includes the production and
characterization of reinforcing and functional materials specifically used for
these foams (i.e. hollow spheres, micro/nanoparticles, particles with specific
electric, magnetic, dielectric properties, biological, etc.) as well as
fabrication, characterization, modeling, and applications of the foams. A main
goal of the conference is to obtain a survey of the current work in the field
and to promote interaction among participants. Participants will try to reach a
consensus with regard to future directions, taking into account the
interdisciplinary nature of the field.

Composite foams have grown out of conventional blown polymer foams to now
include the addition of particles, fibers and/or functional elements, resulting
in complex microstructures that can be engineered to meet specific applications.
Today, by incorporating into composites hollow and solid particles,
nanoparticles, fibers, and specialized foaming agents, unique and tailored foam
properties can be attained. Because of these innovations, the role of syntactic
and composite foams has expanded into the aerospace, automotive, communications,
biomedical, electronics, sporting, and transportation industries. The support
from the NSF is for graduate students and young scientists to attend the
conference.