* 0426775
* "ITR-ASE-(sim):  Computational Studies of Models of Highly Anisotropic Materials"
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Samuel Moukouri, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2009
* USD 428,000.00

This award was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials
Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012.
Research activities covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area,
"Advances in Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation
in Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." This award supports
computational and theoretical research to develop a new algorithm, a "two-step"
density-matrix renormalization group method, and to apply this algorithm and the
dynamical cluster approximation to the simulation of strongly correlated
electron and spin models of highly anisotropic materials. The new algorithm
begins with a perturbation expansion in transverse coupling having properties
that are known from rigorous theorems. Well known techniques such as exact
diagonalization or the density-matrix renormalization group (DMRG) method will
be used to obtain the low energy spectrum of isolated chains. The anisotropic 2D
Hamiltonian is then projected onto a tensor product of states yielding an
effective 1D Hamiltonian which can be studied by the DMRG. Preliminary work
suggests that the method can predict an ordered phase starting from a disordered
phase. Important theoretical issues that have so far resisted other methods will
be addressed. These are: (i) the role of frustration in weakly coupled
Heisenberg spin chains as models for low dimensional quantum antiferromagnets,
(ii) the role of the magnetic field and the possible occurrence of
superconductivity in the ground state of weakly coupled Hubbard chains as models
for organic superconductors, and (iii) the spectral properties of weakly-coupled
Hubbard chains as models for inorganic conductors. This project also involves an
educational component. A non-physics major course will be developed. It will be
based on the use of simple simulations and visualizations of computer
experiments to "bring to life" essential concepts in various physics fields
ranging from simple mechanics to astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;The PI's algorithm may
lead to new insights into the physics of strongly correlated electron materials
generally. It may have applications to specific materials beyond those studied
in this project and may have impacts in other fields. The understanding of
interaction effects in low dimensional quantum antiferromagnets and frustration
may have impact on efforts to develop quantum computers and magnetic
refrigerants, potential replacements for chlorofluorocarbons which pose
environmental concerns. Computer codes created in the course of this research
will be made available to other researchers through the web and public software
repositories. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a proposal
submitted to the Division of Materials Research under the Information Technology
Research solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities covered by this award fall
under the National Priority Area, "Advances in Science and Engineering," and the
Technical Focus Area, "Innovation in Computational Modeling or Simulation in
Research." This award supports computational and theoretical research to develop
a new algorithm that will be used to study strongly correlated electron and spin
models of highly anisotropic materials. Understanding strongly correlated
electron materials has proven to be very intellectually challenging and has
resulted in the discovery of new physics. The PI focuses on materials that
contain one-dimensional "chains" in which the electrons are strongly
interacting. Interactions between the chains are much weaker. Examples include
lithium purple bronze, and various organic conductors like TMTSF. The PI will
exploit the structure of these materials and powerful numerical methods to
devise a new computationally accessible technique and use it to study unusual
electronic states that arise from correlated motion of electrons in these
inherently low-dimensional systems. This project also involves an educational
component. A non-physics major course will be developed. It will be based on the
use of simple simulations and visualizations of computer experiments to "bring
to life" essential concepts in various physics fields ranging from simple
mechanics to astrophysics. The PI's new algorithm may lead to new insights into
the physics of strongly correlated electron materials generally. It may have
applications to specific materials beyond those studied in this work and may
have impacts in other fields. The understanding of interaction effects in low
dimensional quantum antiferromagnets and frustration may have impact on the
quest to develop quantum computers and magnetic refrigerants, potential
replacements for chlorofluorocarbons which pose environmental concerns. Computer
codes created in the course of this research will be made available to other
researchers through the web and public software
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;