* 0426327
* Dispersion of Nanoparticles in Hydrogels for Ophthalmic Drug Delivery
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2007
* Anuj Chauhan, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 03/31/2007
* USD 140,000.00

ABSTRACT - 0426327

Dispersion of Nanoparticles in Hydrogels for Ophthalmic Drug Delivery
Approximately 90% of all ophthalmic drug formulations are now applied as eye-
drops1. While eye-drops are convenient and well accepted by patients, a majority
of the drug contained in the drops is lost due to tear drainage. The drops mix
with the tear fluid, and subsequently, about 95% of the drug flows through the
upper and the lower canaliculi2. Eventually, a major portion of the drug is
absorbed in the nasolacrymal duct, and enters the blood stream. This can lead to
serious side effects. For instance, absorption of Timolol, a beta-blocker used
to treat glaucoma, has harmful effects on the heart3. Furthermore, topical
ophthalmic drug delivery results in a relatively high drug concentration in the
tear film followed by a rapid decline. This causes sharp variations in the drug
delivery rates to the cornea that reduces the efficacy of ophthalmic drugs4.

Intellectual Merit: To reduce drug loss, eliminate systemic side effects, and
improve drug efficacy, we propose to develop disposable soft contact lenses as a
new vehicle for ophthalmic drug delivery. The essential idea is to encapsulate
the ophthalmic drug formulations in nanoparticles, and to disperse these drug-
laden particles in the lens material. This work focuses on soft lenses made of
poly 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) hydrogel. The hydrogel matrix of HEMA
lenses is synthesized by bulk or solution polymerization of HEMA monomers in the
presence of a cross linker such as ethylene glycol di-methacrylate (EGDMA)5.
Addition of drug-laden particles in the polymerizing medium results in the
formation of a particle-dispersion in the hydrogel matrix. If a contact lens
made of this material is placed on an eye, the drug diffuses from the particles,
and through the lens matrix, and enters the thin tear film trapped between the
cornea and the lens.

The three specific objectives of the study are, (i) encapsulate ophthalmic
drugs in nanosized colloidal particles and study the stability of these
particles, (ii) incorporate the drug-laden particles in the hydrogel matrix
during the polymerization process, and study the microstructure and the physical
properties of the particle-laden gel, and (iii) measure and model the drug
release rates from the particles and the hydrogel to determine the controlling
mechanism, and eventually control the release rates from the hydrogel by
manipulating the particle and/or gel properties. We have successfully fabricated
transparent gels loaded with two different types of particles: microemulsion
drops and liposomes. We have also established that contact lenses fabricated
from the particle laden gels can deliver ophthalmic drugs at therapeutic rates
for a few days. The proposed future work focuses on advancing the fundamental
knowledge of particle entrapment, aggregation, segregation, controlling
mechanisms of drug transport, and fluid mechanics of the human eye. In addition
we wish to increase drug loading and improve the drug release profiles to obtain
zero order delivery rates, and also develop the optimal systems for various
ophthalmic drugs.

Broader Impact: Drug delivery is rapidly becoming a very important research area
due to its enormous societal impact. This field has the potential to
significantly improve the quality of life, save lots of lives, and offer
improved treatment for a number of diseases. Our proposed research will help
deliver ophthalmic drugs in an efficient and controlled manner that could
potentially reduce drug wastage, improve compliance, minimize side effects and
maximize the efficacy of currently available drugs. Drug delivery through
contact lenses could be very useful for patients suffering from glaucoma because
use of beta-blockers to treat this disease has serious side effects on heart.
Furthermore due to the rapidly increasing importance of drug delivery, it is
important to expose students to this area of research as early in their careers
as possible. To achieve this objective, the PI proposes to include gel
fabrication and drug delivery through gels in Transport and Interfacial
Phenomena classes and involve undergraduate students in the research.

