* 0426415
* SGER:  Assessment of the Representation of Shape in Individuals from a Culture with Minimal Regular Simple Artifacts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Irving Biederman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Christopher T. Kello
* 08/31/2006
* USD 45,017.00

In a fraction of a second-in a single glance-we comprehend complex scenes never
encountered previously. What is the basis of this extraordinary capacity? A
prominent theory of shape recognition holds that objects exist in memory as an
arrangement of simple, regular, 2D and 3D geometrical shapes, such as bricks,
cones, cylinders, wedges, circles, and squares. To see a novel scene is to make
contact with these pre-prepared elementary shapes in memory, called geons. How
does this extraordinary capacity arise? By one hypothesis, a rich early
experience with natural extended contours would be sufficient. An alternative
hypothesis is that geons derives from our early experience immersed in the
geometry of a manufactured world. Would individuals from a culture with only
minimal exposure to manufactured-world artifacts show the same kinds of
perception as artifact-immersed college students? Would they, instead, have
greater sensitivity for distinguishing among highly irregular shapes, such as
bushes, clouds, or mountain ridges? &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Biederman and Marissa
Nederhouser, M.A., will answer the latter questions in an investigation of shape
discrimination by the Himba. The Himba are a semi-nomadic tribe in northern
Namibia with minimal exposure to Western artifacts and a language that contains
none of the terms for simple shapes (such as those listed for some of the
geons). Ms. Nederhouser will be joining a British team studying color and
linguistic discriminations. There is some urgency in this research because the
Namibian government will soon expand tourism to this remote area, with the
consequent increase of exposure to manufactured-world artifacts. Broader impacts
of this research include a better understanding of natural diversity in a
fundamental mental capability.&lt;br/&gt;