* 0426496
* Evolution of Clonally-propagated Crops Under Human Influence: The Example of the Andean Tuber Crop Oxalis tuberosa
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Eve Emshwiller, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2007
* USD 180,568.00

Vegetatively-propagated crops play an enormous role in feeding the world, but we
understand poorly how they differ from seed-propagated crops in their evolution
and needs for conservation. Little is known about how clonal growth interacts
with selection and dispersal of crops by humans to influence plant domestication
and crop evolution. This research uses the Andean tuber crop "oca," Oxalis
tuberosa, to study how human exchange networks distribute clones of the crop
geographically and how they affect clonal diversity in traditional subsistence
agriculture. Specifically, this project compares the diversity of oca among
different localities and to other clonal plants, and uses spatial statistics to
analyze patterns of clonal and genetic structure of oca across the Peruvian
Andes. DNA fingerprinting (fluorescent AFLP) distinguishes whether similar-
looking tubers are genetic clones. The same kind of data also compares oca to
wild Oxalis species to test hypotheses (based on previous DNA sequence data)
about the origins of oca's multiple chromosome sets (polyploidy).

Training workshops and involvement of Peruvian students in the research will
build international capacity for protecting the rich agricultural biodiversity
of the Andean region. To improve access to information, results will be
disseminated, in both English and Spanish, in scientific papers and
presentations as well as in non-technical publications. Collaboration between
The Field Museum, Michigan State University, and the International Potato Center
in Lima, Peru, reciprocally builds institutional capacity. Societal benefits
include improving strategies to conserve the diversity of clonal crops and
increasing understanding of their domestication. Because so little is known
about clonal distributions of any crop in traditional agriculture, the results
will not only be important to conserve oca's diversity, but will improve our
understanding of the human influence on other vegetatively-propagated crops.