* 0426696
* ITR:    (ASE+NHS) - (int+dmc): Distributed Quantum Information
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Wendell Hill, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,650,000.00

This Distributed Quantum Information Project will explore quantum architectures
that allow for distributed quantum resources, i.e. a network of quantum nodes
connected with quantum channels. The project centers on the realization of a
Matter-light interconnect with Cavity QED where neutral atoms and ensembles of
atoms will provide the quantum nodes and qubits while the quantum channel will
be done by optical means or a quantum bus of coherently transported atoms. This
quantum network architecture will allow the generation of entanglement between
atoms and photons, and entanglement between distant nodes, a critical part of
the interface necessary for quantum computing . Investigations of quantum
coherence and entanglement over macroscopic distances will also enhance our
understanding of the sources of decoherence and their effects on the fidelity of
the transmitted information, and the effects of quantum measurement, quantum
feedback, and back-action. The prototype quantum bus will include quantum
control in its operation, an innovative approach in quantum computing (dmc).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort is a collaboration between
experimentalists and theorists, and between academic and government scientists.
Graduate students and post-doctoral associates will be trained in quantum
information science through the establishment of information science pre- and
post-doctoral fellowships. The proposed in-house rotation and world-wide
scientist exchange program will not only give Fellows exposure to all aspects of
the field and valuable interaction with world leaders, it will also ensure a
constant infusion of new ideas. Special forums for undergraduate students will
be held in the evenings during the academic year and research projects will be
arranged for them in the summer. Participating students will be recruited not
only from existing programs, but from the rich source of Historically Black
Colleges and Universities in Maryland, Washington, DC and Virginia. A dynamic
web page, an active seminar series and an annual open house will be key channels
through which we will disseminate our findings to both the scientific and non-
technical communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is provided
by the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate
and by the Division of Computing and Communication Foundations in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;