* 0426345
* Mechanisms of Developmental Timing in C. Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Eric Moss, Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 07/31/2007
* USD 213,749.00

0212373 Moss

Developmental timing is fundamental to all multicellular organisms. For tissues
and organs to form properly, developmental events must occur in the proper
succession with the appropriate synchrony. The mechanisms that explicitly govern
the timing of these events are not well understood in any organism. Valuable
insights, however, have come from the investigation of heterochronic genes of
the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Dr. Moss will investigate an new and
important heterochronic gene, lin-46, which helps specify the stage-appropriate
fates of cells during the animal's larval development. The LIN-46 protein acts
early in the developmental timing pathway, downstream of the key regulators
LIN-14 and LIN-28. Proteins related to LIN-46 in plants and animals are known to
mediate protein-protein interactions. Therefore, to control developmental timing
LIN-46 is likely to interact with proteins that coordinate the behaviors of
cells and may be regulated by LIN-14 and LIN-28.

The work outlined in this proposal will address how LIN-46 governs developmental
timing from two aspects. First, Dr. Moss will elucidate the molecular
relationship between the lin-46 and other heterochronic genes by determining
whether lin-46 expression is regulated by lin-28 and lin-14, whether they act in
the same cells, and whether they are in a linear genetic pathway. Second he will
characterize the interaction of LIN-46 with other proteins. He predicts that at
least one other protein encoded in the C. elegans genome interacts physically
with LIN-46 and is necessary for its function. He will search for other proteins
that interact with LIN-46 using molecular and genetic approaches.

The long-range impact of this work will be an understanding of the molecular
basis of developmental timing regulation by LIN-46 and how it has evolved. What
is learned about developmental timing in C. elegans may be widely applicable to
other animals. The process of developmental timing is of broad biological
interest because its importance in the evolution of animal form.