* 0426870
* ITR-(ASE)-(sim): Life-Size Atomistic Simulation of Fabrication and Operation of Multi-Component Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Simon Phillpot, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,170,000.00

This award is funded by the Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry and
was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials Research under the
Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities
covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area, "Advances in
Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation in
Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." This award supports
computational research to develop atomistic simulation methods for parallel
computers to simulate nanostructures composed of multiple chemical species. This
award also supports education from high school to post graduate level and course
development. The PIs plan to develop and disseminate a flexible and robust
computational framework for atomic-level simulation of structures in which
chemically diverse materials coexist and function together. The framework will
be scalable to very large systems and will be implemented in a parallel
computing environment. The PIs will integrate three important developments in
atomic-level simulation: (i) variable charge methods that allow the charge state
of an ion to be determined self-consistently, (ii) fictional dynamics, applied
to the evolution of the charge states, and (iii) a real-space, computationally
very fast method for calculating Coulombic sums. The framework will allow the
simulation of systems in the 50 million - 300 million atom size range, which are
experimentally achievable nanostructure sizes. This simulation tool will be used
to address fundamental issues associated with the deposition processes by which
these structures are produced, confinement effects in nanostructures, and self-
organization of domains at the nanoscale. The PIs will simulate the fabrication
of devices in which the oxide ferroelectric (Ba, Sr) TiO3 is epitaxially grown
on Si; the PIs will also elucidate the structure of the interfaces between the
ferroelectric and various electrode materials. The PIs also plan to address
fundamental issues associated with the organization of domain structures and
with domain dynamics in Pb (Zr, Ti) O3-based thin-films and nanostructures.
These simulations will answer fundamental questions associated with the
chemistry of processing through physical and chemical deposition, and the
effects of temperature, strain, microstructure and confinement effects on domain
organization in nanostructures. Each of these simulation efforts will be
coordinated with the work of experimental colleagues. Broader impacts of the
proposed work include: (i) training and professional development of postdoctoral
associates, and graduate and undergraduate students, with an emphasis on members
of underrepresented groups in science and engineering, (ii) involving and
training high school students from underrepresented groups through the
University of Florida Student Science Training Program, (iii) developing and
expanding courses taught by the PIs, and (iv) disseminating results and
educational materials through websites developed by the PIs, through the General
Utility Lattice Program (GULP), and the NSF-funded Network for Computational
Nanotechnology at Purdue University. %%% This award is funded by the Divisions
of Materials Research and Chemistry and was made on a proposal submitted to the
Division of Materials Research under the Information Technology Research
solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities covered by this award fall under
the National Priority Area, "Advances in Science and Engineering," and the
Technical Focus Area, "Innovation in Computational Modeling or Simulation in
Research." This award supports computational research to develop atomistic
simulation methods for parallel computers to simulate nanostructures composed of
multiple chemical species. This award also supports education from high school
to post graduate level and course development.

Chemically complex material structures containing metals, ionic materials, and
covalent semiconductors within a single functional structure are increasingly
common. The integration of dissimilar materials is driving significant new
technologies ranging from smart chemical and biological sensors, with defense
and homeland security applications, to fuel cells for the hydrogen economy, to
microelectronics and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Simultaneously,
feature sizes are rapidly decreasing; The International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors calls for 50 nm (roughly 5 million atoms) by 2011. The scales on
which experimental devices are built are still much larger than the scales at
which atomic-scale computer simulations have been carried out, especially for
structures composed of dissimilar materials. As feature sizes continue to shrink
and computer power continues to grow, it is becoming feasible to model
nanometer-scale devices entirely at the atomic level. The PIs will develop a
robust computational framework for parallel computers to simulate nanostructures
accessible to experiment. The PIs will use this simulation tool to study
fundamental issues related to the growth and structure of nanostructures.

Broader impacts of the proposed work include: (i) training and professional
development of postdoctoral associates, and graduate and undergraduate students,
with an emphasis on members of underrepresented groups in science and
engineering, (ii) involving and training high school students from
underrepresented groups through the University of Florida Student Science
Training Program, (iii) developing and expanding courses taught by the PIs, and
(iv) disseminating results and educational materials through websites developed
by the PIs, through the General Utility Lattice Program (GULP), and the NSF-
funded Network for Computational Nanotechnology at Purdue University. ***

