* 0426271
* Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics, CIG
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2011
* USD 6,940,561.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to develop a Computational
Infrastructure for Geodynamics (CIG) which will develop, support, and
disseminate community-accessible software for the greater geodynamics community
from model developers to end-users. The software will be developed for problems
ranging widely from mantle and core dynamics, crustal and earthquake dynamics,
magma migration, seismology, and related topics. With a high level of community
participation, CIG would leverage the state-of-the-art in scientific computing
into a suite of open-source tools and codes. The infrastructure would consists
of: (a) a coordinated effort to develop reusable, well-documented and open-
source geodynamics software; (b) the basic building blocks - an infrastructure
layer - of software by which state-of-the-art modeling codes could be quickly
assembled; (c) extension of existing software frameworks to interlink multiple
codes and data&lt;br/&gt;through a superstructure layer; (d) strategic
partnerships with the larger world of computational science and geoinformatics;
(e) specialized training and workshops for both the geodynamics and larger Earth
science communities; and (f) modest hardware resources for software development
and community use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIG is proposing to house a small core
team of dedicated software architects and engineers whose work will be guided by
scientific objectives formulated by the geodynamics community. This Software
Development Team will provide full software service to the community in terms of
programming, documentation, training, and full-time support. Guidance for the
programmers will come from standing committees and task groups whose emphasis is
to identify and balance common needs across disciplines. The software
development team will be housed in the Center for Innovative Technologies (CIT 2
), a new off campus facility in Pasadena, which would be managed by Caltech for
the benefit of the national geodynamics community. Intellectual Merit: CIG would
enable scientific progress in multiple areas of geodynamics, by providing the
computational infrastructure needed for vastly improved modeling. Through CIG,
computational geodynamics will become connected with two much larger scientific
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;Scientific computing and geoinformatics. The CIG initiative
has already started to leverage and develop long-term strategic partnerships
with open source development efforts within both
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These strategic partnerships are essential as the
frontier has moved into multi-scale and multi-physics problems in which many
investigators now want to use simulation software for data interpretation, data
assimilation, and hypothesis testing. The impending flood of data from the
EarthScope initiative provides a unique opportunity to develop computational
infrastructure in geodynamics for the benefit of the entire Earth science
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: CIG will have a broad impact
upon our science through the creation of&lt;br/&gt;programming support and
software infrastructure that will outlast the research efforts of any individual
researcher and increase the rate of scientific discovery by providing the means
to routinely and rapidly solve formerly intractable problems. CIG will not only
provide the means of linking geodynamics with computational science and
geoinformatics, but it will foster communication between different
subdisciplines. CIG will impact geoscience through multi- and interdisciplinary
conferences, workshops, and collaborations, and by educating a new generation of
Earth scientists in state-of-the-art methods of computational
geodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;