* 0426609
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Local Effects of Global Conservation Policy: Discourses of Environmental Justice in the Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve, India
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Hilda Kurtz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2006
* USD 11,630.00

Since the 1970s the global development community has adopted conservation as an
integral part of the development agenda, noting that the degradation of natural
resources inhibits the stated goal of "poverty alleviation." There has been an
explosion in policy interest related to conservation and ecosystem management,
and the term "biodiversity" now is ubiquitous in the development discourse. A
worldwide network of biosphere reserves and heritage sites has been established.
While considerable attention has been devoted to the impact of reserves on
natural systems, less attention has been given to the impact of these kinds of
arrangements on the people who live in or near the reserves. This doctoral
dissertation research project seeks to understand how conservation policy as
articulated by international agencies like the United Nations and translated
into action by national governments is transforming the lives and livelihoods of
local communities dependent on the protected resources. It also explores how
local communities resist these policies and strive to retain their control over
resources. The project examines these issues through the case of the Nanda Devi
Biosphere Reserve (NDBR) in the Indian Himalayas. The NDBR is a vast area of
Himalayan wilderness surrounding the Nanda Devi peak. The Biosphere Reserve also
is home to several thousand tribal residents, mainly ethnic Tibetans known as
Bhotiya. In 1982, the area surrounding Nanda Devi was closed to all visitors,
including locals, because of environmental degradation from tourism, and the
area became a UN biosphere reserve in 1988. The livelihoods of the Bhotiya were
traditionally dependent on the use of the biotic resources of the region, and
the closure affected their livelihood activities. The Bhotiya now are struggling
to regain control over the resources of the NDBR, which are currently under the
control of the Indian government and the UN. This project seeks to understand
how the Bhotiya perceive that the policies of the NDBR have affected their
livelihoods and culture. The doctoral student also will try to understand the
conflict in terms of how the policy makers' perceptions of nature, which drive
the policies governing the NDBR, are different than the Bhotiya's perceptions.
Data collection for this project involves using multiple sources. Villagers will
be surveyed and will be asked to take photographs of "nature" with a disposable
camera. The student will interview key agents, such as Bhotiya leaders and
officials from the UN and Indian government. Documents produced by the Bhotiya,
the UN, and the Indian government also will be collected. The data will be
examined using a geographic information system (GIS) augmented by the recorded
interviews, archival research, and analysis of photographic data. In addition to
disseminating scholarly findings through academic channels (dissertation,
conference papers, and research publications), the student will create a
multimedia GIS database that makes publicly available the data collected in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is significant on two different levels.
Intellectually, it will further the conceptual link between political ecology
and environmental justice. Both concepts acknowledge the role of structural
forces as well as human agents in the struggle for control of natural resources.
Dialogue between the two fields has been limited, however. The use of multimedia
GIS with qualitative data sources will expand the definition of GIS. This
research will provide an example of how these two seemingly oppositional methods
can be combined in a useful manner to address complex questions regarding human-
environment relationships. More broadly, this project will help the people of
NDBR and other vulnerable populations by documenting and disseminating the
effects and outcomes of global conservation policies while giving these people a
chance to tell their story. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;