* 0426852
* ITR - (ASE + NHS) - (int): Intelligent Human-Machine Interface &amp; Control for Highly Automated Chemical Screening Processes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* David Kaber, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2008
* USD 798,132.00

High-throughput toxicity screening (testing) of dangerous chemical agents for
effects on human cells and cell functions is a rapidly developing international,
biotechnology industry. Advanced robots have replaced human operators and manual
control of screening processes to promote safe, quick and accurate assessment of
chemicals and toxins. In the screening process, the role of the human operator
has changed to that of supervisory controller of multiple robots manning
multiple process lines and performing simultaneous experiments. The operator's
task now includes monitoring robot states, detecting errors, and intervening in
process control for failure mode recovery. Operators are under high workload and
time stress to properly sequence experiments and to quickly make changes if they
do not progress as planned. The information requirements for effective
performance have expanded dramatically; task workload is now primarily cognitive
vs. physical; and there is a need to achieve high levels of situation awareness
in dangerous chemical operations. All of these changes have had a major affect
on operator stress and work health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI
and his team will develop an intelligent/adaptive, human-machine interface to
support the new role of screening process supervisors in safe and effective,
distributed control of high time stress and high risk, automated chemical and
toxicity testing. Development of this technology will be based on cognitive
modeling of supervisory controller behaviors during actual chemical screening
processes and model predictions of operator performance with different
interactive information display design alternatives during the (model) design
phase and during chemical process run-time. The PI will prototype control
interfaces and shared situation awareness displays for operators that integrate
and display process output data adapted to operator concurrent performance needs
and functional (physiological) states. The work will also involve creating
protocols for long-distance, remote operation of automated screening processes
under varying network communication conditions to provide access to "start-up"
companies and developing nations with critical screening needs (e.g., anti-
terrorism work). In addition, the intelligent interface content and the remote
process control scenario will be informed by, and adapted based on, an automated
robot (mechanical) "health" monitoring system. Outcomes of the project will
include a prototype novel intelligent, adaptive interface technology as embodied
in a remote process control system. Advanced computational tools will also be
developed to classify operator functional states in real-time, based on
physiological data, and to relate this information to screening task workload
and performance. Physiological and performance data models will be used as a
basis for structuring the cognitive model to promote highly accurate operator
performance predictions and facilitate effective dynamic interface configuration
for remote screening process control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research will impact and enhance the safety and effectiveness of high-
throughput, chemical agent screening, thanks to a combination of new approaches
to distributed network control of complex automated systems, user-centered
design of adaptive/intelligent interfaces, and support of complex system
operator situation awareness and decision making through process information
integration and management based on operator functional states. The work will
result in increased access for new companies and developing countries to highly
specialized and expensive automated, chemical screening technologies potentially
accelerating the development of new biotechnologies. In addition, the research
will provide specialized training for graduate students participating in the
project and through faculty development of new course modules, related to the
project, integrated in existing computer science, electrical engineering, and
industrial engineering curriculums.