* 0426194
* Phylogenetic Analysis of Eurasion Allotetraploid Species of Elymus (Gramineae) Based on Four Molecular Data Sets.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Roberta Mason-Gamer, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 06/30/2009
* USD 300,000.00

0426194&lt;br/&gt;Mason-Gamer&lt;br/&gt; Research by Dr. Roberta Mason-Gamer of
the University of Illinois-Chicago is designed to clarify the evolutionary
history of several European and Asian species in the grass genus Elymus. Elymus
is classified within the wheat tribe, Triticeae, along with wheat, barley, and
rye. From an evolutionary standpoint, Elymus is interesting because of its
complex genetic history. While the genetically simplest, or diploid, members of
the Triticeae have two complete sets of chromosomes (one set from each parent,
just as in humans), Elymus individuals have four, six, or even eight complete
sets, representing the combined genomes from two or more genetically and
evolutionarily distinct ancestors. This research focuses on the four-genome
(tetraploid) members of Elymus that are native to Europe and Asia, and builds
directly upon earlier research on the tetraploid Elymus species of North
America. The objective of the research is to clarify the evolutionary history of
18 of these complex Eurasian species using DNA sequence data from four different
molecular markers. More specifically, the goals are to: (1) identify the diploid
maternal and paternal progenitors of each species, and (2) assess whether
patterns of genetic diversity within Elymus correspond either to broad
geographic patterns, or to previously observed patterns of outwardly visible
morphological variation. When data from these species are combined with existing
data from the North American tetraploids, this research will encompass the
largest group of polyploids examined to date using detailed molecular
phylogenetic methods.&lt;br/&gt; Studies of polyploids are relevant to
understanding the extraordinary diversity of flowering plants on earth, since as
many as half of all flowering plant species are of polyploid origin. Not only
does polyploidy represent a major mechanism of plant speciation, but some of our
most important crop plants are polyploid, including alfalfa, canola, cotton,
coffee, cruciferous vegetables, potatoes, soybeans, tobacco, wheat, and many
others. Thus, mechanisms of polyploid formation and the genetic changes that
accompany polyploidy are of broad interest to plant scientists in many fields of
research. Evolutionary studies such as the one described here lay the necessary
groundwork for detailed explorations of many other facets of polyploidy. In
addition to providing insights into the complicated history of Elymus, the
project will support student education at the University of Illinois at Chicago
in two ways. First, two graduate students will be supported by the grant. They
will be deeply involved with the collection, analysis, and interpretation of
genetic data. Whatever they gain from this experience in terms of methods and
ideas will directly enrich their own thesis research. Second, undergraduate
student participation will be an important part of completing the project. The
grant provides work-study wages, and also supports the cost of supplies for
students who wish to receive course credit for completing research projects.
Undergraduates will learn many broadly applicable laboratory techniques,
including DNA isolation, gene amplification, and DNA sequencing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;