* 0426568
* ITR - ASE - Sim: Iterative Algorithms for solving Difficult Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Veit Elser, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 102,400.00

This award was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials
Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012.
Research activities covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area,
"Advances in Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation
in Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." It supports a pilot
project of computational research and algorithmic development on inverse
problems with a focus on protein folding. The work may lead to broad
applications in condensed matter physics and in other disciplines. Inverse
problems are frequently encountered in science and engineering, and especially
difficult ones -one-way functions-are exploited in cryptography and data
security schemes. Two important examples are the recovery of molecular structure
from x-ray diffraction data and factoring the modulus in RSA cryptosystems. As
investigations of matter increase in complexity and alternative one-way
functions are explored for information security, there is a greater need for
efficient and general-purpose algorithms for solving difficult inverse problems.
This project will further develop a promising, recently discovered algorithm
with an eye to one of the most challenging inverse problems in biology, protein
structure prediction from primary sequence data. The new algorithm is a
significant departure from the optimization strategies used in the past, which
do not exploit the highly designed nature of the protein's energy landscape. The
PI aims to demonstrate the advantages of this algorithm over more traditional
optimization algorithms. This project will focus on folding model proteins. The
PI also aims to implement the key operations of the algorithm for realistic
protein potentials. The next generation of scientists and engineers will likely
increasingly rely on shared databases and standardized computing protocols in
the conduct of their work. The PI aims to develop a miniature realization of
such a work environment called "semiprotein world" for Ithaca area high school
students. Semiproteins are model proteins with highly simplified properties, but
which pose many of the same challenges posed by real proteins. Through a
collection of software tools, including a web-based semiprotein data bank,
semiprofessional researchers with web access will be able to design and fold
semiproteins, and then deposit their findings in the database. The design of
semiprotein world will involve on-site participation of Ithaca area high school
students and undergraduates in the Cornell Center for Materials Research NSF-REU
program. This award also helps support the PI's pilot efforts in developing this
outreach program. %%% This award was made on a proposal submitted to the
Division of Materials Research under the Information Technology Research
solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities covered by this award fall under
the National Priority Area, "Advances in Science and Engineering," and the
Technical Focus Area, "Innovation in Computational Modeling or Simulation in
Research." It supports computational research and algorithmic development on
inverse problems with a focus on protein folding. The work may lead to broad
applications in condensed matter physics and in other disciplines. Inverse
problems are frequently encountered in science and engineering, and especially
difficult ones -one-way functions-are exploited in cryptography and data
security schemes. Two important examples are the recovery of molecular structure
information from x-ray diffraction data and factoring in cryptography. As
investigations of matter increase in complexity and new one-way functions are
explored for information security, there is a greater need for efficient and
general-purpose algorithms for solving difficult inverse problems. This project
will further develop a promising, recently discovered algorithm with an eye to
one of the most challenging inverse problems in biology, protein structure
prediction from primary sequence data. The new algorithm is a significant
departure from traditional optimization algorithms. The PI aims to demonstrate
the advantages of his new algorithm. This project will focus on folding model
proteins and laying the foundations for more realistic protein models. The next
generation of scientists and engineers will likely increasingly rely on shared
databases and standardized computing protocols in the conduct of their work. The
PI aims to develop a miniature realization of such a work environment called
"semiprotein world" for Ithaca area high school students. Semiproteins are model
proteins with highly simplified properties, but which pose many of the same
challenges posed by real proteins. Through a collection of software tools,
including a web-based semiprotein data bank, semiprofessional researchers with
web access will be able to design and fold semiproteins, and then deposit their
findings in the database. The design of semiprotein world will involve on-site
participation of Ithaca area high school students and undergraduates in the
Cornell Center for Materials Research NSF-REU program. This award also helps
support the PI's pilot efforts in developing this outreach program. ***















