* 0426486
* Collaborative Research: Ground-based Investigations Relevant to the Joint Dark Energy Mission
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Robert Kirshner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2006
* USD 20,000.00

AST-0426486&lt;br/&gt;Kirshner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Joint Dark Energy
Mission (JDEM) has recently been created through a cooperative agreement between
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the Department of
Energy (DOE) to detect and characterize dark energy and its influence on the
cosmic expansion history. Since ground-based work will impact our understanding
of dark energy during the next decade, prior to the launch of JDEM, the
constraints which can be expected from such studies should play an explicit role
in the requirements definition phase of JDEM. The present project will explore
whether and how a ground-based observing campaign could in any way influence the
design of, or anticipate any part of the results from, the JDEM. It will assess
whether cross-calibration can be precise enough to obviate the need for optical
detectors on JDEM, what new instrumentation might be necessary at ground-based
facilities, and whether a weak lensing survey from space adds
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NASA, DOE, and NSF are all devoting significant
resources toward detecting and characterizing dark energy, and these
investigations provide an excellent opportunity for inter-agency cooperation.
Although the NSF will not, and cannot, be involved directly in JDEM itself, the
science questions affect the NSF-supported community, and this project will help
to define their role.&lt;br/&gt;