* 0426644
* ITR-(ASE)-(dmc): Novel Wireless Broad-band Communications and Robust Time Synchronization Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Ashok Srivastava, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 08/31/2010
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract: ITR: Novel Wireless Broad-band Communications and Robust Time
Synchronization Devices (Proposal No.
0426644)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ITR proposal focuses on
interdisciplinary collaborative research to develop and analyze a novel broad-
band OFDM system, which involves the integrative design of the distributive
algorithms and the time synchronization circuits. A novel pilot-free dynamic
adaptive modulation mechanism will be investigated, which is based on the
switching capability among blind equalization and channel coders, rather than
the existing constellation or symbol-rate switching techniques. The quality-of-
service analysis due to the effect of local oscillator fabrication defects will
also be studied and justified using the real data and a novel integrative
system-on-chip design will be explored to optimize a switchable PLL module.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: The scientific knowledge can be added
by solving and analyzing some basic problems associated with wireless OFDM
systems. The pilot-free dynamic adaptive modulation, the indoor quality-of-
service analysis and the switchable PLL design are significant and unsolved
problems in the telecommunication research, which will be of great interest to
information technology researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This
project will contribute to the technology base of robust wireless OFDM systems.
The innovative pilot-free adaptive modulation, indoor quality-of-service
analysis tool and integrative system-on-chip switchable PLL will be of great
value to information technology. The developed broad-band OFDM system has a
genuine potential to be used in real-time wireless networks, digital audio and
video broadcasting, which are the essential parts of our daily life. Besides the
technological impact, this project also serves to educate the future information
technology workforce by directly involving underrepresented graduate and
undergraduate students in the cutting-edge wireless communications related
research.&lt;br/&gt;