* 0426826
* ITR: Advances of Simulation Algorithm of Quantum Manybody Transport in Steady State Nonequilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Jong Han, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2009
* USD 585,000.00

This award was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials
Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012.
Research activities covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area,
"Advances in Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation
in Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." This award supports
fundamental computational and theoretical research on nonequilibrium transport
in quantum dots and nanostructures. &lt;br/&gt;On the nanometer length scale,
high-bias nonequilibrium and quantum many-body effects are intimately coupled
and conventional theories for transport in semiconductor devices become
inadequate. The PI will develop a quantum simulation algorithm for steady state
nonequilibrium systems. Quantum Monte Carlo simulations will be used to sample
steady-state nonequilibrium ensembles governed by an effective quantum
Hamiltonian that consists of the nanostructure Hamiltonian and the bias
operator. The bias operator, written in terms of many-body scattering states,
embodies the nonequilibrium boundary conditions of an open environment.
Expectation values of time-independent operators can be calculated without
analytic continuation.&lt;br/&gt;Quantum simulation in the far-from-equilibrium
steady state has been lacking to date. The PI's method enables the determination
of essential characteristics of steady-state transport, such as I-V curves. The
algorithm is expected to continuously cover wide bias regimes from many-body
coherent transport to one-body transport. With the flexibility of the quantum
Monte Carlo algorithm, the PI plans to extend simulations to multi-dot and
multi-level systems. The inter-site resonance, dephasing and voltage-drop will
be investigated systematically. Non-local effects induced by the nonequilibrium
boundary condition are included in a controlled manner. &lt;br/&gt;The PI's
general algorithm may have broader impact on other fields that may contribute to
future information technology, including: quantum information control,
spintronics, quantum optics, and quantum computation. A confined system (eg.
quantum dots) coupled to an open environment (eg. Metallic leads) constitutes a
general problem of how quantum information is transported, dephased and reduced
by the many-body interactions and the coupling to the environmental degrees of
freedom. This work on quantum nonequilibrium systems may have further impact on
chemistry and core electrical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award
was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials Research under the
Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities
covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area, "Advances in
Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation in
Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." This award supports
fundamental computational and theoretical research on nonequilibrium transport
in quantum dots and other nanostructures. Electrons in materials such as quantum
dots and nanostructures under the influence of strong electric fields are a
system of strongly interacting particles that is far from equilibrium and
presents a fundamental problem that is intellectually challenging. Such systems
are not well understood and at the same time can form the basis for future
technologies. The PI proposes to develop a new algorithm that he will use to
study the interplay between interactions and the degree to which a system is out
of equilibrium. In addition to algorithmic development, the use of the algorithm
may impact future information technology.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;