* 0426488
* ITR-(ASE+NHS)-(sim+dmc): Non-Equilibrium Surface Growth and the Scalability of Parallel Discrete-Event Simulations for Large Asynchronous Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mark Novotny, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2008
* USD 550,000.00

This award was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials
Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012. It
supports collaborative computational and theoretical research in the area of
statistical physics. The PIs propose to develop algorithms for parallel
discrete-event simulations, study their scalability and performance, and
implement them on chosen applications involving materials related phenomena and
statistical physics. The proposed research contributes to Advances in Science
and Enginering (ASE) and to National and Homeland Security (NHS) as the ITR
National Priorities. The proposed research focuses on innovations in
computational modeling and simulations (sim) using innovative approaches to
develop efficient communication and synchronization protocols in data intensive
simulations (dmc) as Technical Focus Areas. The PIs will focus on parallel
discrete event simulation algorithms which can be applied to study large-scale
systems, including cell phone communication networks, models of spread of
diseases (e.g., smallpox), the electric power grid, dynamic phenomena in
materials systems, and ecological invasion in spatially extended environments.
To understand the scalability and performance of large-scale massively parallel
discrete-event simulations, the simulation itself is viewed as a complex
interacting system consisting of tens of thousands of processors and an
underlying network, facilitating communications and synchronizations between the
processors. Using powerful tools and frameworks from statistical physics and
particularly non-equilibrium surface growth, such as coarse-graining and finite-
size scaling, the PIs identify the relevant node-to-node processes on the
network. The universal features of the resulting non-equilibrium and stochastic
model describe the progress of the individual processors in the parallel
simulation (the parallel simulation "landscape"). Based on the "morphological"
properties of this landscape, the PIs propose to design and develop algorithms
that simultaneously optimize simulation speed and data management. The PIs plan
to apply developed algorithms to various problems, including the study of
dynamic phenomena in selected materials, and ecological invasion in multi-
species models with preemptive competition. Both of these exhibit long-living
metastable states with subtle finite-size effects. Implementation of massively
parallel simulations is crucial to extract and to understand the underlying
temporal and spatial patterns in these systems. This award also supports the
education and training of students at the graduate and undergraduate levels in
simulation and modeling with applications in science and engineering. The PIs
endeavor to involve members of under-represented groups in research and
education supported by this award. The research includes a collaborative
component with researchers at the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), where
scalable simulation of individual-based models (e.g., for modeling a
bioterrorist attack using smallpox in human-contact networks) and critical
infrastructures (e.g., vulnerability detection for the electric power-grid) is
of particular interest to the Laboratory. Graduate students will also
participate in visits to LANL through the Laboratory's summer student program,
further contributing to the education and training value of the proposed
research. Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) at Rensselaer will
support, in part, undergraduate participation in the proposed research. The PIs
will continue to participate in outreach activities, primarily through classroom
interaction with science oriented high-school seniors. %%% This award was made
on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials Research under the
Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012. It supports
collaborative computational and theoretical research in the area of statistical
physics. The PIs propose to use powerful conceptual tools from statistical
physics to develop algorithms to enable computer simulation of complex systems,
including various materials related phenomena. The PIs main focus will be on
simulations characterized by changes in the system that occur as discrete
spatially localized events as time advances. This encompasses a diverse range of
systems from, for example, battlefield simulation to the changes in the
orientation of magnetic moments as a magnetic material is heated. The PIs will
implement these algorithms and apply them to materials related phenomena and
statistical physics. The proposed research contributes to Advances in Science
and Enginering (ASE) and to National and Homeland Security (NHS) as the ITR
National Priorities. The proposed research focuses on innovations in
computational modeling and simulations (sim) using innovative approaches to
develop efficient communication and synchronization protocols in data intensive
simulations (dmc) as Technical Focus Areas. This award also supports the
education and training of students at the graduate and undergraduate levels in
simulation and modeling with applications in science and engineering. The PIs
endeavor to involve members of under-represented groups in research and
education supported by this award. The research includes a collaborative
component with researchers at the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), where
scalable simulation of individual-based models (e.g., for modeling a
bioterrorist attack using smallpox in human-contact networks) and critical
infrastructures (e.g., vulnerability detection for the electric power-grid) is
of particular interest to the Laboratory. Graduate students will also
participate in visits to LANL through the Laboratory's summer student program,
further contributing to the education and training value of the proposed
research. Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) at Rensselaer will
support, in part, undergraduate participation in the proposed research. The PIs
will continue to participate in outreach activities, primarily through classroom
interaction with science oriented high-school seniors. ***

