* 0426300
* ITR: Collaborative Research: (EVS + ASE) - Soc + int): Electronic Auction Markets
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* John Kagel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 159,871.00

This project studies electronic auction markets by integrating theoretical and
experimental approaches, with particular attention to package auctions and
exchanges. In package auctions, participants bid for bundles consisting of
multiple items. In package exchanges, participants bid to buy, sell, or swap
packages of items. For example, the Federal Communications Commission staff is
currently evaluating the use of a package exchange to reallocate spectrum rights
among new and existing users. An existing user might offer $X to its license
with characteristics A for another license with characteristics B. Intellectual
Merit: Package auctions as described above are distributed systems for resource
allocation using human participants, extensive communications, and complex
optimizations. The potential gains include improvements in high value resources
allocations and even in life-savings applications. Moreover, the design of new
auctions is a complex engineering task that must account for human behavior as
well as communication and computation demands. This research will address all of
the issues involved in successfully implementing package auctions and exchanges
and related mechanisms. Among the many objectives, the investigators plan to (1)
create new experiments to test the theory's predictions, such as the recent
Ausubel-Milgrom prediction that outcomes are core allocations, (2) identify
theoretically the communication and computation demands of resource allocation
mechanisms in several kinds of environments, (3) evaluate experimentally how the
environment, bidder characteristics and bidder tools affect the outcomes, (4)
develop (distance) metrics that allow researchers to compare actual bidder
behavior both to the predictions of theory and to the behaviors required for the
mechanism to achieve performance targets, (5) compare (theoretically and
experimentally) the performance of different market mechanisms, both static and
dynamic, and (6) examine (both theoretically and experimentally) the effect of
package evaluation costs on bidder behavior and auction performance.

Broader Impacts: Auctions and exchanges with package bidding can result in
dramatic improvements in resource allocations compared to traditional designs in
many high-value settings. Static package auctions have already been used for
business procurement; the US Federal Communications Commission is exploring
dynamic package auctions and exchanges to reallocate radio spectrum rights to
much higher valued uses. In addition, auction-like mechanisms that do not use
cash transfers promise great improvements for important transactions, such as
life-saving organ swaps that help patients and donors improve the tissue matches
and increase the chance that transplants will succeed, and school matching
procedures that assign children to schools and avoid the kind of chaos
experienced, for example, by New York City high schools in 2003.