* 0426797
* ITR-(ASE)-(int):  Portable Neutron Scattering Visualization and Reduction Software
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Ruth Mikkelson, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2007
* USD 261,000.00

0426797&lt;br/&gt;Mikkelson&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a proposal
submitted to the Division of Materials Research under the Information Technology
Research solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities covered by this award fall
under the National Priority Area, "Advances in Science and Engineering," and the
Technical Focus Area, "Integration of computing, networking, human-computer
interfaces, and information management to support reliable, complex,
distributed, systems." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop software
for time-of-flight neutron scattering data visualization and analysis. The
software will extend the capabilities of the Integrated Spectral Analysis
Workbench (ISAW) developed in collaboration with the IPNS division of Argonne
National Laboratory to work with data from multiple instruments and facilities
using the NeXus file standard for neutron scattering data. In addition, the
project will develop improved data visualization tools and data reduction
operators for powder, glass, liquid and amorphous material diffractometers. The
project staff will collaborate with scientists from Argonne, Los Alamos and Oak
Ridge National Laboratories. The award also supports collaboration wth the DANSE
(Distributed Data Analysis for Neutron Scattering Experiments) team from the
California Institute of Technology. The collaboration will develop ways for ISAW
to interact with next generation software being developed for the SNS. The
software development team will include a diverse group of undergraduate students
who will participate fully in the design and development of the
software.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a proposal submitted to
the Division of Materials Research under the Information Technology Research
solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities covered by this award fall under
the National Priority Area, "Advances in Science and Engineering," and the
Technical Focus Area, "Integration of computing, networking, human-computer
interfaces, and information management to support reliable, complex,
distributed, systems." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-of-flight neutron scattering
techniques provide a critical tool for studying the structure and dynamics of
materials. These experiments often produce large data sets with hundreds of
megabytes of data. This project will develop portable user-friendly software for
visualizing and analyzing such data. The software will support data from
multiple instruments and facilities, including the new Spallation Neutron Source
being constructed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The project will support
collaboration with the SNS and with the distributed Data Analysis of Neutron
Scattering Experiments project at the California Institute of Technology. In
addition to developing the software, this project will contribute to training
future software engineers and scientists. The software development team will
include a diverse group of undergraduate students who will participate fully in
the design and development of the
software.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;