* 0426363
* Dissertation Research: High Status Cemeteries and Socio-Political Organization in Late Pre-Columbian Costa Rica
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Jason Yaeger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2006
* USD 11,887.00

R. Jeffrey Frost (University of Wisconsin at Madison), will conduct
archaeological investigations in southern Costa Rica at the Chiriqui period
(A.D. 800-1500) high-status cemetery site, Pantein de la Reina. Chiriqui is one
of the best defined archaeological complexes in Lower Central America and is
recognized as one of the most important areas for the study of pre-Columbian
chiefdom societies. The investigation builds upon more than ten years of
previous research at the Panteon de la Reina's habitation site, Rivas. The
results of the study, when combined with the Rivas data, will provide an
unprecedented data set that includes both a settlement and its associated
cemeteries, and it will hold great potential for better understanding the
region's prehistoric societies.

Frost's research aims to refine our understanding pre-Columbian social
organization through an investigation of the internal organization of a high-
status cemetery site. Chiriqui cemeteries have rarely been investigated because
of severe looting and poor preservation of organic materials. However, Frost's
research to date demonstrates that despite these limitations these sites can
serve as an effective means to understand social organization when
archaeological research is combined with ethnographic and historical sources.

As the most comprehensive investigation of Chiriqui phase high-status cemeteries
to date, Frost's research will make several significant contributions to
archaeological research on pre-Columbian societies. First, it will provide the
first substantial data on inter-elite interactions by comparing mortuary
treatment between several spatially defined sections of the cemetery. It will
also provide important contextual information for ceramics and metal objects
that have been looted from these cemeteries thus contributing to an
understanding of the social contexts in which such goods circulated. Completion
of this project will also enable larger regional comparisons with previous
research at high-status cemeteries in Columbia, Panama and elsewhere in Costa
Rica

In addition to contributions of archaeological importance, this project will
also have broader impacts. For example, the project will contribute to the
professional development of several students. This project will enable Jeffrey
Frost to complete his dissertation. Frost has also arranged for graduate and
undergraduate students from North America and the University of Costa Rica to
participate in the project, thus providing both Americans and Costa Ricans with
opportunities to work together and gain valuable research experience. These
arrangements will help develop new and perpetuate existing inter-institutional
relations. Previous research at the site has inspired local landowners to
protect their archaeological sites on their land. Frost will also work closely
with local schools and youth groups to help school aged children about the
importance of scientific research and protecting Costa Rica's cultural heritage.

