* 0426189
* CAREER: Open-Loop Discrete-Event Control in Electric Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Steven Rovnyak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 12/31/2006
* USD 61,374.00

9983653&lt;br/&gt;Rovnyak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
develop and validate pattern&lt;br/&gt;recognition methods such as Decision
Trees (DTs) and Neural Networks (NNs)&lt;br/&gt;for electric power system wide-
area open-loop discrete-event control. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed controls will
provide Independent Service Operators (ISOs) and&lt;br/&gt;present-day utilities
with tools necessary to achieve the cost reduction&lt;br/&gt;goals of
deregulation without sacrificing reliability. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;research
will investigate the selection of contingencies to simulate for&lt;br/&gt;the
training data, algorithms for converting simulation data into
input-&lt;br/&gt;output pairs that make up the training sets, and measures of
performance&lt;br/&gt;used to evaluate the classifier operation. The PI and
graduate students&lt;br/&gt;will collaborate with researchers at Cornell
University and the Bonneville&lt;br/&gt;Power Administration and will test the
proposed methods against other&lt;br/&gt;schemes reported in the literature for
out-of-step relaying, generator&lt;br/&gt;tripping, active load modulation, HVDC
fast power changes, and reactive&lt;br/&gt;power switching. Students in EE 588,
Advanced Topics in Power Systems,&lt;br/&gt;will train and test NNs on data from
the research. Undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;in EE 479, Automatic Control
Systems Laboratory, will design feedback&lt;br/&gt;controls for the simple power
system model that is analyzed in this&lt;br/&gt;proposal. The PI will engage all
students in active learning through&lt;br/&gt;frequent and extensive exercises
that lead students through the discovery&lt;br/&gt;process of problem solving
instead of just rewarding the memorization of&lt;br/&gt;techniques. The PI will
distribute detailed, annotated solutions to all&lt;br/&gt;homework problems on
the due date. These teaching methods have been found&lt;br/&gt;by the PI to be
successful with a broad spectrum of students, including&lt;br/&gt;women,
minorities and people with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;