* 0426148
* Statistical Approaches to the Analysis of Genome-wide Measurements: Significance of Periodic Gene Expression and Correlations of Gene Content in Completely Sequenced Genomes
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2006
* Jie Chen, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 11/30/2006
* USD 90,548.00

The goal of this project is to advance interdisciplinary research between
mathematical sciences and modern biological sciences. The specific aims of this
project are to: (1) expand the PI's skills and knowledge in molecular biology
and bioinformatics, (2) pursue projects at the intersection of molecular biology
and statistics, and (3) develop new statistical modeling techniques or improve
the existing statistical methods for analyzing genetic data sets. Research
activities will include: developing statistical methods to identify
statistically significant periodically expressed genes in the cell cycle
expression data sets with controllable false discovery rate (FDR); establishing
an optimal clustering strategy that produces biologically meaningful clusters
for gene expression data sets; and investigating the canonical correlation
between gene content vectors so that optimal relations between genes or protein
vectors can be revealed. The Bioinformatics Center at the Stowers Institute for
Medical Research in Kansas City, Missouri will host the PI for this project.
&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the project may have profound impact in promoting
teaching, training, and learning at the intersection of statistics, molecular
biology, and bioinformatics. Bringing together knowledge and expertise across
disciplines will generate new knowledge and understanding in statistical
bioinformatics. Moreover, such newly acquired knowledge will enrich the
educational experiences and enhance career options for students at the PI's home
institution. Thus, this project will leverage cross-discipline research
collaboration and advanced scientific educational opportunity to advance
scientific knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IGMS project is jointly
supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;