* 0426787
* Collaborative Research:   ITR:    (ASE)-(sim+dmc):   Algorithms for Large-Scale Simulations of Turbulent Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Paul Chew, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Arvind Atreya
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,393,410.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms for Large-Scale Simulation
&lt;br/&gt;of Turbulent Combustion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-ITR
Grant&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Stephen B. Pope, Cornell University&lt;br/&gt;Peyman Givi,
University of Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
collaborative ITR project is the development and use of innovative computational
algorithms for the simulation of turbulent combustion. This is a topic of
extreme intellectual challenge as it combines highly complex and non-linear
combustion chemistry with the multi-scale and stochastic aspects of turbulence.
Addressing this challenge, the four components of the project are (1) Dimension
Reduction Algorithms suitable for combustion chemistry (2) Storage-Retrieval
Algorithms including the use of widely-distributed databases (3) Algorithm
Implementation for efficient performance on large-scale parallel systems, and
(4) performance of Turbulent Combustion Simulations. In combustion (and other
applications) the computational cost can be dramatically decreased if the
dimensionality of the problem can be reduced. Two new approaches to dimension
reduction are being explored and developed. These are based on pre-image curves
and iterated Taylor series. Storage-retrieval algorithms have proved extremely
effective in turbulent combustion calculations, and there are many other
applications ripe for their use. The basis of these algorithms is to re-use data
that are costly to compute directly (e.g., the solutions to the stiff ODE's
governing chemical reactions). Data generated early in a simulation are
efficiently re-used later in the simulation. This idea is extended to widely
distributed computing and databases, so that data generated worldwide in all
previous simulations can be used. To achieve accurate and efficient simulations
of turbulent combustion, several advanced methodologies are combined: the flow
is treated by large-eddy simulation (LES) so that the large-scale, unsteady, 3D
motions are explicitly represented; the statistical distribution of the subgrid
scale compositions is fully represented by its joint probability density
function (PDF) whose evolution equation is solved by a Lagrangian particle
method; and realistic combustion chemistry is incorporated using the combination
of dimension reduction and storage-retrieval. The objective of this aspect of
the work is to develop a comprehensive implementation of these methodologies
that performs efficiently on large-scale parallel systems. Finally, as part of
an ongoing international collaborative workshop, simulations are performed for
several "target flames" for which there exist high-quality experimental data. In
addition to testing and demonstrating the methodology developed, these
simulations serve to investigate the performance of the physical sub-models, and
to shed light on the physics and chemistry of the processes involved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Now, and for many decades to come, turbulent combustion is
a topic of tremendous significance to society and to several major industries.
Energy usage (in power production, transportation, process industry and
elsewhere) occurs predominantly through the combustion of fuels in turbulent
flows. While there is, appropriately, great current interest in fuel cells and
the possible re-emergence of nuclear power, the reality is that combustion
technologies will remain dominant for many decades. There are compelling reasons
to seek improvements in combustion devices, environmental and economic, and the
industry is looking increasingly to computer simulations as a means of achieving
improved designs. Higher combustion efficiencies lead directly to reduced CO2
emissions (for given output); at the same time, lower emissions of pollutants
such as NO and particulates are continually being sought. It is inevitable that
computer simulation, already an integral part of the design process, will grow
in importance, as computers continually increase in power and the fidelity of
the simulations improves. In this project, computer algorithms are being
developed to increase substantially our abilities to simulate combustion
processes and hence to impact the design of improved combustion devices. While
the focus of the project is on turbulent combustion simulations, the algorithms
developed (especially for dimension reduction and storage-retrieval) have broad
applicability in computational science and engineering in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;