* 0426971
* ITR-(ASE+NHS)-(dmc+sim):  Simulation Transformation for Dynamic, Data-Driven Application Systems (DDDAS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Paul Reynolds, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2008
* USD 901,150.00

Brogan, David&lt;br/&gt;0426971&lt;br/&gt;Our world is increasingly instrumented
and networked with remote sensing and computational devices, creating new
opportunities for enhanced analysis and prediction. Exploitation of these
opportunities requires dynamic, data-driven application systems (DDDAS) composed
from complex combinations of sensors, networks, computational resources,
simulation software, and humans-in-the-loop. The project will develop an end-to-
end DDDAS simulation design methodology and transformation process that will
improve the potential for simulations to adapt to the dynamic composition of
computational and data resources at run time. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
will deploy a crosscutting approach to simulation design and transformation
called .COERCE.. COERCE addresses the immediate challenges of making simulations
work most effectively in existing dynamic, data-driven application systems.
COERCE is both coercibility (a property of simulations) and coercion (a
process). Coercibility addresses the practices and methods whereby designer
knowledge about how a simulation can be transformed is captured (possibly in
simulation language constructs) to support future coercion. Coercibility
provides for the capture and representation of simulation properties. Coercion
is the process of transforming a simulation using a human-controlled mix of code
modification and semi-automated analysis and optimization to meet a specific set
of requirements, possibly differing from those for which the simulation was
originally designed. &lt;br/&gt;Through coercion, preexisting (legacy)
simulations can be transformed to adapt to new or missing data sources, to
change fidelity, and to change their roles in a larger data-driven system.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;