* 0426307
* Eddy Transport in the Ocean:  Analysis and Parameterization
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* R. Alan Plumb, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 596,406.00

0426307

The intellectual merit of this activity rests on the contribution this research
will make to improved understanding, and parameterization in models, of eddy
transports in the ocean. The goal of the project is the development and
implementation of a theoretically supportable parameterization of mesoscale
eddies, based on the notion that eddies transport potential vorticity along
isopycnals, for use in large-scale ocean models. The methodology to be employed
comprises: development of the theory of eddy transport in relevant contexts,
based on the transformed Eulerian mean approach; simulation and analysis of the
role of eddies in a hierarchy of ocean models of increasing complexity and
consequent identification of the role eddies play in the large-scale
circulation; and formulation and implementation of a parameterization scheme.
Within this formalism, the advective parts of eddy transport are not
parameterized, but the transformed circulation (including the advective eddy
terms) is the response to forcing by the non-advective eddy transport. Thus far,
the methodology has been applied to the relatively simple case of zonal-mean
flows, but this will be extended early in the proposed funding period to
incorporate three-dimensional time-mean flows, in both idealized and realistic
models. The broader impacts include the contribution an improved eddy
parameterization scheme will make to modeling of the ocean circulation and its
role in climate. Along the way to this goal, the project will produce other
outcomes, especially advances in the theory of eddy transport in the ocean, and
improved understanding of the role of eddies in the structure and circulation of
the ocean. Each of these outcomes has broader potential impact on the modeling
and understanding of the ocean and its role in climate. Research results will be
communicated in the usual way, through scholarly journals and at meetings such
as AGU and, through exposure of graduate students at M. I. T. to this activity,
it will impact the training of graduate students. In addition, at least one
postdoctoral scientist will receive training in this very important area.

