* 0426612
* International Conference on Step Polymerization; September 26-30, 2004; Roanoke, VA
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* James McGrath, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 05/31/2005
* USD 2,000.00

An international conference on Step Polymerization or Polycondensation will be
held at the Virginia Tech Hotel Roanoke and Conference Center
(http://www.hotelroanoke.com/) near the Roanoke Airport from 26-30 September
2004. The co-chairs are James E. McGrath (Virginia Tech), Frank W. Harris
(University of Akron) and Edward E. Paschke (Amoco, retired). This is an
important contemporary topic that relates to materials for new fibers, films,
composites, fuel cells, biomedical devices, microelectronics, and aerospace. The
proceedings will be published in the journal, High Performance
Polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of "POLYCONDENSATION 2004" is primarily
focused on the synthesis and reactions of high performance polymers, although
additional related subjects are included. Lectures on linear, branched, special
architectures, and network polymerizations will be presented. The meeting
program has an international advisory board, an industrial advisory group, and a
local organizing committee. Polycondensation 2004 has already attracted a large
contingent of presti gious international speakers from Europe and
Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program begins on Sunday afternoon with a plenary
lecture by Prof. Jim Economy from the University of Illinois, followed by other
lectures and an opening reception. Three full days of additional invited
lectures complete the program, along with an extensive poster session on Monday
evening, which will permit even more individuals to present their latest
research and encourage further interaction between
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;