* 0426125
* MII:    Hardware-Software Integration for the Design of Real-Time Prototypes Merging Assistive Technologies to Neuroscience
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Gustavo Roig, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project is constructing a modern infrastructure to support cross-
disciplinary research and to serve as a catalyst for student training in the
fields of applied information processing, neuroscience, and assistive technology
research. By merging these fields, a foundation is set for (1) developing new
methodologies destined to respond effectively to the issue of universal
accessibility, and (2) establishing research strategies to meet impending needs
in neuroscience as functional mappings and causality of key brain disorders are
developed. The infrastructure includes a high performance computational cluster
with an active display mural, a magnetic link for integrating
electroencephalography to magnetic resonance imagery, an optical topography
system for near-infrared spectroscopy, and an eye-gaze tracking system. The
infrastructure extends the research capabilities of Florida International
University (FIU) and enables long-range improvements in neuroscience and
assistive technology. The infrastructure is envisioned to provide researchers
with an environment that is conducive to cross training among disciplines,
supported by experimental evaluations and feasibility studies, from which
prototype designs are moved to the realm of practicality. New opportunities are
made possible for consolidating a joint FIU-Miami children's Hospital
neuroscience program worthy of national distinction. In assistive technology
research, a primary objective is to design the next generation of human computer
interfaces that are multimodal and adaptive as real-time assistive systems that
extend the functional capabilities of persons with motor and visually
disabilities. On the educational front, new curriculum is planned, with
engineers, computer scientists, neuroscientists, and radiologists working
together for an integrated approach to the teaching and training of students.
Furthermore, this project strengthens FIU's outreach programs for recruiting
outstanding Ph.D. students. This is coupled with sustained commitments to
recruiting and retaining underrepresented minorities in CISE-related
disciplines.