* 0426593
* ITR-(ECS)-(soc + int): Overcoming Barriers to Integrated Information System and Information Technology Adoption by Health Care Professionals: Diagnosis, Prescription and Prognosis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Robert Mathews, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2008
* USD 983,507.00

The general dilemma facing many healthcare organizations is a lack of
integration between clinical processes through the use of information
technology. One of the major contributing factors of the problem is the
resistance of healthcare professionals towards the adoption and integrated use
of information systems and information management technologies, such as (CPOE)
computerized physician order entry systems, (EMR) electronic medical record
systems, electronic prescription (e-prescribing) technology systems, Pocket PCs,
Tablet PCs, and Personal Digital Pens. Such information technologies could help
to significantly decrease medical errors and reduce costs while improving the
quality of healthcare delivery. The integration of clinical processes and
information technology (IT) is imperative in improving healthcare quality in
America. The benefits of adopting information technology to improve patient care
would seem to be obvious, and yet many healthcare professionals remain
remarkably resistant. Previous research suggests that technology adoption models
that work well in business environments do not explain the technology adoption
process and the resistance to technology adoption in the healthcare industry.
Certain healthcare specialties (in particular physicians and radiologists) are
more resistant to information technology adoption for clinical purposes than
others despite the potential economic and quality of care benefits and despite
the fact that they may readily use information technology for personal reasons.
Approaching the problem from two new perspectives (social networks and
persuasion and social influence) and combining a small in-depth case study with
a larger survey in multiple locations will provide new insights into this
paradox.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will be working with both healthcare
and IT professionals to develop practical guidelines for the development and
implementation of integrated medical information systems delivered with new
information technology in clinical environments. The researchers will devise a
set of interventions and guidelines for IT deployment designed to improve
healthcare professionals' participation and ultimately the quality of care
provided. These guidelines will be integrated into a set of Best Practices that
will be shared with hospitals to help improve healthcare professionals'
participation, with developers of healthcare information technology systems and
with the individuals who would be responsible for the implementation and
evaluation of such systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;