* 0426735
* US-Japan Seminar:   Two-Phase Flow Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Richard Lahey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 06/30/2005
* USD 27,000.00

0426735&lt;br/&gt;Lahey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
participation of American scientists in a U.S.-Japan joint seminar on two-phase
flow dynamics to be held in Moriyama, Japan from December 6-11, 2004. The co-
organizers are Professor Richard Lahey at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in
Troy, New York and Professor Akimi Serizawa at Kyoto University in Japan.
Multiphase flow and heat transfer phenomena is ubiquitous in many industrial,
military and environmental systems and processes. Unfortunately, most multiphase
technology has been empirically based rather than being mechanistically based
(i.e., it was not based on the physics of the transfer processes). As a
consequence, multiphase process optimization, system scale-up and technology
transfer between field-specific applications has been difficult if not
impossible. Nevertheless, significant progress in the mechanistic modeling of
multidimensional, multiphase flow has been made in the last 20 years, including
the development of 3-D multi-field, multifluid, computational multiphase fluid
dynamic (CMFD) models, and the increased use of direct numerical simulations
(DNS) and lattice Boltzmann simulations (LBS). The seminar will build on these
past accomplishments. In addition to state-of-the-art discussions, cooperative
R&amp;D plans will be formulated for the advancement of the field of multiphase
flow and heat transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-organizers have
complementary scientific expertise in the field. This enables them to evaluate
and attract the best science and engineering researchers to participate. These
new developments will impact the areas of current and advanced generation energy
conversion and utilization systems, multiphase chemical reactors, bio-reactors,
nuclear reactors (especially during postulated accidents), petroleum recovery
systems and processes, proposed energy and propulsion systems for manned deep
space exploration (e.g. the manned mission to Mars recently proposed by the
President), the role of ocean waves in greenhouse gas mitigation, and nano-
aerosol particle production and utilization. The seminar organizers have made a
special effort to involve postdocs and graduate students as both participants
and observers. The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in the field
will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage
for future collaborative projects. Following the seminar the organizers plan to
establish a workshop web page. Conference proceedings will be published on this
web site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;