* 0426660
* SST: CAD Tools and Verification for Resonator-Based Sensor Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Sanjay Govindjee, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

SST: CAD Tools and Verification for Resonator-Based Sensor Technology

A major effort in sensing technology centers about the miniaturization of
sensing elements. Much investment is being expended upon the development of
sensing systems that can be incorpo-rated into autonomous micro-electrical-
mechanical systems (MEMS) for widespread wireless sensing needs ranging from
monitoring buildings and bridges for safety, to electronic noses for detecting
atmospheric chemical hazards across wide geographic areas, to electronic ears
for monitoring com-munication channels just to name a few. One key to the
successful deployment of such systems is overcoming the energy needs of sensor
nodes. Note that sensors need power not only to sense but also to communicate.
An attractive technology for dealing with many of these issues is bulk-acoustic
wave resonators (BAWRs); at the MEMS scale of a few microns these devices
operate in the GHz range (cell phone frequencies). BAWRs can be used as high
quality frequency references in chemical sensors, elements of signal processing
filter networks, and as elements of wireless com-munication systems all at very
low power compared to alternate technologies. Much of the promise of such
devices has been seen in proof-of-concept experiments that have recently been
published. However, a careful reading of these publications shows that while the
general operating principles of BAWRs are known, there is a distinct lack of
accuracy to which resonant-based MEMS sensor designers understand expected
system behavior. This proposal intends to help rectify this defi-ciency and to
promote more rapid development of successful BAWR devices by developing freely
available computer aided design (CAD) tools. This interdisciplinary team of
researchers intends to not only develop a CAD tool but to also conduct
experiments to verify its accuracy. Their CAD software is designed to accurately
predict resonator quality degradation from thermoelastic damping, intrinsic
material losses, and anchor (or clamping) losses. They will tackle the problem
in a new way for the MEMS community by looking directly to the governing partial
differential equations (PDEs) for the resonator behavior and then abstracting
small, accurate, and fast models for design level computations using advanced
Krylov model reduction methods. Novel aspects in their approach include a
modeling system that will automatically separate different damping effects from
each other and make possible new virtual experiments for the creation of
heretofore unknown BAWRs. Key to this last point is their proposal to develop an
optimization module for the CAD tool that will allow for the optimization of
targeted performance parameters, such as transfer functions, that are needed for
higher level sensor node design. Integral to the proposed work will be the
fabrication of poly- and single-crystal BAWRs that will test the models, help
refine them, and test new concepts in coupled resonator designs. The team make-
up includes experts in material modeling, scientific computing, and MEMS design
and fabrication. They intend to build upon their past successes in creating new
MEMS devices and in creating and disseminating MEMS design software. The
scientific questions to be addressed in this proposal are of a critical
importance to the community. But beyond these merits, it is noted that the
proposal will have the broader impact of developing the community's research
infrastructure as the software to be developed will be dis-tributed freely. On
the human resource side the proposers will fill a broader objective by training
students in an highly interdisciplinary field by combining training in semi-
conductor engineering with mechanical modeling and scientific computing. Such
graduates are sorely needed in the com-munity. The proposers additionally plan
to recruit from the successful Summer Undergraduate Program in Engineering
Research at Berkeley (SUPERB). This program aims to reach out to under-
represented groups in engineering and provide them with a high quality research
experience and encourage them to aspire to graduate degrees. The PIs have
successfully participated in this program in the past.