* 0426061
* The evaluative component in linguistic change and variation
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* William Labov, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2008
* USD 274,715.00

Studies of language learning have shown that children reproduce their parents'
language with great accuracy, including the frequency of such variable
pronunciations as working vs.workin'. Once past adolescence, people lose much of
their ability to learn rapidly and accurately, but gain in an understanding of
the social significance of variation. With National Science Foundation support,
Dr. William Labov will direct a research project designed to study
experimentally the ability of speakers of different age, gender and ethnicity to
recognize and respond to the natural variation that native speakers produce. The
research team, including Dr. Sharon Ash (University of Pennsylvania), Dr. Naomi
Nagy (University of New Hampshire) , and Dr. Tracy Weldon (University of South
Carolina), will conduct experiments in three cities: Boston, Philadelphia, and
Columbia, South Carolina, using both local and national linguistic variables. In
the second year, the project will gather data from students in middle school,
high school and college, African-American and Euro-American, in all three
cities. Earlier research has shown that language change is continuing in almost
all American cities despite the standardizing effect of the mass media, and that
divergence is increasing, in both regional and racial dialects. The project will
explore the social motivation of this continued change. It will also throw light
on the "critical period" for language learning, and the ability of adults to
change their use of language or learn new ones