* 0426130
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Medi(c)ating Illness: An Ethnographic Exploration of Women's Health Education in the Age of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Joseph Dumit, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 8,000.00

The principal objective of this Science and Technology Studies Dissertation
Improvement Grant is to support field work that will result in an ethnographic
study of the role of pharmaceutical marketing in women's health care. This
project will combine intensive archival work and the collection of oral
histories with popular culture analysis and participant observation at a large
pharmaceutical marketing firm. It will focus on the ways in which advertising
and popular theories of gender and mental illness interact with the experimental
production of medical and scientific knowledge. The thesis is that
pharmaceutical marketing, specifically the development of the brand, is actively
helping to redefine the ways in which women can be ill, and is affecting how
women individually and collectively situate themselves in medical systems, how
they strategize to share medical information and personal experiences, and how
they negotiate narratives about female sickness and health. The major product
will be a dissertation manuscript that will contribute to understanding the
implications of prescription drug marketing in our changing notions of gender,
illness and medical systems. Its analysis will draw off the Multidisciplinary
methods of science studies, medical and cultural anthropology, and cultural
studies. This study of pharmaceutical marketing will contribute substantively to
the fields within STS. First, it will document medical knowledge production at
the intersection of popular understandings and scientific discourse; second, it
will provide an interdisciplinary case study of how the nature of medical
objects is changing within shifting relationships between academic and corporate
medicine and patient movements; third, it will borrow from anthropological
categories of personhood (self, normality, rationality) to propose how people's
identities are depending more and more on the personal relationships they
develop with their illnesses, which are changing along with the social meanings
that marketing attaches to their prescription drug treatments. The broader
impacts of this project will include the establishment of new lines of
communication between underrepresented patient groups, clinical researchers and
pharmaceutical marketers, with a special focus on women's mental health care and
new analyses of the changes in women's health care policy.

