* 0426266
* SOMAS:  Support of Mentors and their Students in the Neurosciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Julio Ramirez, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 326,000.00

This project aims to enhance the recruitment and retention of students in the
sciences, by developing a summer research program in the neurosciences for
undergraduate students wherein junior faculty members and participating students
receive intensive mentoring. The faculty members are being mentored in launching
and maintaining a teaching/research career at a predominantly undergraduate
institution. The undergraduate students are being mentored in conducting
research as well as the steps involved in applying to graduate school. Ethics in
research will be central feature of the training. The thread weaving the
experiences of the participants together is the intensive mentorship that will
be provided throughout the project. Junior faculty from across the United States
are invited to submit applications to obtain summer research support for
undergraduate students who spend 10 weeks collaborating with the faculty member
on projects of common interest. Faculty members with little experience in grant-
writing and who are just beginning their research programs as well as those from
institutions serving women and minority groups that are underrepresented in the
sciences are particularly encouraged to apply. The faculty mentors and their
students receive travel support to attend the joint Annual Meetings of the
Society for Neuroscience and the Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience (FUN),
where they participate in the Professional Survival Skills and Ethics Workshop,
or other workshops that seek to help faculty develop grant-writing skills. The
students present their research findings at the FUN Poster Session held jointly
with the Society for Neuroscience Meeting, and attend Survival Skills Workshop
sessions that provide them with tips on applying to graduate school as well as
what to expect after enrolling as a graduate student. The SOMAS Program aims to
serve as a model for other summer research programs that have traditionally
focused on the undergraduate student. In the long term, preparing junior faculty
to integrate teaching and research at predominantly undergraduate institutions
amplifies the impact of the program because it influences SOMAS Faculty Awardees
throughout their careers. Because of the interdisciplinary nature of the
neurosciences, the SOMAS Program has the potential to influence departments as
wide-ranging as biology, psychology, chemistry, mathematics, and computer
science at predominantly undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;