* 0426453
* ITR: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: -(NHS+ASE)-(dmc+int): Diagnosis and Assessment of Faults, Misbehavior and Threats in Distributed Systems and Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Sekhar Tatikonda, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research develops theory and techniques for
monitoring and diagnosing faults, hazards or, more gener-
ally,&lt;br/&gt;functional changes in dynamic systems and networks, under
limited and possibly corrupted information. We present&lt;br/&gt;a unifying and
multifaceted approach to this problem that decomposes the large body of fault
diagnosis research into six&lt;br/&gt;topics: (i) deterministic fault diagnosis,
(ii) model-based probabilistic diagnosis, (iii) adaptive and sequential
diagnosis,&lt;br/&gt;(iv) distributed system-level diagnosis with communication
constraints in wired/wireless networks, (v) fault diagnosis&lt;br/&gt;via
distributed belief propagation algorithms, and (vi) model-independent diagnosis.
The research team will leverage&lt;br/&gt;its expertise in the areas of fault
diagnosis, sequential detection, system-level diagnosis, distributed control,
modeling,&lt;br/&gt;analysis and performance evaluation, applied probability,
graph theory, belief propagation and model reduction to the&lt;br/&gt;problem of
detecting, identifying and localizing faults and abnormalities in dynamically
evolving environments. Beyond&lt;br/&gt;intellectual value, the research program
proposed will have broader impacts in a variety of ways.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: Networks and networked systems are increasingly solidifying their roles
as building blocks of the&lt;br/&gt;nation's economic and social foundation.
Numerous emerging commercial, governmental, medical, military and
security&lt;br/&gt;applications are vitally dependent on these systems, creating
a growing need for ensuring that these critical infrastructures&lt;br/&gt;are
reliable and trustworthy in spite of malicious or non-malicious disruptions.
Building trustworthy networked systems&lt;br/&gt;using off-the-shelf components
and software presents a significant hurdle that needs to be overcome in order to
exploit the&lt;br/&gt;full potential of networked systems. The proposed project
outlines a synergistic and comprehensive approach for
scalable&lt;br/&gt;methodologies for diagnosing faults, adversarial behavior and
threats in complex systems and networks, under uncertain&lt;br/&gt;information
and possibly in the presence of communication errors and constraints. The
successful completion of this&lt;br/&gt;project will make a substantial and
timely contribution to the National Priority Area of National and Homeland
Security&lt;br/&gt;(NHS) because of its ramifications in the monitoring,
testing, and reliable and secure operation of networked
systems,&lt;br/&gt;communication networks, and complex digital systems. The
development of distributed algorithms for fault diagnosis&lt;br/&gt;and the
resulting overall enhancement of distributed systems in ways that make them more
reliable also contributes&lt;br/&gt;to the National Priority Area of Advanced
Science and Engineering (ASE). The integration of data models,
distributed&lt;br/&gt;algorithms, system dynamics, control and decision making
is aligned with the technical focus area of data, models
and&lt;br/&gt;communications (dmc), and the development of critical support
mechanisms for reliable operation of complex dynamic&lt;br/&gt;systems and
networks is aligned with the technical focus area of integration of computing
(int).&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this proposal
lies in the synergistic and comprehensive exploration of dif-
ferent&lt;br/&gt;dimensions within the broad area of detection and
identification of faults or, more generally, abnormal behavior
in&lt;br/&gt;complex dynamic systems and networks. The ultimate goal is to
develop appropriate models and innovative distributed&lt;br/&gt;algorithms that
integrate and unify techniques from a number of diverse disciplines, including
fault diagnosis in discrete&lt;br/&gt;event systems, detection and estimation,
graph theory and optimization, distributed system-level diagnosis, belief propa-
gation,&lt;br/&gt;model reduction and information theory. Apart from advancing
the forefront of the various individual approaches&lt;br/&gt;to diagnosis, the
overarching theme is the integration of these ideas into a well-defined approach
that achieves the ad-vantages&lt;br/&gt;of both deterministic and probabilistic
methodologies via scalable models and algorithms. While extending
the&lt;br/&gt;frontiers in the broad area of fault diagnosis in complex dynamic
systems and networks, this research will at the same&lt;br/&gt;time leverage the
applicability of these techniques to the design of test platforms for
experimenting with distributed fault&lt;br/&gt;diagnosis in ad-hoc mobile
networks and fault localization in indoor sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;Educational
Impact and Outreach: The main educational goals of this program are two-fold:
(i) To develop courses&lt;br/&gt;and educational materials that discuss
systematic approaches for algorithms and architectures for fault diagnosis
and&lt;br/&gt;tolerance in complex systems and networks. For example, Web-based
lectures on special topics of interest will be&lt;br/&gt;established for
practicing engineers in the field; a senior/graduate level course on this topic
will be developed; a central&lt;br/&gt;Web-page will be maintained at the
University of Illinois to disseminate new results within the members of the team
as&lt;br/&gt;well as to the broader scientific and research community. (ii) To
continue to actively recruit and mentor participants
from&lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups in our respective research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;1