* 0426686
* ITR/Collaborative Research:  (ECS)-(dmc) - Collaborative Logistics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Andreas Schulz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert L. Smith
* 08/31/2008
* USD 183,471.00

This grant provides funding for the development of methodology and technology to
support effective inter-company logistics collaboration. Examples of such
collaborations include collaboration between carriers with different
transportation networks to provide integrated services to customers who need
goods to be transported over more than one network between origins and
destinations, such as collaboration between different rail networks and
alliances between airlines and shipping lines, and collaboration between
shippers to offer bundles of shipments to carriers that will reduce empty
repositioning costs. Various sensitive and important issues have to be addressed
to enable such collaboration, including the determination of what information
should be shared and when it should be shared, and the determination of the
rules according to which costs and benefits will be distributed between
collaborators. For collaboration to be sustainable, all participants have to be
better off under the collaborative arrangements, which places stringent
requirements on the design of such arrangements. The researchers will
investigate fundamental principles governing practical and sustainable logistics
collaborations. Various collaborative arrangements will be investigated. These
arrangements will be compared based on the existence of stable collaborations
under each arrangement, and the impact of each on total welfare as well as the
distribution of the welfare. In order to study various collaborative
arrangements, problems will have to be solved that are computationally hard.
Examples of these problems are deterministic and stochastic mathematical
programs with equilibrium constraints. The researchers will develop new
algorithms to solve these problems.

If successful, this research will lead to a comparison of collaborative
arrangements and the establishment of guidelines for the design of such
arrangements for various logistics applications. The results will provide
insight into what information should be shared and when the information should
be shared, what the value of the shared information is, and how costs and
benefits should be distributed between collaborators for the collaboration to be
beneficial to all participants. The research will lead to new algorithms and
computational tools to solve the problems that arise in the design and operation
of collaborative logistics. Successful completion of this research may be of
value to users and providers of transportation services, and thus to the economy
at large.

