* 0426211
* U.S. Participation in the Development of a Transnational Database 2004-2007
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Timothy Smeeding, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2007
* USD 157,500.00

The Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) project is a consortium of multiple nations
which, via their NSF's and other research funders, cooperatively finance a
research and data center. Here LIS harmonizes household income microdata sets
collected by each nation, and employs electronic mail to make the data available
to researchers across the globe. This data is used by over 400 researchers
worldwide to analyze economic and social policy and its effect on such topics as
regional and group-specific income structures, poverty and income inequality,
political support for public policy, voting, fertility, immigration, child-
wellbeing, and wage and earnings differentials by education level and by gender.
Regular activities such as biennial meetings of sponsoring agencies and annual
summer workshops are combined with intermittent conferences based on the
database. Currently, twenty-nine nations participate in LIS, with several others
(Korea,&lt;br/&gt;South Africa, Turkey, Portugal, Greece) in the process of
joining. Over 130 data bases are now in LIS, with more being added every month
(see www.lisproject.org). LIS has come to be the most respected source of cross-
nationally available household income distribution data and related studies
extant. And so this proposal for core funding from the US, like the proposals to
the other 29 nations, is vital to the future of the LIS
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plans for the next three years include several
improvements in database management (more sophisticated electronic access
system; web tabulator access system for non programmers; better on-line
documentation, fifth wave of data); in research (inequality, poverty, gender
studies, etc.); in training (annual LIS workshops in the United States, in
Europe and elsewhere). The research aims include developing better purchasing
power parities for income distribution studies; adding a number of developing
nations data and making them comparable with rich nations data; expanding the
usage of LIS in studies of political economy; measuring effects of low income on
child well being; and related subject areas. This project is also beginning a
new Luxembourg Wealth Study which is parallel to the LIS but which is based on
household wealth surveys in 10 nations.&lt;br/&gt;