* 0426904
* ITR-NHS-DMC:    Making Speech Recognition Pervasive by Migrating it Into Silicon
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Rob Rutenbar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,050,000.00

NSF ITR Proposal 0426904&lt;br/&gt;Making Speech Recognition Pervasive by
Migrating it Into Silicon&lt;br/&gt;Rob A. Rutenbar (CMU), Tsuhan Chen (CMU),
Robert W. Brodersen (U.C.
Berkeley)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether running on
a single cell phone or a conventional PC - all of today's state-of-the-art
speech recognizers exist as complex software running on conventional computers.
This is profoundly limiting for national and homeland security applications in
which mobility or stealth are essential. Today's state-of-the-art speech
recognizers fully occupy the resources of a modern desktop PC; but we cannot
deploy such hardware in scenarios where size, covertness, long-life, and
untethered operation are essential. Our cell phones last a week if we do not use
them; they last a few hours when we actually speak to them. To remedy this, we
must move the core of today's most successful speech recognition strategies
directly into silicon. We propose to design a silicon speech recognition
architecture that can offer at least 100 times better energy efficiency than
today's software solutions. We will explore performance trade-offs by extending
field programmable gate array (FPGA) emulation technology, so that proposed chip
designs may be rapidly evaluated executing real-world problems involving hours
of voice data. The Carnegie Mellon / Berkeley team brings decades of experience
with silicon design, low-power design, and speech recognition to this effort.
The goal of the project is to liberate speech recognition from the artificial
constraints of its current software-only form, and to make it a reliable,
pervasive technology for the field-oriented national and homeland security
applications where it is today
unsuitable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;