* 0426071
* A Terrestrial Annelida Biodiversity Survey of the Philippines:   Part II
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Samuel James, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Sam James&lt;br/&gt;DEB 0426071&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
terrestrial Annelida biodiversity survey of the Philippines, Part
II&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a biodiversity survey, the project seeks to discover,
describe and document the earthworms and other annelid worms of the Philippines,
a biodiversity hotspot nation in urgent need of data to support conservation
efforts. Earthworms are important ecosystem engineers everywhere they occur.
This project will conduct field trips to the remaining areas of old-growth
lowland and montane rainforest in the central region (known locally as the
Visayas) and southern parts of the country, including Mindanao and small
neighboring islands. On these trips the research team will collect annelid
specimens in a systematic effort to obtain every species of these organisms
present, while capturing basic information on their ecology and distributions
over various habitats and microhabitats. Laboratory activity will consist of
specimen curation, morphological examination, the preparation of publications
describing new species, and database building. This activity is expected to
discover up to 200 new species of earthworms and several more each of the other
annelid groups. Since many Philippine rare small mammals depend on earthworms
for food, information on these organisms will be valuable to better
understanding of the conditions needed for conservation of these mammals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electronic products of the research will include a
web-searchable database on Philippine Annelida, a large archive of images,
identification and study aids, and an interactive key to the earthworms of the
archipelago, including common exotic species. This database will be part of a
global earthworm information system to which other researchers are welcome to
contribute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide information valuable
to conservation of The Philippines' rapidly vanishing unique biota, contribute
towards revising the classification of Southeast Asian earthworms, and provide
new knowledge of terrestrial leeches, and enchytraeid oligochaetes of the
Philippines. It will discover and render accessible to the world community the
diversity and ecology of an ecologically important group of soil fauna. This
survey will provide new data valuable to analyzing the history biotic
interchanges in the South Pacific and East Asian regions. There should also be
significant impact on understanding of the geological and organism dispersal
events involved in the development of the biota of the Philippines. Our
collection of tissues suitable for DNA extraction will enable future projects to
clarify relationships within one of the most species-rich groups of earthworms.
This project includes the training of the first Philippine Ph.D. recipient in
earthworm syste matics and career development for a second student. Other
outcomes are opportunities for applied annelid biodiversity science: 1) a list
of candidate species for evaluation as native organic waste composting worms,
which could promote sustainable development and solution of environmental and
social problems without recourse to invasive foreign species; 2) Our
distribution data become a catalog of sources for drug discovery, in which the
leadership of the Philippine Dept. of Science and Technology is strongly
interested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;