* 0426173
* International Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering [ISCRE 18]
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Arvind Varma, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

Intellectual Merit Chemical reaction engineering (CRE) is the field that deals
with chemically reacting systems of engineering significance. It results in a
general methodology useful in approaching a variety of systems (chemical,
biochemical, biological, materials, environmental, electrochemical) where
engineering of reactions is needed to produce products of value. CRE is required
in the development of both existing and newer technologies. In addition to its
established critical role in the petroleum, petrochemical and chemical
industries, it is necessary to speed up commercialization of new specialty and
commodity chemicals, materials and biotechnology products. For example, CRE is
playing a major role in the development of fuel cells for automobiles and
stationary applications, and in the design and discovery of pharmaceutical
drugs. Perhaps the most important events for the international CRE scientific
community are the biennial ISCRE conferences (International Symposium on
Chemical Reaction Engineering). These conferences bring together, for three
days, distinguished international researchers in reaction engineering, prominent
industrial practitioners, along with new researchers and students of this
multifaceted field. In these conferences, the state-of-the-art of various sub-
disciplines of CRE is reviewed in a timely manner, and new research initiatives
are discussed. Broader Impact The ISCRE 18 participants will benefit from state-
of-the-art reviews and presentations by leading experts, by exchanging the
latest advances on frontier research subjects, and by debating controversial
points with their peers in the CRE discipline. The meeting will provide an
opportunity for interaction and cooperation among industrial and academic
researchers, from various countries around the world. The award of travel funds
and registration subsidy are expected to attract many graduate students,
including women and minority, to the meeting that they may otherwise be unable
to attend. The students and other young researchers will have an opportunity to
interact with each other and with experienced researchers in the field, which
will positively influence their professional development.