* 0426195
* COX-2: mechanisms of post-transcriptional regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jeffrey Wilusz, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 08/31/2008
* USD 494,999.00

Cyclooxygenases are the key and rate-limiting enzymes in the production of
prostaglandins. Prostaglandins play an important role in many diverse biological
processes. The goal of this project is to uncover the sequences and factors
involved in the regulation of formation and function of the unusually large 3'
untranslated region (UTR) of the human cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) gene. This ~ 2.5
kb 3' UTR likely contains elements that regulate gene expression by several
post-transcriptional mechanisms. COX-2 is a highly regulated gene, and previous
studies have shown that transcriptional activation alone cannot account for the
sustained induction of the mRNA under abnormal conditions. Therefore,
understanding all of the post-transcriptional molecular mechanisms involved in
COX-2 gene regulation is critical. First, auxiliary regulatory elements will be
identified that play a role in the alternative polyadenylation of COX-2, the
process that determines the size of the 3' UTR. Second, protein factor(s) that
recognize and bind these auxiliary regulatory elements will be identified.
Finally, turnover of the COX-2 mRNA regulated by its 3' UTR will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies will lead to new insights into
mechanisms of gene regulation, with broad applicability to many areas of
biology. These investigations will be excellent training for two women who are
graduate students in the lab, thereby enhancing the representation of women in
experimental science. In addition, the Principal Investigator strives to serve
as a role model for women in science. Given the location of the laboratory in an
inner-city environment, these investigations will also serve as an outstanding
training opportunity for undergraduates and minorities.