* 0426691
* ITR:   Collaborative Research:   (ASE+NHS+EVS)-(sim+dmc+int):   In Silico De Novo Protein Design:   A Dynamically Data Driven, (DDDAS), Computational and Experimental Framework
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Christodoulos Floudas, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2009
* USD 546,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Christodoulos Floudas &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0426691&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A challenge in
computational protein design is the discovery of novel proteins, which are
compatible with either target template structures or arbitrarily three
dimensional structures. This research is a dynamically data driven application
systems, (DDDAS), effort through an integrative research framework, (i.e.,
computational, physicochemical, and biochemical approaches) for the in silico de
novo design of peptides and proteins. The primary aims of the project are (i) in
silico sequence selection and folding specificity calculations through a novel
computational framework that is based on mixed-integer optimization and
deterministic global optimization, (ii) in vitro and in silico characterization
via NMR, structure determination, and molecular dynamics, (iii) protein
expression, structural characterization and activity measurements of predicted
sequences, and (iv) the development of a web-based WorkBench support system for
de novo peptide/protein design which will be freely available to all
researchers. The biological systems for testing and validating the proposed
framework include the C3a anaphylatoxin (aims (i)-(iv)), and human beta
defensins (aims (i), molecular dynamics of (ii) and (iv)).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned
effort involves an interdisciplinary team (Floudas, Lambris, Morikis) from three
institutions (Princeton, U. Penn, U. California at Riverside). Their expertise
spans the fields of complement biology, protein chemistry, structural biology,
mathematical modeling and analysis, combinatorial and global optimization,
scientific computing, and bioengineering, and the project is an integrative
computational and experimental effort. These developments can expedite
significantly the drug discovery process, address important tasks in the design
of new drugs, and the proposed novel concept of a web-based WorkBench will be
the first such service to the scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using IT and DDDAS
techniques, in a uniquely symbiotic computational and experimental framework,
this project will lay the groundwork for making significant advances in the
discovery of new drugs. This framework for in silico prediction of new sequences
which fold selectively to structural templates and their experimental validation
will allow rapid screening of novel alternatives and will lead into better and
faster drug discovery which has direct impact in our society. The proposed
effort integrates participation of graduate students, postdoctoral students, and
undergraduate students into the research, thereby providing multidisciplinary
training opportunities. The co-PIs have records in research with undergraduate
students as part of their junior independent work, as well as senior thesis
work. All three institutions have policies for attracting students and employees
from traditionally under-represented groups. The co-PIs are committed to working
with these students and will work pro-actively to attract them to this research
project, the seminar series, the journal club, and the graduate level course.
The co-PIs have strong records of educating undergraduate and graduate students,
and post-doctoral associates from under-represented groups. The results of the
research will be disseminated to the entire scientific community through
publications in archival journals, refereed proceedings, and via presentations
at conferences. Furthermore, the development of the web-based WorkBench for the
de novo design of peptide/proteins will provide, for the first time, service to
the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;