* 0426178
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ecological &amp; Behavioral Implications of New Archaeological Occurrences from Upper Burgi Exposures at Koobi Fora, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* John W. Harris, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 11,900.00

Under the direction of Dr. J.W.K. Harris, Jack McCoy will conduct extensive
field survey and excavation of 2 million year old sediment deposits at Koobi
Fora in Northern Kenya. This doctoral dissertation project is designed to
identify, characterize and describe archaeological occurrences principally
through the proxy of hominid (early human) modified fossil bone exhibiting
evidence of meat consumption and stone tool use. Using stone tools to process a
carcass for meat and marrow produces distinctive modification marks (cut marks,
percussion marks) on fresh bone. These marks are often preserved on the bone as
it becomes fossilized. Evidence (stone tools and cut marked fossil bone) of an
established pattern of this novel new meat consumption behavior prior to 2.3
million years ago has been discovered to the north in Ethiopia and only a short
distance to the west at Lokalalei in Kenya. And yet, at Koobi Fora, where the
fossil remains of over three dozen hominids (genera: Australopithecus &amp;
Homo) have been recovered from Upper Burgi (2.2-1.9 million years old) exposures
virtually nothing is known of hominid behavior, ecology, or material culture
during this period. Extensive paleontological and archaeological research
previously conducted at Koobi Fora did not focus on archaeological traces from
the Upper Burgi period; a pivotal time in hominid
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Koobi Fora encompasses an area of over 3,000
square kilometers. Approximately 1,000 square kilometers are exposed ancient
deposits spanning the last 4 million years. Because of the unique nature and
vast lateral extent of the exposures, a large variety of ancient landscapes and
habitats can be identified in the sediments. The selection of widely separated
areas of investigation makes it possible, utilizing modified bone and stone
tools as markers on the landscape, to develop a regional view of hominid
activities and movements during this time period. Recognition of the
distribution patterns of these markers across widely different geographic
locations and paleoenvironments will allow one to address theoretical questions
of hominid habitat preference, as well as changes in diet and behavior which
have not been addressed elsewhere at this early stage of human evolution.
Significantly, this research goes beyond the discovery and initial description
of the archaeological traces and examines the circumstances that made stone
tools adaptive at the onset of a novel new hominid behavior (carnivory) that
would eventually become habitual. It is expected that this research will become
part of a long term basin-wide comparative study that will address the changing
nature of the earliest archaeological record in the Turkana Basin over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a broader perspective, this project has the
potential to confirm the usefulness of modified fossil bone as an unequivocal
proxy for stone tool use. If fossil bone fragments with a modification signature
indicative of hominid activity have visibility in the geological record then it
will become possible to identify hominid presence and behavior patterns where no
stone tool evidence (traditional archaeological record) is known to exist. Stone
tools from Gona in Ethiopia, dated at 2.6 million years old, presently define
the onset of the archaeological record. Testable hypotheses about hominid
behavior prior to 2.6 million years ago can only be formulated if the hominids
can be located on the ancient landscape. Cut marked bone and percussion
fractured shaft fragments may provide that opportunity and could become the
basis of a new paradigm from which to investigate the true onset of the
archaeological record.&lt;br/&gt;