* 0427783
* IERI: Tuple Spaces as a Foundation for Collaborative Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Shiladitya Chaudhury, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,338,091.00

A multidisciplinary team will examine the application of core distributed system
techniques to an important area of social concern: the coordination of multiple
learners in educational activities. Increasingly, learners are bringing mobile
computing devices to class. Equally importantly, modern educational activities
in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) curricula require learners
to take roles, contribute ideas, solve aspects of a larger problem, and work
together as a team. These activities imply systematic coordination of learner
participation. Yet today's classroom technologies provide only ad hoc solutions
to the problem of coordination. Investigators at three complementary
institutions will collaborate to determine if the distributed computing concept
of tuple spaces can provide a robust, flexible, sustainable solution.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project team will develop methods and knowledge that better
align social needs and distributed computational techniques at their
foundations, thus addressing "the interactions and complex interdependencies of
information systems and social systems". The investigators will build on the
recent expansion of the distributed computing concept of tuple spaces to mobile
devices and social uses, employing the Java language and handheld or laptop
devices. Thus, they will exploit both long-standing and recent advances in data
structures, networking, and algorithms to enhance the design of distributed
systems that support innovation in STEM education, seeking to maximize
educational benefits. This research will investigate the soundness of this
alignment, consider expressiveness and performance characteristics, investigate
programmer cognition, and evaluate sample applications in educational settings.
The technical work will tie to a maturing, cumulative body of research on
effective learning in groups. The broader impact of this research lies in the
potential for improving math and science education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;