* 0427794
* ITR - ASE - [int+dmc]: Storage Based Supercomputing for Scientific Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* James Buckley, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,150,000.00

ITR - ASE - [int+dmc]: Storage Based Supercomputing for Scientific
Applications&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many scientific
computing applications the size of the data sets, already in the range of
multiple terabytes, continues to grow rapidly. The time required to move this
data from magnetic media, across a system bus into main memory, and then execute
code to perform a computation is prohibitive. We are addressing the bottleneck
by moving the computations to be implemented close to the magnetic media in
fast, customizable hardware tailored to the application. We will explore the
benefits associated with our proposed architecture on two specific application
domains: genomics and astrophysics. In the genomics domain we will explore new
approaches to discovering similarities between biological sequences. In the
astrophysics domain we will examine the processing of gamma ray burst
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will directly translate
into more capability in scientific computations that are dependent upon large
data sets. This will have a direct positive impact on the fields of astrophysics
and genomics. The impact, however, will go well beyond these domains since the
tools, techniques and architecture developed will be applicable to a wide range
of scientific computing problems. We are developing a computing system that
allows effective exploration of the huge and growing datasets that are central
to modern scientific discovery. This new computer architecture is a central and
critical instrument, analogous to the telescope and microscope, in moving
forward scientific boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;