* 0427469
* Hot Quarks 2004 - a Workshop on the Physics of Ultrarelativistic Nucleus-Nucleus Collisions for Young Scientists
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Steffen Bass, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 03/31/2005
* USD 5,000.00

The Hot Quarks 2004 Workshop will take place on July 18-24, 2004 &lt;br/&gt;in
Taos, NM. The main topic of the workshop is the physics&lt;br/&gt;of strongly
interacting nuclear matter at extreme energy densities.&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
Chromo-Dynamics, the theory describing the forces acting &lt;br/&gt;within
atomic nuclei, predicts that at sufficiently&lt;br/&gt;high temperatures and/or
densities, matter should undergo a&lt;br/&gt;transition from the standard
hadronic phase to a plasma of&lt;br/&gt;deconfined quarks and gluons (Quark
Gluon Plasma, QGP) - a&lt;br/&gt;transition which, according to our cosmological
models,&lt;br/&gt;took place in the early universe about 10 microseconds after
the Big&lt;br/&gt;Bang.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Already the programs at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;Alternating Gradient Synchrotron (AGS)
and the CERN Super Proton&lt;br/&gt;Synchrotron (SPS) have produced evidence for
the onset of new&lt;br/&gt;phenomena. The research in this field is now
successfully&lt;br/&gt;continuing at the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC)
at BNL&lt;br/&gt;while the next phase, to take place at the CERN Large
Hadron&lt;br/&gt;Collider (LHC), is under preparation. There are around
2000&lt;br/&gt;physicists worldwide working in the field: a very
active&lt;br/&gt;and lively, expanding community. In such a context,
good&lt;br/&gt;communication and networking, especially among the young
and&lt;br/&gt;productive members in the field, are
vital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this particular workshop is to enhance
the direct &lt;br/&gt;exchange of scientific information among the younger
&lt;br/&gt;members of the community (graduate students, postdocs and
&lt;br/&gt;junior faculty), both from the experiment and theory.
&lt;br/&gt;Participation in the workshop will be by invitation &lt;br/&gt;only -
in order to strengthen the emphasis on younger members&lt;br/&gt;of the
community, participation will be restricted to people&lt;br/&gt;who have
obtained their Ph.D. no earlier than 1989.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This particular
approach makes the workshop unique among the &lt;br/&gt;various workshops and
conferences in the field. &lt;br/&gt;For young scientists it represents an
opportunity &lt;br/&gt;for exchange and exposure that that they would not have
in one of &lt;br/&gt;the major big conferences. It will help to stimulate
&lt;br/&gt;the next generation of the field and strengthen their sense
&lt;br/&gt;of community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;