* 0427597
* Sensors: Intelligent Multi-Sensor Modeling, Identification, and Data Fusion for Automated Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Devendra Garg, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/2007
* USD 98,000.00

Intelligent Multi-Sensor Modeling, Identification, and Data Fusion for Automated
Manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;(NSF Proposal No.
0427597)&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
research effort is to develop innovative methodologies for modeling, identifying
and fusing data from multiple heterogeneous information sources/sensors in a
flexible manufacturing workcell environment. Major contributions resulting from
this research would consist of integrating artificial intelligence techniques,
such as Genetic-Neuro-Fuzzy method and Bayesian estimation, with elements of
signal processing and statistical techniques such as Extended Kalman filtering,
and parametric estimation methods such as Maximum Likelihood, and Expectation
Maximization. This research project would focus on the following three major
components: 1) precise sensor modeling which would include obtaining analytical
and probabilistic models of sensors and associated noises, understanding their
capabilities and limitations, 2) extracting real-time data from multiple sensors
and interpreting the data on a common processing platform, and 3) developing
strategies to combine the noise-free data from these sensors to remove
uncertainty and to obtain accurate model of the environment the manufacturing
system operates in. The innovative theories developed would be tested and
validated via experiments conducted at Duke University's flexible manufacturing
workcell. Since the research would emphasize the use of a variety of sensors in
manufacturing processes, the manufacturing industry would be a major
beneficiary.&lt;br/&gt;