* 0427345
* Sensors: A Cross-Layer Approach for Energy Efficiency in Wireless Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Zygmunt J. Haas
* 08/31/2009
* USD 250,000.00

Sensors: A Cross-Layer Approach for Energy Efficiency in Wireless
Sensor&lt;br/&gt;Networks (Proposal
ECS-0427345)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Sensor
proposal focuses on developing a battery-aware and density-aware cross-layer
mechanism with dynamic power management that provides a comprehensive solution
to achieve high energy efficiency in sensor networks. This research includes
following tasks: (1) develop battery-aware routing protocols to maximize battery
lifetime of sensor nodes by considering mathematical battery models and
collaborative nature of sensor nodes; (2) investigate promising, realistic
approaches for more accurate traffic prediction on sensor nodes to reduce power
consumption of sensor nodes while enabling them to function fully in sensing and
routing activities; (3) design density-aware routing algorithms for sensor
networks in a dynamic power management approach to reduce traffic redundancy and
minimize power consumption of packet routing; (4) integrate the above approaches
into a cross-layer mechanism that can globally optimize various power saving
solutions to achieve high energy efficiency and low packet loss rate network-
wide. The intrinsic merit of the research lies in development of viable
solutions for cross-layer energy optimization for future generation sensor
networks. The research will have a significant impact on fundamental design
principles and infrastructures for the development of future sensor networks.
The outcome of this project will be applicable to a wide spectrum of
applications. The broader impact of the project will be evident through
integrating graduate students into the project and disseminating important
findings to the research community and by facilitating the partnership between
industry and academia through New York State Center of Excellence in Wireless
Networking and Information Technology and Center for Advanced Tec&lt;br/&gt;