* 0427976
* SII:     Lebesgue Estimation for Minimizing Power Consumption in Ad Hoc Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Roy McCann, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2008
* USD 94,391.00

SSI: Lebesgue Estimation for Minimizing Power Consumption in Ad Hoc Sensor
Networks (Proposal No. 0427976)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract- This sensor
proposal focuses on the development a new type of state-estimator (optimal
observer) that minimizes the power requirements of wireless sensor networks
employed in real-time feedback control systems. There is considerable ongoing
work in optimizing sensor network protocols for minimizing power requirements.
It is noted that most of the power consumed in a wireless sensor device is
associated with executing a communication transmission event. This research
seeks to determine a method whereby both the occurrence of communication events
is minimized and the data content of each message is minimized while ensuring
that the resulting state estimate does not exceed a specified error requirement.
The intellectual merit of this research is in transforming a continuous-time and
continuous-state model for the plant into a non-periodic discrete-time and non-
uniform discrete-state system. The research will develop methods for analyzing
and designing state estimators as stochastic timed automata within the framework
of generalized semi-Markov processes. The broader impact of this research is
setting the foundation for a wireless sensor network laboratory at the
University of Arkansas. This laboratory is directed towards intelligent
transportation systems in anticipation of the introduction of ad hoc sensor
networks throughout highway infrastructure and motor vehicles. In outreach to
K-12 students, the laboratory elevates the awareness of engineering careers to
young people by showing explicitly how technology can be employed to increase
safety, reduce congestion, and improve air quality. Additionally, the results
will aid in the development of advanced collision avoidance and traffic
regulation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;