* 0427239
* ITR - (ASE) - (sim): New Models and Simulations to Facilitate Developing Novel Nanocomposite Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Francis Starr, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2010
* USD 510,000.00

This award was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials
Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012.
Research activities covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area,
"Advances in Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation
in Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." The Divisions of Materials
Research and Chemistry jointly support this award for computational research and
education. The research is being done in collaborations with groups at NIST,
University of Chicago, and the University of Rome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
nanostructured materials offer properties unattainable by traditional
approaches, impacting a broad range of fields from computer technology to health
care. The growing field of polymer nanocomposites has demonstrated that the
addition of a small fraction of nanoparticles to polymeric materials can lead to
dramatic changes in modulus, strength, and other properties, which in turn has
led to real-world applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will address
three fundamental issues: What is the underlying mechanism controlling
nanoparticle clustering and cluster structure in a polymer matrix? How can
knowledge of the clustering properties be used to improve the modeling of
nanocomposite materials? How do design choices of the nanoparticles impact the
overall materials properties? Computational molecular modeling is ideally suited
to probe nanocomposite behavior at the molecular level. Hence the proposed
research will utilize distributed Beowulf computing resources to carry out
innovative modeling that both exploits existing methods and develops new
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, it has become apparent that
nanoparticle clustering in a polymer nanocomposite has, in many cases, a strong
similarity to the phenomena of gelation. While traditional phase separation is
well understood in the framework of statistical mechanics, the formation of gel
phases is comparatively poorly understood. Hence, to understand and eventually
control the formation and morphology of nanoparticle clusters, simple model
systems are needed in which model parameters can be unambiguously related to the
properties of the gel. The insights into the basic mechanisms of gelation will
be folded into the design of new models that improve the length and time scales
that can be computationally studied for nanocomposite materials. Relating the
parameters of the largely homogeneous polymer matrix to general interactions
leading to gel formation will enable the development of implicit models for bulk
polymer interactions. Such implicit models would dramatically reduce the amount
of computational resources that must be dedicated to simulating the molecular
detail of polymer chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be integrated
with educational activities via a new program on computational modeling at
Wesleyan University. Connections will also be made with high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a proposal submitted to
the Division of Materials Research under the Information Technology Research
solicitation NSF-04-012. Research activities covered by this award fall under
the National Priority Area, "Advances in Science and Engineering," and the
Technical Focus Area, "Innovation in Computational Modeling or Simulation in
Research." The Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry jointly support
this award for computational research and education. The research is being done
in collaborations with groups at NIST, University of Chicago, and the University
of Rome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New nanostructured materials offer properties
unattainable by traditional approaches, impacting a broad range of fields from
computer technology to health care. The growing field of polymer nanocomposites
has demonstrated that the addition of a small fraction of nanoparticles to
polymeric materials can lead to dramatic changes in modulus, strength, and other
properties, which in turn has led to real-world
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational research supported by this
award will study the unique properties of polymers with nanoparticles dispersed
in them in order to gain an understanding that may lead to the design of novel
new materials. The research will be integrated with educational activities via a
new program on computational modeling at Wesleyan University. Connections will
also be made with high school students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;