* 0427646
* ITR - (ASE) - (sim): Optimized Dirac Inverter for Quantum Field Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Richard Brower, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Large scale numerical computation for quantum field theory is entering a new
phase. For the first time cost effective dedicated Terascale hardware provides
the capability to simulate the full non-linearities of the fundamental theory of
nuclear forces and to confront experimental data with ab initio theoretical
predictions. Indeed there is a range of high precision experimental results
coming from the major nuclear and particle physics laboratories that can no
longer be fully understood by conventional models. They require accurate full
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) simulations to interpret the data. However the full
potential of the international lattice gauge theory initiative will be missed if
new or substantially improved algorithms are not developed and optimized on the
multi-Terascale architectures for the next decade. The main problem in getting
accurate answers for lattice QCD is an efficient algorithm for determining the
effects of quark loops on physical quantities. This effect was ignored in
earlier quenched approximations which just treated the effects of the gluons of
QCD. To solve this problem one needs to evaluate the eigenvalues of the (Dirac)
quark propagator in the presence of external gluon fields. In this proposal we
will make a concerted and sustained r effort to find new algorithms for the
Dirac inverter for QCD in the context of the evolving scientific objective of
the National Lattice Gauge theory initiative and the actual architectures being
brought into production. Our design focus is on using the best physical and
empirical knowledge of the QCD vacuum to guide the design of appropriate multi-
scale Krylov space inverters which are known to dominate the compute intensive
kernel of all QCD simulation codes.