* 0427787
* GSE/RES  Career Choice Barriers:  Predictors of resilience for women in STEM majors
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Gail Hackett, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2008
* USD 249,999.00

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and Arizona State University are collaborating
in a study that will address: a) What barriers and supports can be identified at
various developmental stages (middle school and late high school and sophomore
in college) as being salient for women's selection of a STEM related career? b)
How do these barriers and supports fit into a comprehensive, intervention-
focused theory of achievement and career choice? And c) How do these barriers
and supports directly relate to interventions for girls and women interested in
STEM careers? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collection will be conducted at two
different metropolitan sites (Milwaukee, WI and Phoenix, AZ), across three
different educational levels (middle, high school and early college), in three
discrete studies (interviews and taxonomy development; instrument development
and testing; and comprehensive model testing). Organizations involved include
the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee Public Schools, Shorewood
Public Schools, Arizona State University and Deer Valley School District
(Arizona). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The analogy of a leaky
pipeline has been used frequently to describe the progressive developmental
decrease of women's interest and participation in science, technological,
engineering, and math (STEM) preparation. Something happens along the way that
prompts women to think and believe that they cannot or do not want to continue
in STEM courses, majors, or careers. There is no obvious reason why this would
disproportionately occur for women than men since innate abilities do not differ
between men and women (NSF, 2003). Although theoretical models include external
influences on achievement and choice behavior, past research examining such
models has more often focused on the internal aspects of a woman's choice,
rather than on how the internal beliefs and perceptions interact with external
factors. It is important, also to understand barriers and supports that may
differ at various stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research study is developing
a taxonomy of barriers, including those related to the learning environment, and
identifying those that appear to be differentially salient in the career choice
process at various developmental points, and then testing the validity of the
social cognitive career model containing measures of those supports and
barriers. Finally, the investigators will link the taxonomy directly to
interventions designed to promote resilience for women pursuing STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study increases the applications of the social
cognitive career theory to understanding achievement related choices (Betz &amp;
Hackett, 1983; Hackett &amp; Betz, 1981; 1989; Lent, Brown &amp; Hackett, 2002)
by incorporating elements of Eccles (1994) model of achievement to increase its
predictive utility. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: It will identify
developmentally appropriate environmental barriers and supports that affect
women's retention in the path to STEM careers and translate those directly to
interventions designed to promote resilience for women pursuing STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;