* 0427538
* ITR-(NHS+ASE)-(Sim): Self-Organization of Complex Network Dynamics for Efficiency and Robustness
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Kevin Bassler, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2009
* USD 250,000.00

This award was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials
Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012.
Research activities covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area,
"Advances in Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation
in Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." This award supports
computational research in the dynamical properties of networks. Many natural and
man-made systems are structured as complex networks. Examples include
infrastructure networks, such as the power-grid, phone lines, and the Internet,
transportation networks, such as highways, railways, and airways, and social
networks, such as those describing acquaintanceships, collaborations, and
terrorists. Other complex networks describe dynamic adaptive control systems in
both engineering and biology. All of these networks consist of nodes where
connections or interactions are described by a mesh of links. Generally, the
nodes will behave heterogeneously, and the links will have different strengths
or capacities. Typically, the links transport some quantity, including
information, power, material, disease, or influence, between the nodes.
Therefore, the networks often evolve, or are constructed, to ensure that the
transport is efficient and robust to changes in either the network itself or to
changes in its environment or task. In many natural networks, and in some
designed networks, the capacity to evolve or organize to become efficient and
robust is built into the dynamics of the network itself. Understanding and
controlling the evolutionary dynamics of complex networks is important to both
national and homeland security and to advanced science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most existing studies of networks are
concerned primarily with their structural properties. This research will,
instead, explore how the dynamics of networks can self-organize to ensure
efficient and robust behavior. It will also examine how the dynamics of networks
is related to the evolution of their structure. The goal will be to characterize
and understand how network dynamics can be designed to optimize and control
their behavior in a robust way. Another goal will be the opposite, namely to
understand how the behavior of a network can be disabled. Specifically, the work
will build upon recent results that have explored the efficiency of transport in
scale-free networks, the emergence of scale-free leadership structure and of
collective efficiency in social networks, and the evolution of canalization, a
type of robustness known to be important in developmental biology, in adaptive
control networks. Simple models of dynamic networks that aim to capture the
essential underlying behavior of real-world networks will be studied with the
tools and methods of statistical physics, including large-scale computer
simulations. The results will then be compared with real-world
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the research will be important to
national and homeland security because they will help us understand how to
design and build efficient and reliable infrastructure and transportation
networks, and how terrorist or disease activity may be disrupted by exploiting
the vulnerabilities of the network dynamics. The results will also advance
science and engineering by improving our understanding and design of adaptive
control systems on networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will be
involved with this project. The PI also has a commitment to involvement of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;