* 0427516
* US-Switzerland Cooperative on:   Student Research on Remotely Accessed Energy Labs
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* William Hutzel, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 06/30/2006
* USD 24,000.00

0427516&lt;br/&gt;Hutzel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this two-year U.S.-Switzerland
cooperative research education project, William Hutzel of Purdue University will
take two teams of graduate students to Lucerne, Switzerland to test the limits
of a remote access lab concept initiated under NSF's Advanced Technology
Education program. The Swiss partner is Rudolf Furter of the HVAC (Heating,
Ventilating and Air Conditioning) Engineering Department at HTA (Institute for
Technology and Architecture) in Lucerne, Switzerland. Teams of students will
work to create an international network of web-enabled laboratory equipment.
Through remote access, U.S. students will conduct experiments using HVAC
equipment in Switzerland and Swiss students will monitor and control a variety
of equipment located in the United States when the project is
completed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
international education project will create a multi-site laboratory network
physically separated by thousands of miles. The Swiss team will develop a
detailed summary of sensors and actuators on the HVAC system and write a
sequence of operations predicting performance. The U.S. team will develop
control strategies, graphics and network protocols for controlling the HVAC
equipment. The project directors will then assess and compare the performance of
the U.S. and Swiss students who participate in the remote access project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This sustained
international partnership adds a global perspective to routine laboratory work
and demonstrates the need for global engineering research and practice. As an
education research project and teaching tool, it will assess teaching and
learning when using equipment in a distance learning format at multiple off-
campus sites as well as provide students with an understanding of current HVAC
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;