* 0427360
* Sensors: On-sensor Self-Calibration of Oxygen Microsensor; A Model System of Structural and Functional Integration of Biomicrosystem
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Chang-Soo Kim, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2008
* USD 248,344.00

&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Sensors: On-sensor self-calibration of oxygen microsensor; a
model system of structural&lt;br/&gt;and functional integration of
biomicrosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
work is the implementation of on-chip, built-in intelligent control
(2-point&lt;br/&gt;self-calibration/self-diagnosis) of dissolved oxygen
microsensor by using an integrated&lt;br/&gt;electrochemical actuation
microsystem. The development of intelligent and autonomous&lt;br/&gt;biochemical
microsensor is in infant stage. A novel protocol needs to be developed to
overcome&lt;br/&gt;the signal instability caused by drift of baseline and
degradation of sensitivity. We propose to&lt;br/&gt;use an electrochemical
actuation mechanism (water electrolysis) to accomplish this
novel&lt;br/&gt;functionality. A water electrolysis microsystem (microchambers,
microelectrodes, and&lt;br/&gt;microchannels) will be designed to provide two
critical functions. First, the electrolytes saturated&lt;br/&gt;with the
electrochemically generated dissolved gases serve as the calibrants for an
integrated&lt;br/&gt;microsensor (two-point procedure with oxygen-saturated and
oxygen-depleted electrolytes).&lt;br/&gt;Secondly, the electrochemically
generated bubbles provide a driving force of the
bidirectional&lt;br/&gt;microfluidic manipulation for the sampling/dispensing of
sample solution. A microsystem&lt;br/&gt;including an amperometric dissolved
oxygen microsensor and a water electrolysis microactuator&lt;br/&gt;is prepared
by microfabrication technology. Their performances will be characterized in
terms of&lt;br/&gt;the actuation signal (duration and amplitude) and the
geometries of microfluidic components.&lt;br/&gt;The self-calibration/self-
diagnosis capability is expected to significantly improve the
accuracy&lt;br/&gt;and reliability of the biochemical sensors during continuous
use and to make the in situ decision-&lt;br/&gt;making process viable in
biological and medical monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERITS OF PROPOSED
ACTIVITY&lt;br/&gt;The electrochemical actuation is an emerging field in the
MEMS-based microsensor&lt;br/&gt;technologies. The proposed method is the first
approach to accomplish the functional integration&lt;br/&gt;(built-in
intelligence) combined with the structural integration of biochemical
sensor/actuator&lt;br/&gt;(miniaturization). The electrolysis actuation is
applicable to improve performances of other&lt;br/&gt;enzymatic microsensors
that utilize the oxidase enzyme reaction and to accomplish
intelligent&lt;br/&gt;optical biosensing system. The same method can achieve the
microfluidic actuation without the&lt;br/&gt;complicated MEMS-based structures.
This system integration of both microsensors and&lt;br/&gt;microactuators is
anticipated to advance current biomicrosystem technology towards
innovative&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation for autonomous and minimally-attended
biochemical monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS RESULTING FROM THE PROPOSED
ACTIVITY&lt;br/&gt;The PI has a joint appointment in the Departments of
Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering and&lt;br/&gt;Biological Sciences at the
University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR). The primary responsibility of&lt;br/&gt;the
PI is to bridge the gap between the disciplines by initiating the campus-wide
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research activities and by educating the students
from both departments. The UMR is a member&lt;br/&gt;of LS-MoAMP (The Louis
Stokes Missouri Alliance for Minority Participation) program and&lt;br/&gt;runs
WIES (Women in Engineering and Science Program). The proposed research will be
a&lt;br/&gt;valuable resource to expedite these activities through the
involvement of students from various&lt;br/&gt;academic departments and from
underrepresented groups.