* 0427951
* SIRG: Highly Multiplexed Optical Fiber Sensing Networks for Infrastructure Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Tao Lin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

0427951&lt;br/&gt;Anbo Wang&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensors
for civil infrastructure monitoring require capability of dense multiplexing,
long span or large area coverage, minimum maintenance, low cost, versatility
response to a range of key measurands, and harsh environment performance. The
objective of this project is to develop a new optical fiber sensor technology
that would increase the multiplexing capability and permit measurement of a
number of key structural health and integrity parameters, such as pressure,
strain and temperature. This work is directly based on a newly demonstrated UV-
induced intrinsic Fabry-Perot interferometric (IFPI) fiber sensor method at
Virginia Tech's Center for Photonics Technology. Sensor performance
characteristics will be optimized by developing a thorough understanding of the
effect of sensor fabrication and multiplexing parameters through both
mathematical modeling and experimental analysis. Different types of data
aggregation will be investigated for real-time infrastructure monitoring by a
large number of heterogeneous sensors using a hybrid of hierarchical and data-
centric approaches. . A multidisciplinary team has been assembled to accomplish
these objectives leveraging expertise from the mathematics, electrical
engineering, materials science and computer engineering at Virginia
Tech.&lt;br/&gt;Through novel sensor design and computer networking, the
successful completion of the research will result in a revolutionary increase in
sensor multiplexing density for large area coverage of physical parameter
measurements with high spatial resolution and harsh environment capability. Such
capabilities will permit real time monitoring of critical civil and industrial
infrastructure both for future economic growth, and homeland security at a scale
previously unrealizable. &lt;br/&gt;This is an integrated research group (IRG)
proposal supported by Division of Civil &amp; Mechanical Systems (CMS) under
Sensors Initiative NSF04-522.&lt;br/&gt;