* 0427966
* Sensors:  Adaptive Methods for Coordinate Metrology Using Support Vectors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Shivakumar Raman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2009
* USD 299,992.00

The larger objective of this Sensors and Sensors Networks (Sensors) research
project is to develop sturdy, consistent and adaptive methods for sensing in
manufacturing. Within this framework, the focus of primary research is in
prudent and yet accurate feature verification using coordinate measuring
machines. The processing of parts results in surface errors that will be
quantified using process physics prior to feature verification. Sensing will be
guided by the geometry of the part and these prior process models. Support
Vector Machine (SVM) represents a new type of learning machine based on
statistical learning theory. Methodologies based on the SVMs and learning theory
will be applied to integrate sampling and zone determination in part
verification. Research will focus efforts on developing and evaluating search
methods for sample reduction using SVM, and on quantifying errors generated
during processing. Methodologies for non-linear forms and profile metrology will
follow. Extensions will be investigated for full-part metrology and Reverse
Engineering (RE). Suitability of proposed sensing concepts to surface metrology
and tribology will also be investigated. Research will be deployed to classrooms
and computer modules prepared for wider dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
success of this research for an adaptive procedure will lend itself for use to a
wider domain of sensing, but the principal focus for this research is in
coordinate metrology for part verification. Successful application will improve
product and process designs and interchangeability. New generation software for
coordinate metrology incorporating learning will also result. This research will
lead to metrology standards as well as present improved solutions to the
inspection enterprise. The two principal concepts embedded in this project are
knowledge-based sensing and mathematical search. These concepts can be extended
to other manufacturing sensing applications. Introduction of SVMs to
manufacturing is also expected to lead to other applications. Significant
potential exists in education and training in each area of manufacturing,
metrology, and operations research/data mining.