* 0427853
* Mobile Link Organisms as Processors and Transporters of Materials within a Marsh-Estuarine Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Dennis Allen, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Russell
* 08/31/2008
* USD 612,000.00

The goal of this project is to quantify the roles of mobile link animals, mainly
fishes and decapod crustaceans (collectively called nekton), in processing and
transporting materials within and between marsh-estuarine systems and
subsystems. At short time scales, previous work indicates that mobile organisms
are probably a major source of dissolved nutrients, ammonium and phosphate. On
longer time scales, they accumulate organic biomass. Simultaneous observations
of the fluxes of materials and mobile organisms between salt marshes, mud flats,
oyster reefs and tidal channels will furnish estimates of the relative
importance of each of these components in processing and transporting materials
within and across boundaries. A replicated Before-After Control-Impact (BACI)
approach will determine the statistical significance of these fluxes.
Hypothesized decreases in inorganic fluxes following the exclusion of mobile
link animals from flooded intertidal creek basins, particularly under dark
conditions, will provide an empirical measure of the role of these animals in
material processing. This project has broader impacts. The research will take
place in North Inlet Estuary, South Carolina, which is a nearly pristine
ecosystem, that is part of the National Estuarine Research Reserve System. Many
of the mobile animals are also economically important components of coastal
fisheries. Furthermore, these studies will provide an attractive mechanism and
opportunity for educating students, teachers and laypersons in marine and
wetland science.