* 0427408
* ITR:     Collaborative Research:   (ASE+NHS) - (int):    BFT-LS:   Byzantine Fault Tolerance for Large-Scale, High-Performance Distributed Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,09/30/2011
* Liuba Shrira, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2011
* USD 273,621.00

Title: ITR: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH - (ASE+NHS) - (int): BFT-LS: Byzantine Fault
Tolerance for Large-Scale, High-Performance Distributed Storage
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliance on information available over the Internet
is increasing every day. At the same time, the number of malicious attacks is
growing. Nevertheless, it is critical that online information be stored
reliably: information must not be lost, must be accessible when needed, and what
a user sees must be what is actually stored. These requirements must be
satisfied in spite of malicious attacks on the network or the storage nodes.
This project concerns research on a new storage system, BFT-LS (Byzantine Fault
Tolerance - Large Scale), that satisfies these requirements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BFT-LS is designed to support five main goals: (1)
Reliability. BFT-LS provides extremely reliable storage: stored objects are not
lost, are available when needed, and are uncorrupted, in spite of malicious
attacks and Byzantine failures in which a node behaves arbitrarily badly. (2)
Automatic Reconfiguration. BFT-LS is a dynamic system that reconfigures itself
automatically, thus enhancing reliability by reducing reliance on operators.
BFT-LS also allows nodes to be added to replace failed nodes and to improve
service under increasing load. (3) Application Independence. BFT-LS provides a
flexible interface that meets the needs of many applications, including file
systems and databases. (4) Extended Semantics. BFT-LS supports atomic
transactions that can read and write many objects. In addition, read-only
transactions can run in the recent past yet are guaranteed to see a consistent
state. (5) Efficient access at large scale. BFT-LS is intended to run
efficiently at very large scale: it must store a vast quantity of state that is
accessed by huge numbers of users who are physically located all over the world.
It provides an infrastructure that allows clients to us data cached nearby,
rather than communicating with far-away storage nodes. Nearby nodes aren't
trusted, however; instead a new reliable stream mechanism ensures data
validity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BFT-LS is expected to provide greater
functionality than earlier work while also providing outstanding performance.
Its extended functionality not only requires innovative new solutions in many
areas, but also makes the system more generally useful because it can support a
wide range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;