* 0427737
* Production of Exopolymeric Substances by Arctic Sea Ice Algae
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Michael Lizotte, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/2006
* USD 177,526.00

Synopsis of proposal:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exopolymeric substances (EPS)
produced by photosynthetic microalgae are gaining recognition as a significant
but highly variable component of primary production in aquatic systems. EPS
production may play critical roles in algal motility, buoyancy, attachment to
surfaces, nutrient scavenging, defense, and photosynthetic carbon overflow. EPS
is also a source for transparent exopolymer particles (TEP) that have been
implicated in many critical mechanisms controlling carbon transformations and
export in the sea. EPS and TEP production have been most frequently studied in
diatom cultures and phytoplankton blooms. These materials are transformed by
colonizing organisms and physical aggregation processes (e.g. marine snow), and
subjected to microbial degradation as well as zooplankton grazing. Arctic sea
ice and underlying waters show high TEP accumulations associated with diatom
blooms. When TEP from the sea ice is released to the water column, it has the
potential to increase aggregation (increasing carbon export from surface waters.
Thus, TEP production has attributes distinct from primary production of
particulate or dissolved carbon, implying a need for rate process measurements
for Arctic ocean carbon cycle models. The main hypothesis to be tested is that
high EPS and TEP production in Arctic sea ice is a consequence of nitrogen
stress during diatom blooms. Studies on diatoms in culture and from benthic
diatom communities (an analog to the thin, high-biomass algal communities that
occur in the ice-seawater interface of sea ice) have shown that low N and P
availability can lead to high EPS production. Nutrient stress has been
demonstrated in Arctic sea ice diatom blooms, and most commonly attributed to
the supply of N or Si. The project will test the effect of all 3 macronutrient
elements (N, P and Si). It will make rate measurements for EPS and dissolved
organic carbon production as a fraction of primary production, along with
measurements of TEP accumulation, using both experimental manipulations and
field observations to test this hypothesis. The field program will be carried
out in the Beaufort Sea as part of the Canadian Arctic Shelf Exchange Study
(CASES). The main goal of CASES is to understand the biogeochemical and
ecological consequences of sea ice variability and change. Canadian researchers
will be making core measurements of algal biomass and production (dissolved and
particulate) to which this new project will add partitioning of EPS and TEP
production. The CASES field studies will focus on offshore pack ice during the
spring, with the advantage of encountering a wide variety of sea ice habitats
that may differ in TEP production. Sea ice is an extreme environment covering a
large fraction of the World Ocean. The recent discovery that Arctic sea ice
cover is diminishing, possibly due to human-induced climate change, underscores
the need to understand this ecosystem. Outreach activities will produce teaching
materials focused on sea ice and polar oceanography for inclusion in on-line
course materials developed for community college students. Development of
educational materials will be done in collaboration with students and teachers
at Fullerton College. Products will be assessed as part of a community college
oceanography courses and will also incorporate opportunities to showcase
international scientific collaboration "in action" during field seasons in the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;