* 0427647
* ITR: Improving the Security of Quantum Cryptography with Modified Coherent State
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Zhe-Yu Jeff Ou, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 09/30/2007
* USD 350,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Progress has been made in producing single photon
states. But so far those sources have&lt;br/&gt;small efficiency and are
wavelength dependent and are limited for practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;Recently a new scheme was proposed and demonstrated for
producing photon source&lt;br/&gt;with sub-Poissonian photon statistics. The
scheme relies on a two-photon quantum&lt;br/&gt;interference phenomenon to
reduce and eventually cancel the two-photon events from a&lt;br/&gt;coherent
state. In this program, we propose to implement the scheme in an
optical&lt;br/&gt;communication environment. More specifically, we will start
with a fiber pulsed laser as&lt;br/&gt;the primary source and use a combination
of wave guide nonlinear optical materials to&lt;br/&gt;produce a two-photon
state for canceling the two-photon events in a coherent state.
The&lt;br/&gt;technical challenge will primarily be the temporal mode match for
a complete destructive&lt;br/&gt;two-photon interference. Such a source has the
advantages of high secure data rate,&lt;br/&gt;well-defined direction and
wavelength independence for practical application in&lt;br/&gt;quantum
cryptography. This source can also be used to form a three-photon interferometer
for&lt;br/&gt;nonlocality test of quantum
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Quantum cryptography,
when implemented in the correct condition, will provide&lt;br/&gt;unbreakable
codes for secure communication. The potential benefit of this technology
is&lt;br/&gt;tremendous, given the current status of security issue in
information technology. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed program will significantly
improve the applicability of quantum cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;Participation of
graduate students and undergraduate students in the research is
an&lt;br/&gt;integral part of the proposed program, which will train and prepare
next generation&lt;br/&gt;quantum physicists for the information age in the new
century. Results of the research&lt;br/&gt;will be published in international
journals to enhance scientific and
technological&lt;br/&gt;understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;