* 0427511
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Santiago Tuxtla Archaeological Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Christopher Pool, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Christopher A. Pool, Marcie L. Venter will conduct
archaeological research at Tuxtla, Veracruz, Mexico. Totogatl is the original
location of Tuxtla, which was one of the principal towns in the Aztec province
of Tochtepec, and the early colonial predecessor to modern Santiago Tuxtla. The
visible ruins at the site include several pre-Columbian pyramid mounds, as well
as the stone foundations of a colonial building believed to have been a convent,
which the Spanish conquistador, Hernan Cortes, ordered to be built. Venter's
investigations will consist of mapping the site, conducting systematic surface
collections of artifacts and excavating key areas. Together, these sets of data
will allow her to identify areas of local and foreign occupation, and to
document changes in settlement, craft production, and artifact inventories as a
result of interaction with the Aztec Empire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tuxtla is
particularly important because it lay on the eastern edge of the Aztec empire.
Whereas a great deal is known about the Aztecs in their core region of central
Mexico, interactions with the imperial frontiers are much less understood.
Elsewhere, boundary interactions in the precapitalist world were often
multidimensional, with different degrees of control, peaceful alliance, and
resistance. The same may have been true of Tuxtla, which is recorded as having
paid tribute to the Aztec Empire, but which was also part of a region renowned
in its time for its commercial success and relative autonomy. In addition, some
of Tuxtla's inhabitants are recorded as having spoken a local version of the
Aztec language, Nahuatl, while others spoke the indigenous Popoluca language.
Venter's investigation will test different models of Aztec-Tuxtla interaction,
including (1) Aztec domination of Tuxtla, (2) Tuxtla independence and
competition with the Aztec Empire, and (3) sharing of authority with the
Empire's representatives. She will also investigate whether Tuxtla's relations
with the Aztecs shifted among these alternatives over time. Understanding how
the Aztecs and Tuxtecos managed their relationships with one another may provide
insights into imperial relations elsewhere on the Aztec frontier and
precaptialist boundary dynamics in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the
research questions of interest to social scientists, this project will have a
broader impact by enhancing public understanding of science, particularly
through its cooperation with the Tuxtla Regional Museum, which is currently
being refurbished by Mexican agencies. The museum hosts a steady stream of local
residents and schoolchildren as well as foreign tourists traveling to the
region's other archaeological and ecological attractions. Archaeological
specimens and educational resources provided by the project will enhance the
museum's collections and public outreach activities. In addition, the project
will provide training opportunities for students from Mexican universities and
employment for local citizens.&lt;br/&gt;