* 0427177
* ITR-ASE-Sim:     Collaborative Research:    De Novo Hierarchical Simulations of Stress Corrosion Cracking in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Michael Ortiz, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award was made on a collaborative proposal submitted to the Division of
Materials Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation
NSF-04-012. The Division of Materials Research, the Chemistry Division, and the
Division of Computing and Communications Foundations fund this award. The other
proposals in this multidisciplinary collaborative are 0427188 and 0427540 and
involve investigators at Caltech and Purdue. Research activities covered by this
award fall under the National Priority Area, "Advances in Science and
Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation in Computational
Modeling or Simulation in Research." This award supports computational research
and algorithm development with the aim of developing new modeling tools for
materials failure and with the further aim of applying these tools to advance
the understanding of stress corrosion cracking. This award also supports related
educational activities some of which involve underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs aim to develop a scalable parallel and
distributed computational framework consisting of methods, algorithms, and
integrated data handling and visualization tools for: 1) an accurate quantum
mechanical-level (QM) description; 2) reactive force fields (ReaxFF) to describe
chemical reactions and polarization; 3) molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to
extract atomistic mechanisms of SCC; 4) accelerated dynamics for long-time
behavior to obtain parameters directly comparable to experiments; and 5)
"atomistically informed" continuum models to reach macroscopic length and time
scales. Automated model transitioning by novel techniques will be employed to
embed higher fidelity simulations inside coarser simulations only when and where
they are required, while controlled error propagation will ensure the overall
accuracy of the results. The PIs plan to use this hierarchical multiscale
computational framework to study stress corrosion cracking (SCC) of aluminum,
iron, and nickel-aluminum superalloys in gaseous and aqueous environments. These
materials are used widely in industrial applications and their performance and
lifetime are often severely limited by stress corrosion in environments
containing oxygen and water. Simulations will be used to extract an atomic-level
understanding of the basic mechanisms underlying SCC. The PIs plan to
investigate SCC inhibition by ceramic coatings (e.g., alumina and silicon
carbide), self-assembled monolayers (e.g., oleic imidazolines), and by
microorganisms (e.g., Shewanella oneidensis strain MR-1).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will deliver software tools having broad
applicability across scientific disciplines and industry. This award supports
annual computational science workshops for undergraduate students and faculty
mentors from underrepresented groups. Workshops will be organized to foster
close interactions between underrepresented minority graduate students at US
institutions and postdoctoral level counterparts from Latin American
institutions. Undergraduate students will be involved in the research through
summer research experiences; at least half are expected to be from
underrepresented groups. The PIs will also assist minority institutions in
developing computational science curricula, and mentor early-career faculty from
minority institutions and EPSCoR states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports education. Elements of the PIs' education program include: 1) a unique
graduate course jointly taught by USC and Caltech faculty emphasizing hands-on
experience in hierarchical multiscale material simulations; 2) a dual-degree
program at USC offering graduate students the opportunity to obtain a PhD in the
physical sciences or engineering and an MS in computer science with
specialization in high performance computing and simulations; and 3) summer
research experiences for undergraduate students involving a total immersion
course in computational science followed by research in simulation, parallel
algorithms and visualization. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a
collaborative proposal submitted to the Division of Materials Research under the
Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012. The Division of
Materials Research, the Chemistry Division, and the Division of Computing and
Communications Foundations fund this award. The other proposals in this
multidisciplinary collaborative are 0427177 and 0427540 and involve
investigators at Caltech and Purdue. Research activities covered by this award
fall under the National Priority Area, "Advances in Science and Engineering,"
and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation in Computational Modeling or
Simulation in Research." This award supports computational research and
algorithm development with the aim of developing new modeling tools for
materials failure and with the further aim of applying these tools to advance
the understanding of stress corrosion cracking. This award also supports related
educational activities some of which involve underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stress corrosion cracking (SCC) is a complex
technological and economic problem involving premature and catastrophic failure
of materials due to an insidious combination of mechanical stresses and
chemically aggressive environments. Safe and reliable operation of structural
systems are endangered by uncertainties in SCC, the reduction of which could
have enormous economic impact. The PIs plan to develop computational tools that
contain essential physics across a wide range of length and time scales to
achieve an atomic-level mechanistic understanding of SCC. Because of the large
number of atoms and complex physical and chemical processes, these tools will be
able to manage distributed computing resources and focus them on SCC
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to use these tools to study SCC of
aluminum, iron, and nickel-aluminum superalloys in gaseous and aqueous
environments. These materials are used widely in industrial applications and
their performance and lifetime are often severely limited by stress corrosion in
environments containing oxygen and water. Simulations will be used to understand
the basic mechanisms underlying SCC. The PIs plan to investigate how various
coatings and microorganisms inhibit SSC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports education. Elements of the PIs' education program include: 1) a
graduate course jointly taught by USC and Caltech faculty emphasizing hands-on
experience in hierarchical multiscale material simulations; 2) a dual-degree
program at USC offering graduate students the opportunity to obtain a PhD in the
physical sciences or engineering and an MS in computer science with
specialization in high performance computing and simulations; and 3) summer
research experiences for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
will deliver software tools having broad applicability across scientific
disciplines and industry. This award supports annual computational science
workshops for undergraduate students and faculty mentors from underrepresented
groups. Workshops will be organized to foster close interactions between
underrepresented minority graduate students at US institutions and postdoctoral
level counterparts from Latin American institutions. Undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will be involved in the research. In addition, the PIs
will assist minority institutions in developing computational science curricula,
and mentor early-career faculty from minority institutions and EPSCoR states.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;