* 0427223
* ITR - (ASE+NHS) - (dmc+int):    Triage and the Automated Annotation of Large Image Data Sets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Donald Geman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas F. Russell
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,410,349.00

Proposal: 0427223&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: Donald Geman, Yali Amit,
Stuart Geman, and Laurent Younes&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: Johns Hopkins U, U of
Chicago, Brown U, and Johns Hopkins U&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
ITR-\(ASE+NHS)\-\(dmc+int)\: Triage and Automated Annotation of large Image Data
Sets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is a
computational and mathematical framework for progressive annotation of large
image databases at a semantic level. The proposed research fuses two powerful
paradigms, coarse-to-fine indexing and syntactic scene parsing, into one model
and computational strategy in order to provide a less-to-more detailed
annotation of a scene as a function of available computing cycles. Coarse, and
likely flawed, interpretations emerge at the early stages of processing,
followed by finer and more accurate ones. The fusion between coarse-to-fine and
syntactic models allows one to gain the best of both: a nearly optimal
computational engine for detecting candidate constituents embedded in a full
semantic and syntactic scene analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large image data
sets are ubiquitous. Sources include medicine, manufacturing, astrophysics,
molecular biology, defense and intelligence. In general, these resources are
useful only in proportion to our ability to access selected semantic categories,
such as ``includes people'' or ``contains a frontal lobe mass''. There is then a
great need for automated annotation, whereby computer programs would produce a
``meta'' data structure, partially describing the contents and context of each
image. Progress in automated scene annotation will have an immediate impact on a
broad range of scientific disciplines, including medicine and surveillance
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;