* 0427628
* An Integrated View of Oceanography: Ocean Weather Forecasting in the 21st Century
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Eric Chassignet, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 07/31/2006
* USD 20,000.00

Progress in a wide range of ocean research and applications depends upon the
prompt and dependable availability of ocean information products. The field of
physical oceanography has matured to a point where it is now conceivable to
combine numerical models and observations via data assimilation in order to
provide ocean prediction products on various spatial and time scales. As a
result, many nations have begun large-scale efforts to provide routine products
to the oceanographic community. The Global Ocean Data Assimilation Experiment
(GODAE) provides a framework for these efforts, i.e., a global system of
observations, communications, modeling, and assimilation that will deliver
regular, comprehensive information on the state of the oceans, in a way that
will promote and engender wide utility and availability of this resource for
maximum benefit to the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective
of the school is to form/motivate the young scientists and professionals that
will be the principal movers and users of operational oceanographic outputs in
the next 10 years. Specifically, in order for good science to be performed, one
needs to understand the limitations of the products that are made available to
the community at large. The lectures will present these limitations as well as
emphasize the following two themes: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) How can science
benefits from an operational environment? &lt;br/&gt;2) What are the limits of
ocean prediction systems? of predictability? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Leading
scientists from around the world will brought together to summarize the present
knowledge in ocean modeling, ocean observing systems, and data assimilation to
present an integrated view of oceanography. In addition to formal lectures,
shorter talks by experts in the field will expose the participants to a wide
range of applications. Attendees will also have the opportunity to present their
work via poster sessions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
societal benefit will be an increased knowledge of the marine environment and
ocean climate, predictive skills for societal, industrial, and commercial
benefit and tactical and strategic advantage, as well as the provision of a
comprehensive and integrated approach to the oceans. The lecture notes will be
reviewed by the attendees and will be published as a proceedings volume.
Graduate students, post-doctoral fellows and beginning investigators will
receive additional training in ocean data assimilation.&lt;br/&gt;