* 0427144
* SCI: ITR - (NHS + EVS) - (dmc + SIM) : Improving the Integrity of Domain Name System (DNS) Monitoring and Protection
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Blatecky
* 08/31/2009
* USD 3,514,736.00

This proposal outlines an effort to monitor and study one of the Internet's most
important elements of infrastructure whose failure would render the Internet
unusable: the Domain Name System (DNS). The CAIDA measurement group from SDSC is
teaming with the Internet Systems Consortium (ISC), maintainers of BIND and the
F-root servers of DNS, to carry out a series of tasks. These tasks include:
establish a long-term measurement infrastructure with supporting software tools
to measure and understand behavior of the root DNS system; study a series of
research questions on DNS such as the effects of anycast for a given root and/or
client, anomaly identification in DNS traffic; characterizing traffic reaching
the root name servers; understanding spurious RFC 1918 (private address space)
traffic; how to auto-identify one-way queries; the traffic effects of DNSSEC;
DNS resolver behavior in the context of global DNS; and characterizing root
server performance and connectivity. The sum of this work, and the associated
outreach activities, are intended to go a long way in the community hardening
and securing DNS over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Broader
Impact: The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in how it addresses
National and Homeland Security (NHS) related recommendations to develop a
'cyberspace network operations center (NOC)' as well as its long-term mission to
provide data needed to support DNS research that has relevance to the real
Internet and how it support economic prosperity and vibrant civil society (ECS).
The proposed work has broad impact on all three national priority areas in the
ITR solicitation: (1) It advances the integrity of the field of Internet
research by providing real data from core Internet components that are otherwise
not amenable to measurement or modeling. (2) A global economy dependent on the
Internet is a global economy dependent on the Domain Name Service working
properly and securely. Protecting oneself against vulnerabilities in the DNS
infrastructure will reduce national as well as global risk. (3) The DNS-OARC
will enhance national and international security by providing a collaborative
knowledge environment in which to establish and refine mechanisms for emergency
response, and developing new technology for prevention, attribution and
remediation of malicious or otherwise misbehaving agents affecting the
DNS.&lt;br/&gt;