* 0427382
* ITR (ASE + NHS) - (sim + dmc):    Infrastructure Creation for Future Generation Test, Diagnosis and Yield Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2010
* Ronald Blanton, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2010
* USD 624,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0427382&lt;br/&gt;Blanton,
Ronald&lt;br/&gt;CMU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant yield degradation is
expected from design-fabrication interactions that are also known as systematic
defects. Because our ability to see these defects is quickly diminishing, test
will become the&lt;br/&gt;main source of insight into these failures. In other
words, in addition to its normal sorting function, test&lt;br/&gt;will be the
essential feedback loop for understanding the failure mechanisms inherent in
complex fabrication&lt;br/&gt;processes. Specifically, test will be the key
enabler for characterizing defects, unacceptable
parametric&lt;br/&gt;variations, and design-process interactions essential for
yielding reliable, working products in both a&lt;br/&gt;timely and cost-
effective manner.&lt;br/&gt;To meet this challenge, new efficient approaches to
test, testability analysis, design-for-test, built-in self&lt;br/&gt;test, and
diagnosis must be developed that can cope with the variety of failure types
expected in futuregeneration products. Research in this area is restricted
however since current test tools (i.e. fault simulators and test generators) are
limited in the variety of failures that they can directly analyze. To remedy
this situation, a fault tuple based infrastructure will be developed and
disseminated that will enable researchers in the field of design, test and
manufacturing to develop new and efficient approaches to test. The fault tuple
mechanism is a general and effective methodology for analyzing failures in
digital integrated circuits. Its key characteristic is its ability to precisely
model the effects of any arbitrary failure mechanism on the logical behavior of
a digital circuit. The proposed infrastructure includes the development,
implementation and dissemination of (i) a fault tuple simulator, (ii) a fault
tuple test generator, (iii) a set of fault generators (i.e. software modules
that extract fault tuple models of a given defect type from the
chip&lt;br/&gt;design), and (iv) accompanying documentation that details
capabilities and limitations of the test tools.&lt;br/&gt;We believe creation of
the proposed infrastructure will not only allow researchers to effectively
evaluate&lt;br/&gt;their approaches to test but enable them to develop totally
new, innovative test methodologies that are&lt;br/&gt;impossible within the
current infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;