* 0427260
* Skill Learning for Humanoid Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Howard Zelaznik, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2010
* USD 952,000.00

Currently humanoid robots do not move like human beings. They are not skillful
enough to perform tasks that require interactions with humans and the
environment. Humans can learn new skills very easily with deliberate practice.
If humanoid robots could acquire skills like humans, they would be able to help
with many needs of society.

Humans exhibit remarkable flexibility in motor skill. We believe that human
flexibility is derived from the fact that humans are inconsistent in
performance. This inconsistency allows people the flexibility to learn new
skills. Should humanoid robots have the ability to acquire skills like humans,
we can expect a dramatic improvement in the performance of humanoid robots on
various tasks.

This proposal, a unique collaboration between a robotics researcher and a motor
learning and control researcher from a kinesiology perspective, aims at
capturing these characteristics of human motor learning and control and then
instantiating these characteristics in the coordination and control algorithms
of a humanoid robot. In addition, an international collaboration with
researchers at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology (AIST) in Japan will allow us to examine the goodness of our research
experimentally on an HRP-2 humanoid robot.

In this project, we will be studying the motion of human subjects as they learn
a few complicated tasks. These subjects will either practice the skill as a
whole or practice the individual parts of the skill. We then will observe how
well subjects transfer to a novel motor skill. We will model the learning human
with network models and then attempt to put these models in a humanoid robot.
Will the humanoid robot show the same transfer of learning as the human? Can the
humanoid robot show the same types of errors as the human? These are some of the
questions that we seek to answer from this research.

The broader impacts of this research include: (i) a systematic investigation of
motor skill learning and transfer, their limitations, and their integration to
produce intelligent humanoid robots; (ii) research collaboration between
researchers from engineering and liberal arts to engage in information
technology research and education from different perspectives, and international
research collaboration with the AIST in Japan; (iii) development of a web site
for students to simulate humanoid robots using OpenHRP software; and (iv)
research results will be disseminated in professional conference and archival
journal publications. In addition, the project will have an impact on
undergraduate and graduate education, especially experimental research and
senior design projects. Finally, for the outreach impact, humanoid robots and
simulation tools will be an excellent vehicle to educate high-school students in
team work and encourage them to select engineering for their higher education
and career.

