* 0427947
* ITR - (NHS+ASE+ECS) - (dmc+sim+int):  Loosely Cooperating Micro Air Vehicle Networks for Toxic Plume Characterization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Richard Han, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2009
* USD 997,998.00

Proposal Number: 0427947&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kamran Mohseni &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Colorado, Boulder &lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR - Loosely Cooperating
Micro Air Vehicle Networks for Toxic Plume
Characterization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Release of
contaminants in urban areas can lead to severe public health consequences. This
project develops an integrated Sensor Flock to enable rapid characterization of
toxic plumes for contamination prediction and source location. A Sensor Flock
consists of semi-autonomous micro air vehicles (MAVs) transporting miniature
toxin sensors throughout the atmosphere above populated areas, networked to a
base station providing toxin dispersion modeling and flock supervision, using
novel lightweight, real-time, data-reactive wireless information routing. MAV
platforms lower manufacturing costs, reduce risks of collision damage, and
reduce visibility and noise that might create public alarm.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The concept of Information Energy is introduced to tightly integrate
advances in three interdisciplinary areas: aerodynamics, networking, and
control. This enables high-quality information products from the Sensor Flock,
using relatively simple individual vehicles. The MAVs are designed based on
biomimetic principles of bat flight to enable exceptional flight performance.
Vehicle control is based on a hierarchical information energy formulation,
producing simple gradient-descent guidance laws on each vehicle, but with well-
understood flock clustering behavior toward regions of high-quality data. The
behavior of data-driven routing in each of the following three communication
scenarios is investigated: inter-MAV exchange of high-quality data for flock
convergence; MAV-to-ground collection of sensor data; and ground-to-MAV command
and control.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Existing disciplinary courses at CU Boulder
are enriched with results from this work, expanding student multidisciplinary
exposure. A summer Aerobotics program enables local high school students to
participate in a design/build/fly competition integrating computer science and
aerospace engineering.&lt;br/&gt;