* 0427878
* SST: Robust Wireless Piezoelectric Sensor Network for Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Yu Ding, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/2008
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0427878&lt;br/&gt;PI: Yu Ding&lt;br/&gt;Texas Engineering
Experiment Station&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is one component of a 3-way
collaborative sensors research program, between University of Connecticut (Grant
0428210), Columbia University (Grant 0427353) and Texas Engineering Experiment
Station (Grant 0427878). The research is aimed at developing a wireless
piezoelectric sensor network as well as the associated decision making
algorithms with enhanced sensor system robustness, reliability, and detection
sensitivity for structural health monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve
the detection sensitivity, a smart adaptive sensor node is designed to allow
multi-resonance passive frequency response based detection and active damage
interrogation. To enhance the network robustness, distributed data decoding,
distributed interference avoidance, and robust routing strategies are
investigated. To reduce false alarms, an adaptive statistical threshold is
established and sensor self-diagnosis techniques are developed. A
multidisciplinary team has been formed by researchers from Mechanical,
Electrical, and Industrial Engineering fields from these three institutions to
carry out the work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to create an
enabling technology for next-generation large-structure health monitoring and
thus have strategic importance to a series of industrial/military systems. The
technology could substantially reduce system downtime and service workload. This
research will provide multidisciplinary training for all participating students.
Research accomplishments will be implemented into undergraduate/graduate
curricula and also enhance laboratory developments in all partner
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project supported under Sensors
Initiative NSF 04-522.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;