* 0427754
* Collaborative Research:  ITR-(ASE)-(sim): A Multi-scale Combined Hybrid-Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)-Neutral Atom Code
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Joachim Raeder, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2009
* USD 334,772.00

This project will produce a new class of numerical model for space physics
simulations that incorporates a greater range of the physics believed to be
important in the dynamics of the heliosphere and magnetosphere. This will permit
researchers to study some of the heliospheric phenomena that in which small-
scale and large-scale features are inextricably linked. The approach to be taken
seeks to represent both the dynamic and the kinematic aspects of plasma, ions
and neutral atoms in the heliosphere. The model will combine MHD for
representing plasma dynamics with Monte Carlo simulation techniques for
representing neutral atoms and transport codes for very energetic particles. The
resulting multi-physics code will be used for research into: (a) the dynamics of
the heliosphere, including its interaction with extra-solar particles and cosmic
rays, and changes associated with the time-dependent solar wind and solar cycle;
and (b) the propagation of shocks such as those associated with coronal mass
ejections. It will also be used as the basis for a geospace general circulation
model for use in the study of space weather. The resulting model will include a
structured-grid adaptive mesh refinement capability, to help resolve small-scale
features in a computationally efficient way, and innovative approaches to load-
balancing and task scheduling so that the adaptive code will run efficiently on
highly parallel computing platforms.