* 0427002
* ITR: Collaborative Research: (ASE+ECS)-(int+dmc+soc) - Environment Computing for Global Grids
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* John Huth, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 09/30/2009
* USD 375,000.00

This ITR proposal is a request for funding to address the two critical scaling
problems for large scale grid computing. Experience with the current generation
of deployed grid systems makes it clear that, while these systems are practical
for tens of sites, with tens of full-time managers, they do not scale to the
hundreds or thousands of sites required by large scientific collaborations or to
larger global scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two essential non-scaling
effects are: (a) Software Environment Computing (SEC): a lack of well-defined
mechanisms for constructing and manipulating software environments on remote
sites reliably, safely and without human intervention is a major source of non-
scaling behavior. The solution proposed is to define and implement an
infrastructure where software environment creation and manipulation are basic
elements of grid computing. They propose to use the Pacman package as a first
implementation of SEC; (b) Effective Resource Allocation (RA): a lack of grid-
level mechanisms for controlling allocation of resources will cause grids to
become difficult to manage and inefficient for typical users as the grids scale
up in size. The solution proposed is to introduce a common grid currency to
bootstrap an economy and promote policy decisions. Both SEC and RA require new
approaches in order to achieve a qualitative leap forward in grid computing and
in IT. Definitive solution of these problems would be a major intellectual
advance in IT providing both theoretical understanding and practical tools that
would be the basis of further research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact: By
identifying and unblocking the essential problems in contemporary grid
computing, this work will enable grids to grow in size towards limits that we
are not currently able to calculate. A dramatic growth in grids will result in
near SETI-at-home scale computing for broad ranges of scientific and other
computing projects and would constitute a true change in the national computing
landscape.