* 0427235
* SGER:  Experimental Investigation of Transport Phenomena in Buoyancy Driven Nanofluids
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* George Nnanna, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 03/31/2005
* USD 23,072.00

A preliminary experimental investigation is proposed to study the transport
phenomena in Buoyancy-Driven Nanofluid (BDNF) system. Nanofluids are a new class
of heat transfer fluid engineered by suspending nanoparticles in the
conventional heat transfer fluid. The presence of the nanoparticles changes the
transport properties of the conventional fluid thereby increasing the effective
thermal conductivity of nanofluid. Buoyancy-driven nanofluid systems have
potential applications in the MEMS and electronics thermal management, as well
as in engine cooling systems, superconducting magnets, and other cooling
applications. The objectives of this study are to develop empirical correlations
for predicting the heat transfer in enclosures that contain BDNF and to lay the
foundations for a longer term research effort to understand the fundamentals of
thermal transport in BDNF. The outcome of this preliminary investigation will
serve as groundwork for parametric experimental studies on the influence of
parameters such as volume fraction, thermophysical properties of the fluid and
nanoparticles, aspect ratio, volumetric expansion coefficient, and velocity of
the nanofluids on heat transfer enhancement of buoyancy-driven nanofluids. This
information is of practical relevance in determining the thermal performance of
buoyancy-driven nanofluids, and designing nanofluid heat transfer systems for
cooling of electronics and other engineering systems.

