* 0427912
* ITR:    Collaborative Research - ASE - (sim+dmc):    Image-based Biophysical Modeling: Scalable Registration and Inversion Algorithms and Distributed Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,10/31/2008
* William Gropp, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 10/31/2008
* USD 275,518.00

Abstract for Collaboration &lt;br/&gt;0427985, 0427464, 0427094,0427912,0427695
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multidisciplinary team of researchers from Argonne
National &lt;br/&gt;Laboratory, Carnegie Mellon University, Columbia University,
&lt;br/&gt;University of Chicago, Emory University, and University of
&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania, with collaborators from the Universities of Graz and
&lt;br/&gt;Lubek, will initiate a long term research project on image-driven,
&lt;br/&gt;inversion-based biophysical modeling. The team includes expertise in
&lt;br/&gt;numerical algorithms and scientific computing, fluid and solid
&lt;br/&gt;biomechanics, PDE optimization, inverse problems, medical image
&lt;br/&gt;analysis and processing, and distributed and grid computing necessary
&lt;br/&gt;to tackle this class of problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to create a framework for assimilating multimodal &lt;br/&gt;dynamic
medical image data to produce highly-resolved, &lt;br/&gt;physically-realistic,
patient-specific biomechanics models. While the &lt;br/&gt;computational and
algorithmic aspects of the project are widely &lt;br/&gt;applicable, the target
application will be the construction of &lt;br/&gt;patient-specific cardiac
biomechanics models from 4D image datasets of &lt;br/&gt;heart motion. Such
models are useful for medical diagnosis and &lt;br/&gt;surgical planning. This
places a premium on quick turnaround of the &lt;br/&gt;computations, which mean
they must be fast, scalable, and capable of &lt;br/&gt;exploiting grid-based
computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will focus on three key areas that
undergird the project's &lt;br/&gt;overall goals: registration, inversion, and
distributed computing. The &lt;br/&gt;registration research component will
create multilevel algorithms to &lt;br/&gt;extract cardiac deformation histories
from time-varying medical image &lt;br/&gt;datasets via the solution of
sequences of 3D image registration &lt;br/&gt;problems. The inversion research
component will develop multilevel &lt;br/&gt;algorithms that use these
deformation field histories as virtual &lt;br/&gt;observations to solve inverse
problems for cardiac biomechanical &lt;br/&gt;parameters. The distributed
computing research component will create &lt;br/&gt;tools for performance
prediction and resource scheduling that support &lt;br/&gt;simulations across
distributed computational resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dovetailing with the
research components, the project will undertake &lt;br/&gt;an educational
program designed to communicate the fruits of its work &lt;br/&gt;and of the
wider benefits of the integration of the biomedical &lt;br/&gt;sciences,
computing sciences, and computational sciences, to a more &lt;br/&gt;general
audience of students, disciplinary researchers, and the lay &lt;br/&gt;public.
The professional activities of the team members in the &lt;br/&gt;inversion,
image registration, grid computing, and computational &lt;br/&gt;science
communities will be parlayed to organize workshops and &lt;br/&gt;international
meetings, edit volumes, teach summer schools, develop &lt;br/&gt;university and
short courses, and engage in outreach activities---as &lt;br/&gt;they have done
in the past---but with greater emphasis on the field of &lt;br/&gt;computational
biomedicine. The proposed image-based cardiac &lt;br/&gt;biomechanics modeling
application will provide an excellent &lt;br/&gt;opportunity to demonstrate the
benefits to health and welfare that &lt;br/&gt;advances in optimization-based
registration and inversion algorithms &lt;br/&gt;and Grid computing can provide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;