* 0427502
* Collaborative Research:  ITR-(ASE)+(DMC_INT): New Methods for the Exploration of Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vents with Multiple Autonomous Underwater Robotic Vehicles
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Milica Stojanovic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2008
* USD 327,873.00

This research project seeks to develop and validate novel information technology
to enable the coordinated deployment of multiple autonomous underwater vehicles
(AUVs) to enable the goal of large-scale oceanographic exploration of mid-ocean
ridges that presently are unexplored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project addresses the following information technology obstacles to this
scientific objective:&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing acoustic data communication
technology for small data communication networks providing real-time low-power
acoustic telemetry for multiple AUVs. &lt;br/&gt;2. Developing information-
fusion navigation techniques combining acoustic communication range data and
other sensors for AUV navigation.&lt;br/&gt;3. Developing sensor-based optimal
planning techniques for vent discovery and exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expected results are new AUV systems and capabilities which will be validated as
follows: &lt;br/&gt;1. Employing multiple AUVs to discover hydrothermal vents on
the unexplored segment of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge from 2 degrees S to 8 degrees
S.&lt;br/&gt;2. Conducting large-scale physical oceanographic surveys and small-
scale bathymetric surveys to determine quantitatively vent size and frequency,
and the relative frequency of basalt vs. serpentinite circulation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;3. Performing fine-scale photographic surveys of newly
discovered hydrothermal vent fields to evaluate quantitatively species diversity
and persistence in vent habitats and the biogeography of vent
fauna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The large-scale exploration of the
deep ocean with multiple robotic AUVs will provide a powerful new tool for
benthic science, and enable closely related research in AUVs for moored and
permanent sea-floor observatories.