* 0427471
* ITR:    Grid Computing for Ecological Modeling and Spatial Control
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Louis Gross, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,416,610.00

Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental problems related to natural
resource management span a wide variety of spatial, temporal and biotic
hierarchy levels. Resource managers are charged with local, short-term decisions
regarding controlling access and types of use for sub-areas within larger
natural areas, as well as much longer-term planning for entire areas as large as
many thousands of hectares. Similarly, regional-scale planning for water flows,
hunting regulations, preserve allocation, and forest harvesting requires
stakeholders to provide input to the process, and such planning has led to
numerous contentious public debates throughout the US. The main objective of
this project is the development of computational tools, utilizing grid-
computing, to assist natural resource managers in assessing the impacts of
alternative management plans. The central theme of this proposal is that
evaluating the impacts of human actions to manage natural systems requires the
use of computational models utilizing the best available science to analyze
potential effects. To be effective, such models must be defensible
scientifically, readily available to various stakeholders and extensible to
allow new users to evaluate alternative plans, assumptions and choices of
criteria to prioritize management actions. This requires the use of
computational ecology to develop models, visualize these models, consider
alternative human controls within these models and analyze from an optimization
perspective the various controls, based upon social choice criteria that may
vary from stakeholder to stakeholder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the variety of
scales involved in natural resource management, the use of a
multimodeling&lt;br/&gt;approach is appropriate. In this, different models with
potentially different mathematical and&lt;br/&gt;computational forms are chosen
for different components of the system, based upon the necessary levels of
detail and available data for different components. These models are linked into
a multimodel to evaluate the interactions of biotic and abiotic components. Grid
computing provides a natural framework to develop toolsets for ecological
multimodels due to the dispersed nature of datasets, software and computational
resources, in addition to the general lack of appropriate hardware at many
natural resource agencies. The challenges go well beyond the current state-of-
the-art in geographic information systems, requiring spatially-explicit dynamic
models linked to spatio/temporal optimization schemes. Courses for managers and
the engagement of underrepresented groups are
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;