* 0427089
* ITR:  IT-Based Collaboration Framework for Preparing Against, Responding to, and Recovering from Disasters Involving Critical Physical Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Andrea Hollingshead, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,370,002.00

Abstract for 0427089

One of the most urgent and vital challenges confronting society today is the
vulnerability of urban areas to extreme and unpredictable events such as
terrorism, earthquakes and the like. For example, in 2002, a total of 608
million people across the globe were affected by disasters resulting in 24,500
deaths and damage to property and to the environment estimated at $27 billion
dollars. These significant human and economical costs emphasize the urgent need
to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of first responses to extreme
events. The objective of this grant is to develop and to test a conceptual
framework designed to improve collaboration among the key actors involved in
disaster relief operations. These key actors include firefighters, police
officers, medical personnel, experts, the original civil engineers and
constructors involved in the construction of the affected infrastructure, and
the physical and technological infrastructure itself, including sensors and
systems of sensors embedded in it. Theoretically derived information technology
(IT)-based solutions to prepare against, respond to and recover from disasters
will be developed and tested based on the proposed framework. The research team
is composed of civil engineers, computer scientists, entomologists,
psychologists, communication scholars and first responder professionals. Each
studies the technological and social processes of collaboration from a different
viewpoint. All of these viewpoints will be represented in the conceptual
framework, which will explore three phases of first response: preparation,
response, and recovery. First responders face many challenges in the chaotic and
inhospitable environment of disaster relief operations; including information
unreliability and overload; coordination and communication breakdowns; and
threats to personal safety and the vulnerability of physical infrastructure.
This grant seeks to reduce uncertainty and improve collaboration among first
responders. It will advance theory, research and practice regarding efficient
and effective first response in several important ways. First, previous research
initiatives regarding collaboration have focused on supporting interactions
among people, instruments and systems running on fixed computers and devices, in
complex, large scale, but fairly stable operating conditions. This research
investigates collaboration in chaotic, volatile, and complex disaster relief
environments, which requires interaction among both stationary and mobile users
and among users and technological devices such as sensors and communication
media. Second, it explores the role of civil engineer as a vital member of the
first responder team, providing key knowledge of and experience with the
affected physical infrastructure. And finally, it will enable first responders
with an IT-based components platform to address issues pertaining to critical
physical infrastructure, such as security and vulnerability, along with the
expertise to prepare before, respond to and recover after a disaster occurs.