* 0427173
* ITR: Transformation of Engineering Design:  Digitization and Global Distribution of Engineering Work
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Stephen Barley, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,300,000.00

This research project is jointly funded by the Information Technology Research
program, the Digital Society and Technologies program, and the Office of
International Science &amp; Engineering. It will investigate how information
technologies that employ sophisticated mathematical techniques are reshaping
technical work through a process conceptualized as intensification of
abstraction. Intensification of abstraction centers on the replacement of the
physical by the virtual, i.e., the manipulation of symbols that represent and
substitute for objects. The study will be conducted in the context of automotive
engineering design in partnership with General Motors Corporation. It will focus
on the way in which information technology tools that employ techniques like
finite element analysis and computational fluid dynamics are bringing about
changes in how engineers think about and do engineering, changes in
organizational structures and processes, changes in engineering knowledge, and
changes in the division of engineering labor. It will also trace how these
technologies alter relationships between automotive firms and their suppliers
and pave the way for outsourcing engineering work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will entail detailed ethnographic observations of GM engineers in both
US and India, supplemented with interviews in firms that manufacture analysis
tools and the researchers who develop the techniques on which the tools are
based. To date little systematic research has examined the socio-technical
dynamics of these kinds of changes. The intellectual merit of this study lies in
its potential to alter how studies of technology and work understand the role of
information technologies in a knowledge economy. Since technical and
professional occupations now represent the largest sector of the American
workforce, intensification of abstraction may transform modern knowledge work as
significantly as automation did production and clerical work in the 20th
Century. The broader impacts include implications for the U.S. economy and the
nation's place in the international division of labor.&lt;br/&gt;