* 0427498
* SST/Collaborative Research:  Self-Supporting Wireless Sensor Networks for In-Process and In-Service Integrity Monitoring Using High Energy-Harvesting Nonlinear Modeling Principles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Sang-Gook Kim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 180,000.00

The research objectives of this Sensor Small Team (SST)/Collaborative Research
grant focus on the derivation of scientific principles for harnessing
information from a large network of self-sustainable sensors for quality and
integrity monitoring in engineering systems, especially those at the core of
manufacturing and service enterprises. The objectives include: fabrication and
adaptation of sensors that integrate the piezoelectric micro-power generator
components that can harvest energy from the host-environment with components for
transmitting the measured signals as radio frequency waveforms and sensor
components tuned to measure vibrations and acoustic emission from a host
structure; derivation of an approach based on augmenting the current monitoring
foundations of statistics and machine learning with nonlinear dynamic principles
to decipher information buried in the, conceivably feeble, signals from a
network of self-sustainable sensors for monitoring in-service integrity of large
complex systems; and validation of the new framework for in-service integrity
monitoring of pipeline infrastructure through lab experiments and limited field
tests.

If successful, this research will create a new pathway to monitor and control
large-scale complex civil, biomedical, electro-mechanical, transportation,
telecommunications, and environmental systems. It will help in surmounting two
major technological barriers in sensing large scale complex systems by obviating
the need for wiring, energizing and local processing, and allowing for
discerning the complicated patterns, including the nonlinear dynamics,
underlying the signals from real-world sensor networks. The research will lead
to a novel interdisciplinary graduate program minor in Miniature Wireless
Sensing Networks, to be offered jointly by the four participating institutions.