* 0427014
* Collaborative Research: ITR-(ASE+EVS)-(dmc+sim): Coastal Modeling and Management
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Vivek Sarin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 02/28/2009
* USD 394,500.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-047014, 0426811,
0427115&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: P. LYNETT, B. RAUBENHEIMER, P.
LIU&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: TEXAS A&amp;M UNIVERSITY, WOODS HOLE OCEAN
&lt;br/&gt;INST., CORNELL UNIVERSITY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COLLABORATIVE: ITR
COASTAL MODELING AND MANAGEMENT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this grant to
develop a coupled, hybrid hydrodynamic computational model for simulation and
prediction of complex water wave processes from the deep ocean to the shoreline.
The model will be physically comprehensive, with total domain scales on the
order of hundred's of kilometers, yet with a nearshore grid resolution less than
a meter. To include this great range of scales, a number of diverse hydrodynamic
models, with various but overlapping physical and practical constraints, will be
integrated to create a hybrid hydrodynamic software tool. The method of
interfacing the different hydrodynamic models will be founded in distributed
computing techniques, thereby allowing for utilization of computer cluster
resources. In addition, each of the individual models in the hybrid system will
be parallelized, leading to the creation of a massively parallel and distributed
simulation platform. Coupled with the hybrid hydrodynamic model will be sediment
transport formulations, such that morphological change in the nearshore (i.e.
beach erosion) can be simulated. These formulations will employ the fine
resolution and high fidelity wave forcing from the hydrodynamic model, including
the effects of strong turbulence in the breaker, surf, and swash zones.
Validation of the coupled model will use established datasets from field studies
and controlled experiments. The technology infrastructure developed to pass
information between the various coupled models will be transparent and
expandable, such that as more sophisticated models become available, they may be
plugged into the existing simulator. The coupled simulator will be utilized by
practicing engineers for design of coastal protection measures and by policy
makers who may need better estimations of wave impact and erosion due to extreme
events. By influencing future design and policy decisions, the simulator will
contribute towards the goal of sustainable coastal margins. Education and
outreach will be accomplished through the unveiling of a web-based, open access,
coastal simulator. The website will be completely free access, open to college
and high school students, as well as academics and engineers. The coastal
simulator will be used remotely for senior level coastal engineering design
classes. It would be of immense impact to be able to show these students first-
hand the level of uncertainty and possible error in common engineering tools
through comparison with the high accuracy model developed here, such that they
are in a much better position to interpret the predictions when they become
practicing engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jointly funded by the
Division of Chemical &amp; Transport Systems, Fluid Dynamics &amp; Hydraulics
(FDH) program, and the Division of Ocean Sciences (OCE).&lt;br/&gt;