* 0427711
* ITR: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: (EVS+NHS)-( int+dmc): 'FAST Copper': Dynamic Optimization of Resources in Frequency, Amplitude, Space, and Time for Broadband Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* John Cioffi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

ITR: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: (EVS+NHS)-(int+dmc): 'FAST Copper': Dynamic
Optimization of Resources in Frequency, Amplitude, Space, and Time for Broadband
Access Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mung Chiang, Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;John Cioffi, Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;Alexander
Fraser, Fraser Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0427677&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadband access is
the commercial and technical future of telecommunications. Higher data rates on
access links enable any or all of video, data, and voice/audio signals. It is
widely recognized that the ability to deploy ubiquitous, robust, broadband
access services to the majority of U.S. households is vital to economic
prosperity, a vibrant civil society, and homeland security. The goal of this
'FAST Copper' project is to help build an engineering foundation to bring
broadband information services to everyone with a phone line, including people
who live in rural and less-privileged areas. This can be achieved by
substantially enhancing the rate and reliability of the existing copper plant
access network. Equity of broadband information access in the U.S. will be
enhanced as a result. There are two threads of research activities towards this
goal: (a) dynamic and joint optimization of resources in Frequency, Amplitude,
Space, and Time (FAST) to overcome the attenuation and crosstalk bottlenecks,
and (b) integration of communication, networking, computation, modeling, and
distributed information management in the multi-user environment of twisted pair
networks. Innovations in both physical layer algorithms and network
architectures and protocols are pursued. In particular, Dynamic Spectrum
Management, a science of multi-user methods for adaptively tuning an access
network to specific situations dynamically, is investigated for rate
improvements and implementation viability. This proposal has major activities
integrating research with education. It also facilitates close collaboration
with industry in analyzing highly valuable empirical data and validating
research results through extensive lab tests.&lt;br/&gt;