* 0427889
* ITR-(ECS+ASE)-(dmc+int): Info Tech Challenges for Secure Access to Confidential Social Science Data
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Matthew Shapiro, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,938,000.00

Census Research Data Centers (RDCs), based in Ann Arbor, Berkeley, Boston,
Chicago, Durham, Ithaca, Los Angeles, New York City, and Washington provide
approved scientists with access to confidential Census data for research that
directly benefits both the Census Bureau and society. The RDC directors,
administrators, board members and researchers, together with the Center for
Economic Studies and the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD)
Program, constitute a collaborative research network that is building and
supporting a secure distributed computer network that enables research that is
critical to our economic and civic prosperity and security. The network operates
under physical security constraints dictated by Census and the Internal Revenue
Service. The constraints essentially eliminate the possibility of distributing
the computations to facilities outside of the Bureau's main computing facility.
Instead, the researchers use the RDCs as supervised remote access facilities
that provide a secure, encrypted connection to the RDC computing network.

This project addresses the technical and logistical issues raised by the
creation, maintenance, and growth of the RDC network while maintaining the
confidentiality guaranteed to participants in Census data. The RDCs and LEHD
will lead a new wave of research with the development of innovative, large-scale
linked data products that integrate Census Bureau surveys, censuses and
administrative records with data from state governments and surveys conducted by
private institutions. Both CES and LEHD have extensive experience in creating
these products. The RDC network researchers will enhance that experience and
contribute their own expertise to the data linking research. The newly created
data will be richer than any presently available to researchers with no increase
in respondent burden. They will also raise complicated and vexing issues
regarding disclosure avoidance and participant privacy.

The project also creates synthetic versions of these confidential data sets.
This will increase the accessibility of these data to social science researchers
while preserving the confidentiality of private information. Synthetic and
partially-synthetic data are new confidentiality protection techniques that rely
on computationally intensive sampling from the posterior predictive distribution
of the underlying confidential data. The result is micro-data that preserve
important analytical properties of the original data and are, thus, inference-
valid. The synthetic versions of confidential data are for public use. At the
same time, ongoing research within the RDCs using the gold-standard confidential
data will constantly test the quality of the synthesized data and allow for
continuous improvement. As a result a continuous feedback relationship will be
established between the research activities conducted in RDCs on confidential
Census Bureau data and the quality of the Bureau's public use data products-
namely, the synthetic micro data created by these projects. In order to
accomplish these computationally-intensive activities, as well as to allow
researchers to engage in such innovative research as agent-based simulations and
geo-spatial analysis, we will install a supercluster of SMP nodes optimized for
the applications of creating linked data, analyzing the gold-standard data, and
processing the data to produce multiply-synthesized public use data sets. Two
industry partners, Intel and Unisys, have promised to directly support the
creation of this supercluster by donating 256 Itanium 2 processors and providing
the computing crossbars, cluster infrastructure, and disk storage arrays at
manufacturer's cost. The Linux-based system will be integrated and tuned by the
proposal team from Argonne National Laboratories. The synthetic data specialists
on the proposal team will port existing multi-threaded data synthesizers and
develop new ones.

Broader Impacts: The research conducted in RDCs and at LEHD over the past decade
has made important contributions to our understanding of essential social,
economic, and environmental issues that would not have been possible without use
of the confidential data accessible via the RDC network. It is difficult to
overstate the significance of this research, which has used more than 30 years
of longitudinally integrated establishment micro-data from the Census Business
Register and Economic Censuses; confidential micro-data from all the major
Census surveys (Current Population Survey, Survey of Income and Program
Participation, American Housing Survey), confidential micro-data from the
Decennial Censuses of Population in 1990 and 2000; longitudinally integrated
Unemployment Insurance wage records, ES-202 establishment data, and Social
Security Administration data; federal tax information linked to major surveys;
environmental data on air quality linked to Business Register and Economic
Census data; Medicaid data linked to the Survey of Income and Program
Participation; and many others.

