* 0427821
* Interconnect Planning in Placement and Logic Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Malgorzata Marek-Sadowska, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0427821&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of California-Santa
Barbara&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Marek-Sadowska,
Malgorzata&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Interconnect Planning in Placement and Logic
Synthesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Due to
the tremendous progress in technology, VLSI chips become very large and complex,
and this trend is expected to continue. The increased chip complexity causes
that average interconnect lengths increase and proportionally larger and larger
fraction of chip's area is occupied by interconnects. This tendency is not only
caused by the increased design complexities, but also by the fact that the
existing CAD tools do not scale well. This proposal addresses several issues
related to interconnects in submicron technologies at design abstractions higher
than routing. In design flow, placement is a step which to a large extent,
determines the interconnect characteristics. The intension is to integrate into
placement several objectives, which are conventionally solved by point tools on
placed (and often on routed) designs. The goal is to develop an efficient,
multi-objective incremental placer capable of offering well-understood
tradeoffs. Besides incremental corrections at the placement level, methodologies
of circuit optimization integrated into placement flow will be studied and
developed. Timing-driven placement flow will integrate retiming, sequential
budgeting, skew optimization, and simultaneous global routing. It is expected
that the work at the placement level will result in efficient optimization
techniques and will help in formulating requirements for the higher level
tools&lt;br/&gt;to create easier routable designs.&lt;br/&gt;