* 0427071
* ITR-(EVS+ASE+NHS)-(int+dmc+soc)-Improving the Safety and Efficiency of Medical Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Lori Clarke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,742,242.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0427071&lt;br/&gt;Title: Improving the Safety and Efficiency
of Medical Processes&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lori A. Clarke&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative:
0426942 Henneman, Philip&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent insights into the extent of
medical error, coupled with dramatic increases in healthcare costs and a
worsening nursing shortage, provide evidence of the need to develop new
healthcare processes. Working with experts on medical safety and building upon
past accomplishments in process languages and software verification, this
project will develop visual process representations for critical paths of care
that capture the morass of exceptional situations and the inherent multi-tasking
undertaken by extremely busy medical professionals. Appropriate representations
will be developed to guide medical professionals as well as provide the basis
for analysis and evaluation leading to safety and efficiency improvements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach will be evaluated using a number of medical
processes. The evaluation will first involve static analysis approaches that
will look for potential problems and inefficiencies. The resulting improved
processes will then be used to drive a simulation environment involving actual
medical personnel in role-playing situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this research should help reduce healthcare costs, improve medical outcomes,
and support the training of medical personnel. Moreover, the process definitions
and analysis capabilities that arise from the proposed work should be applicable
for reducing errors and improving efficiency in a wide variety of human-computer
application areas.&lt;br/&gt;