* 0427264
* Collaborative Research:  ITR (ASE)+(sim): Virtual Laboratory for Earth and Planetary Materials Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Marlon Pierce, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2009
* USD 166,227.00

This project is collaboration between chemists, materials science researchers,
computer scientists and geophysicists to advance the state-of-the-art in the
numerical modeling of the properties of minerals, primarily at very high
temperatures and pressures. It will create a virtual community laboratory. The
intent is to refine existing first-principles computational mineral physics
numerical simulation codes, to develop new first-principles codes, to develop
novel visual human-computer interface tools, to make these widely available
through a web portal and supporting grid infrastructure, and to use these
numerical tools to investigate the structural, thermodynamic and thermoelastic
properties of minerals in the deep Earth. An additional component looks at some
of the possible properties of ice on Titan, a moon of Saturn. The project is
motivated by a number of grand challenge problems in understanding Earth and
planetary structures including: developing a better understanding of the
variation in thermo-mechanical properties of silicate melts characteristic of
magma; the behavior of hydrogen in near-anhydrous silicates; the properties of
possible iron alloys in the outer core; and the properties of water-ice in
environments such as those that may exist on Titan. Other topics to be addressed
include the properties of solid solutions involving magnesium, iron and aluminum
silicates. Part of the work involves developing improved parallelized methods
for solving sparse linear algebra problems and three-dimensional fast Fourier
transforms. To facilitate collaboration, the project includes research on the
development of a grid-based architecture for the submission, execution and
analysis of numerical chemistry calculations. The innovative aspect of this will
be the development of a message-relaying framework to augment the communication
and collaboration mechanisms currently available. This will involve the
augmentation of the NaradaBrokering system (NB) to provide support for plug-in
web services through a WSRF-compliant API. NB will also be extended to support
the GSI security protocol. Common access to resources will be provided through
web portals. Additional development will include the creation of collaborative
(multi-user) visualization tools, supported by the NB infrastructure,
specifically designed to be useful in browsing a snapshot of a complex
simulation while that simulation is in progress. IT work also includes the
development of task automation and more sophisticated grid schedulers. To test
the collaborative environment, graduate students and post-docs at two non-
partner institutions will be trained in the use of the community modeling
system. To facilitate use of the virtual laboratory and its tools, tutorial
workshops will be held. The project includes international partners from Italy
and the UK, and international workshops on the numerical simulation issues are
planned.