* 0427914
* ITR-(ASE+EVS)- (dmc+sim):   Tracking Environmental Change through the Data Resources of the Bird-monitoring Community
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* John Fitzpatrick, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,691,684.00

Cornell University has been granted an award to address a fundamental problem in
population biology: How can we estimate true abundance of wild bird populations
across North America? They approach this problem from three directions. First,
they will use one of the largest and longest-running resources of environmental
time-series data sets in existence by organizing the distributed resources of
observation-based bird monitoring projects. Second, they will develop novel data
analysis methods targeted for analyzing abundance of wild bird populations
across North America. Their data mining approaches include ensemble learning,
statistical smoothing, multi-task machine learning, and the estimation of change
in abundance over time to quantify variation in spatio-temporal variation in
abundance and to estimate the impact of environmental conditions. Third, they
will make all data and analysis tools available online to allow browsing of
bird-monitoring data. Fast response times are guaranteed through novel methods
for approximate results to data-exploration queries. In addition to advancing
research both in computer science and population biology, they will expose
advances in high performance computing and data analysis to new audiences, from
biologists, conservation agencies, and land planners to school classrooms and
through their website to the literally millions of people who watch and
appreciate wild birds. They will enable online interpretation of the results of
their analyses and computations through web-based data visualizations and active
dissemination and use of this information through collaborative education and
conservation programs.