* 0427179
* ITR-(ASE+NHS)-(int): Concurrent Multi-Function Radios - Integrated System Realization of Wireless Networking for Heterogenous Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* John Choma, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Proposal Number: 0427179&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Concurrent Multi-Function
Radios - Integrated System Realization of Wireless Networking for Heterogeneous
Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This ITR proposal focuses
on the analysis, design, characterization, and implementation of integrated
radio systems that can concurrently operate multiple functions and standards for
information transfer such as data transmission, voice communication, and
navigation systems. These radios offer a higher data rate and robustness in
addition to the added functionality in the performance of wireless systems.
Concurrent multi-function transceivers comprise an integral part in building
more interdependencies among various otherwise disjointed networks; they are
essential in having a coherent, uninterrupted, and reliable flow of information
in a heterogeneous infrastructure at times of crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
treatment includes proposition for various transceiver architectures;
development of novel circuit blocks and subsystems; analysis, formulation, and
characterization of multi-function radio system and building blocks; and
integrated implementations using standard silicon technologies. The nature of
the proposed research topic compels the integration of multiple disciplines such
as devices, circuits, electromagnetic theory, control, computation, and
communication systems into a robust, but flexible, platform in order to achieve
the desired goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposed
research effort lies within its educational aspects and the transfer of
technological results to the technical community and the industry. From the
educational perspective, the PIs plan to recruit diverse doctoral electrical
engineering students with multi-disciplinary skills in order to combine circuit
design with electromagnetic, control, and communication system issues. They will
also recruit outstanding undergraduates destined for graduate study to
facilitate their immersion into this multidiscipl&lt;br/&gt;