* 0427933
* Workshop on the Role of Theory in Biological Physics and Materials; Tempe, AZ; May 17-18, 2004
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Michael Thorpe, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2005
* USD 33,200.00

This award supports a Workshop on the Role of Theory in Biological Physics and
Materials to be held in Tempe, AZ, from May16-18, 2004. The award is jointly
supported by the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences Division of
Materials Research, Physics Division and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities,
and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biosciences
Directorate. The workshop will be comprised of about fifty participants working
in five topical areas. These areas are: biomolecules; cell biology - simple
structures; cell biology - complex structures; systems biology; and education
and infrastructure. Discussion groups have been set up on the workshop homepage
so that all can contribute to the workshop. A report will be produced that will
provide guidance to NSF and the theory community.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports a Workshop on the Role of Theory in Biological Physics and
Materials to be held in Tempe, AZ, from May16-18, 2004. The award is jointly
supported by the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences Division of
Materials Research, Physics Division and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities,
and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biosciences
Directorate. The workshop will be comprised of about fifty participants working
in five topical areas. These areas are: biomolecules; cell biology - simple
structures; cell biology - complex structures; systems biology; and education
and infrastructure. Discussion groups have been set up on the workshop homepage
so that all can contribute to the workshop. A report will be produced that will
provide guidance to NSF and the theory community.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;