* 0427645
* MODERN MIRACLE MEDICAL MACHINES:  Research-Based Curriculum Enhancements for the Pre-Med Physics Course
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Dean Zollman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 09/30/2008
* USD 302,281.00

Modern medical procedures, for both diagnostic and treatment purposes, involve
sophisticated applications of fundamental principles of contemporary physics.
Pre-medical students who are enrolled in an introductory physics course have
heard of many such procedures. Yet, they will seldom encounter these
applications while studying physics. Thus, the opportunity to help these
students make a connection between procedures that they consider relevant and
modern physics is lost. To address these concerns the Modern Medical Miracle
Machines project is completing a two-stage effort involving both research on
student learning and development of educational materials. During the first
stage we are conducting research on the reasoning and models that students use
as they transfer basic physics knowledge to the application of physics in
contemporary medicine. The results of this research are then being used to
develop active engagement teaching-learning materials to help students learn
about the applications of 20th and 21st Century physics to contemporary medical
diagnosis and procedures. The goal of the research component is the enhancement
of the existing research base on how students transfer their knowledge of
physics to other topics. The principal hypothesis of this component of our work
is that students can build models that aid in the understanding of physical
phenomena and applications to tools such as surgical lasers and positron
emission tomography. Building on this research foundation we are creating
modular instructional materials. The goals of the development of instructional
units that introduce applications of contemporary physics to medicine are to
integrate applications of contemporary physics into the pre-med physics course,
emphasize hands-on and minds-on activities, combine written materials,
interactive multimedia and utilize visualization techniques. Each module is
relatively short and is being redeveloped so that teachers can substitute for
existing, traditional materials without a need for a complete revision in the
physics course. An independent evaluator is assessing the effectiveness of the
project's activities. The evaluation focuses on both formative and summative
aspects and will utilize mixed-method approaches (qualitative and quantitative)
that include observation, rubrics, performance assessments, Web-based surveys,
interviews and focus groups. The research and educational materials is fostering
the integration of research and education by both conducting fundamental
research on student learning and by creating resources to bring to the pre-med
physics students information about contemporary research in physics and its
applications to medicine. By testing our materials at a historically black
university (Norfolk State University) and a Hispanic serving institution
(University of Texas at El Paso), we are attempting to assure that the
instructional materials appeal to students who are underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;