* 0427494
* Changing Expectations for Science and Scientists in Natural Resource Decision Making: A Case Study of the Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Brent Steel, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 199,913.00

While most theorists and participants have normative expectations that including
ecological scientists and scientific information will improve the quality of
natural resource decisions, there is little empirical research that clearly
verifies such benefits. Indeed, our previous research on this topic reveals
significant differences among scientists, natural resource managers, leaders of
NGO's, and the attentive public in the Pacific Northwest about what role science
and scientists should play in the policy process. Interestingly, scientists were
the most skeptical about the objectivity of their research, their ability to
provide scientific answers and, to effectively engage in the environmental
policy process (Lach et al, 2003; Steel et al., 2002). However, the extent to
which these patterns hold outside the Pacific Northwest remains in question.
This research extends our previous work funded by the National Science
Foundation to the national group of scientists participating in the Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) program and includes in-depth case studies of
selected LTER sites. Our objectives include: (1) describing the perceptions,
experiences, and expectations of participants regarding the role of ecological
scientists and the use of scientific information in natural resource decision
making; (2) examining and characterizing the impact of site specific
characteristics that may impede or promote the use of science and scientists in
the environmental policy process; (3) characterizing the means, obstacles, and
strategies for effective integration of science in resource management
decisions; and (4) expanding our theoretical and empirical understanding of how
scientists and their scientific knowledge are utilized in resource decision
making and management. The purpose of this study is to replicate our regional
pilot study nationally and collect data from a full range of scientists and
other participants in resource management about their attitudes and expectations
for the changing roles of ecological science and scientists in the environmental
policy process. The research will be conducted in two phases: (1) a national
survey of all current LTER scientists using the protocol developed in the pilot
study and, (2) development of five case studies at LTER sites where there has
been engagement in policy issues by LTER scientists. Data for the case studies
will be collected from three sources: (1) published stories about the site and
documentation by LTER scientists about their policy interactions; (2) focus
group interviews with representatives from each of the four groups (ecological
scientists, resource managers, leaders of interest groups, and the attentive
public); and (3) a mail out survey to a sample of managers, interest group
representatives, and members of the attentive public at each study site. The
proposed research will extend general understanding of the expectations that
participants have about the appropriate roles of ecological science and
scientists in the policy process. We will be able to better describe how
participants view the nature and functions of ecological science and scientists
in public decision processes, how efforts to involve ecological information and
scientists in management processes and public outreach efforts by scientists are
affected by perceptions of the role of science, and how various site factors
(e.g., types of science employed, nature of the issues investigated, and their
context) influence the process. Training will also be provided to interested
scientists about effective engagement in resource decision-making.