* 0427746
* ITR/ASE-SIM:  Multiscale Treatment of Systems with Strong Heterogeneities: Development of Hybrid Atomistic-Coarse-Grained Methodology and Computer Code
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Dennis Diestler, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2009
* USD 715,121.00

Xiao Zeng, Dennis Diestler, and Ruqiang Feng of the University of Nebraska are
supported by the Chemistry Division under the Information Technology Research
program to develop a hybrid atomistic-coarse-grained computational methodology
capable of describing multi-scale processes. Ruben Parra of DePaul University
will also participate as a summer visiting scholar. The prototypical system
consists of two planar solid substrates separated at the interface by a fluid
film. In the vicinity of the interface, atoms can execute irregular, large-
amplitude motions whereas far regions of the substrates are homogenously
strained. The fluid and near regions are treated atomistically while the far
regions are described by continuum mechanics as a coarse-grain mesh.
Thermomechanical properties are computed at ensemble averages, which are
effected by Monte Carlo simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcome
of this research is a powerful computational technique for analyzing the
thermomechanical response of realistic fluid-solid and solid-solid interfacial
systems, in which the coupling of the molecularly heterogeneous interface to the
macroscopic continuum plays as essential role. Although the specific
formulations will be cast with the contexts of thin-film lubrication and
nanoindentation, the approach is applicable to other real-world physical
problems such as crack propagation.