* 0427262
* SGER:  Size Dependent Neuronal Translocation of Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Gunter Oberdorster, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 06/30/2007
* USD 199,997.00

0427262 Oberdorster There is increasing concern about potential adverse effects
of engineered nanoparticles (NP) on the environment and on human health. Because
of their small size of &lt;100 nm in diameter, NP are likely to elicit much
greater biological activities than larger-sized particles. Distribution of NP
from the portal of entry to other organs may induce serious adverse effects. In
particular, the findings of nano-sized particles translocating via sensory
neurons from the respiratory tract (nasal region) to structures of the Central
Nervous System (CNS) raise questions about potential short-term and longterm
health consequences. Are uptake and translocation in sensory nerves controlled
by the size of NP? Does NP chemical composition and surface coating influence
neuronal uptake and translocation? Does the translocation of NP induce signs of
toxicity in target areas of the brain? This proposed research will address these
fundamental questions within the SGER program of NSF. The research is considered
exploratory and high risk because it is a first attempt to systematically
examine NP size-dependent translocation along neuronal pathways, representing a
project of an emerging area of nanotoxicology. Results will likely catalyze
nanotechnological engineering with respect to developing nanostructured
materials based on health effects. &lt;br/&gt;The studies will be performed in
rats using intranasal instillation of NP. The Objective 1a studies (limit of NP
size for translocation) will be performed with gold nanoparticles of 5 different
sizes, 2 nm . 100 nm. This will be followed by Objective 1b studies on the
impact of NP chemistry using different types of NP (nanogold with different
coatings; TiO2; SiO2; Cd-based quantum dots and rods and Pt-Fe core-shell
nanoparticles).&lt;br/&gt;This research necessitates close collaborations
between materials scientists and toxicologists; the proposed studies will,
therefore, be performed in a multidisciplinary team approach involving
scientists in the disciplines of classical toxicology, cellular/molecular
toxicology, and materials science at the University of Rochester. Results of
this exploratory research will form the basis for a subsequent comprehensive
research program to assess biological effects of NP, whether they are adverse or
benign, and to elucidate underlying cellular and molecular
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;