* 0427110
* ITR: ASE: INT: DMC: UltraLight: An Ultrascale Information System for Data Intensive Research
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Alan Whitney, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,970,000.00

This ITR proposal is a request for funding to develop and deploy UltraLight, the
first of a new class of integrated information systems that will support the
decades-long research program at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and other next
generation sciences. Physicists at the LHC face unprecedented challenges: (1)
massive, globally distributed datasets growing to the 100 petabyte level by
2010; (2) petaflops of distributed computing; and (3) collaborative data
analysis by global communities of thousands of scientists. In response to these
challenges, the Grid-based infrastructures developed by the LHC collaborations
provide massive computing and storage resources, but are limited by their
treatment of the network as an external, passive, and largely unmanaged
resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UltraLight will overcome these limitations by
monitoring, managing and optimizing the use of the network in realtime, using a
distributed set of intelligent global services. The UltraLight hybrid packet-
and circuit-switched network infrastructure will employ ultrascale protocols and
dynamic building of optical paths to provide efficient fair-sharing on long
range networks up to the 10 Gbps range. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UltraLight's scope
offers exciting and unusual educational outreach opportunities for students. It
provides direct and significant support for E&amp;O activities including:
application development, experiment participation, infrastructure deployment,
and internships at participating institutions. Existing outreach programs within
the GriPhyN, iVDGL, and e-VLBI Grid projects, as well as Florida International
University's CHEPREO and CIARA programs, will be exploited to attract
undergraduates to physics and math, and to inject new important elements of
information technology into core graduate science domains. &lt;br/&gt;