* 0427430
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  (NHS+ASE) - (dmc+int+soc):  A Wireless Local Positioning System for Mobile Remote Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Zhi Tian, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2009
* USD 402,410.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This ITR proposal focuses on developing wireless systems
capable of positioning&lt;br/&gt;mobiles remotely in complex mobile environments
that are encountered in emerging&lt;br/&gt;applications, such as homeland
security, law enforcement, defense command and control,&lt;br/&gt;multi-robot
coordination, and traffic alert such as vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-
pedestrian&lt;br/&gt;collision avoidance. The proposed wireless local
positioning system (WLPS)&lt;br/&gt;has two main components: 1) a base station
deployed in a mobile (e.g., vehicles, robots or&lt;br/&gt;handhelds) that serves
as a Dynamic Base Station (DBS); and 2) a transponder (TRX)&lt;br/&gt;installed
in wireless mobile handhelds, robots and vehicles that act as Active
Targets.&lt;br/&gt;Such a framework offers attractive features including high
probability-of-detection&lt;br/&gt;performance, low-cost transceiver designs and
infrastructure-less operation.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
activity is to initiate a multi-disciplinary effort to&lt;br/&gt;address the key
challenges in wireless mobile positioning with seamless
network&lt;br/&gt;connectivity. Based on the DBS-TRX structure, various wireless
communications and&lt;br/&gt;networking technologies will be exploited to
establish a paradigm of contiguous,&lt;br/&gt;accurate and mobility-aware
positioning with non line-of-sight coverage. In addition, a&lt;br/&gt;laboratory
will be set up to provide a cost-effective tool to test and evaluate
wireless&lt;br/&gt;positioning schemes in simulated practical environments, as
well as to assess the impacts&lt;br/&gt;of WLPS on location-critical tasks such
as wireless sensor network cooperation and&lt;br/&gt;routing.&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the proposed activity benefit location-dependent applications
that&lt;br/&gt;are critical to human welfare but hindered by the restrictive
operation conditions of&lt;br/&gt;current positioning systems. WLPS has multiple
potential applications that would benefit&lt;br/&gt;society, ranging from
improved localization technology for national and homeland&lt;br/&gt;security
(NHS) to economic prosperity (ASE) with better highway safety for both
drivers&lt;br/&gt;and pedestrians. The laboratory developed will serve as an
educational test bed for&lt;br/&gt;engineering students and researchers. With
its broad range of applications, its rich&lt;br/&gt;technical components and
multi-disciplinary nature, the proposed WLPS research will&lt;br/&gt;help
promote the integration of research with education and outreach activities at
all&lt;br/&gt;levels.