* 0427093
* GeoSystems:  Probing Earth's Deep-Time Climate and Linked Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Christopher Maples, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 05/31/2006
* USD 77,973.00

GEOSYSTEMS: &lt;br/&gt;PROBING EARTH'S DEEP-TIME CLIMATE &amp; LINKED
SYSTEMS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gerilyn Soreghan, University of
Oklahoma&lt;br/&gt;Christopher Maples, Desert Research Institute&lt;br/&gt;EAR-
0427093&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GeoSystems is a
developing community-based initiative that focuses on the importance of the
deep-time perspective for understanding the complexities of Earth's atmosphere,
hydrosphere, biosphere and surficial lithosphere using climate as the focus.
Earth's climate operates on a continuum of temporal, spatial and parametric
scales, as a fundamental mediator of change. The deep-time geologic record
preserves numerous proxies of past climate states and transitions, many of which
are far more extreme than those archived in instrumental, historical, or
Quaternary records. Understanding the ranges, rates, and processes responsible
for these extremes in global systems is critical for predicting potential
impacts of such changes. Processes such as extinction and evolution of species,
orogenic and magmatic events, sea-level change, and the like operate over a
variety of time scales and are complexly entwined with climatic trends, many of
which also operate over a variety of time scales and must be viewed within the
context of the deep-time perspective. The proposed GeoSystems initiative will be
able to progress only through data enhancements and modeling collaborations
among earth, ocean, and atmospheric-modeling researchers, focusing on the deep-
time record to achieve a holistic understanding of Earth's climate and related
systems. At this workshop, participants from various disciplines (e.g.,
sedimentology/stratigraphy, inorganic and organic geochemistry, paleontology,
climate modeling, geomorphology, tectonics, marine geology, geochronology) will
convene to discuss and formulate a vision and an initial science plan to enable
a quantum leap in the pursuit of GeoSystems research and education. This
workshop will contribute to informed decision-making on deep-time climate and
related systems research and thus raise collective awareness and understanding
of Earth System behavior as viewed from the deep-time climate
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;