* 0427418
* Sensors: LiMo3Se3 Nanowires as Programmable Chemical Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Frank Osterloh, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 02/28/2009
* USD 361,926.00

Abstract CTS-0427418 F. Osterloh, U of Cal Davis

Sensors: LiMo3Se3 Nanowires as Programmable Chemical Sensors

A versatile electrochemical sensor for the rapid and selective detection of
chemical warfare agents, glucose, explosives and for other molecules in the gas
and liquid phases is proposed. The sensor is based on arrays of nanometer thick
films of metallic LiMo3Se3 nanowires that are dispersed between two or several
gold electrodes. Upon exposure to solvent vapors the nanowires undergo large
(240%) and reversible changes of their conductivity. The electronic response
depends on the nature of the solvent and on the concentration, and it occurs
within seconds of the exposure. The selectivity of the nanowires can be
controlled by covalently linking receptors to the selenide surface of the
nanowires. Upon attachment of propionic acid (a proton receptor) the nanowire
film becomes a detection element for protons in aqueous solution. A similar pH
sensor also forms by linking 10 nm large gold nanoparticles to the wires, and by
subsequently attaching 3-mercaptopropionic acid to the gold nanoparticles. In
order to use the LiMo3Se3 nanowires for sensors that will be faster, smaller,
more sensitive and versatile and less expensive than sensors based on
conventional materials, it is planned to systematically study the structure,
physical and electrical properties of LiMo3Se3 nanowires under variable
conditions. The conductivity response of the nanowires to molecules or variable
charge, polarity and coordinating power will be measured using patterned indium
tin oxide microelectrode arrays that allow simultaneous interrogation of up to
twenty different nanowire films. The number of molecules/ions that interact with
the nanowires under given conditions will be determined with quartz crystal
microbalance measurements. Systematic covalent modifications of the nanowires
with small molecules and with oligopeptides will be conducted to introduce
receptors for the selective detection of chemical warfare agents, for glucose
and for explosives. Scanning tunneling measurements on modified nanowires will
probe changes of the electronic structures that occur as a result of these
modifications and that are due to analyte interactions. Accompanying electronic
structure and molecular dynamic calculations will simulate the observed
phenomena, and develop models to rationalize the effects. In being able to
detect glucose, explosives, and chemical warfare agents, the nanowire based
sensors that will be fabricated in this project will directly contribute to
health care and national security. In establishing a molecular level
understanding of the physical and chemical aspects of molecule-nanowire
interactions this project will make also a general impact on the design and
understanding of nanowire sensors. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
involved in all aspects of the project. They will prepare the materials and
characterize them with instruments that they operate independently, and they
will present their results at conferences. Collaborations with physical and
theoretical chemists and with a physicist will strengthen the communication
across disciplines. Results from the project will be incorporated into exhibits
at a local science museum and into chemistry demo shows on campus and at local
high schools. This K-12 outreach initiative will involve the UC Davis chemistry
club, an organization of 20 undergraduate students with different majors which
is overseen by the PI. During an open door day undergraduate students will be
given the opportunity to visit the lab and to make contact with the respective
PIs. An graduate course on "Inorganic Colloids" will be offered as an
introduction to the chemistry and physics of colloidal particles and their uses
for engineering applications, and in particularly to sensor technology.