* 0427385
* ITR - (ASE+ECS) - (dmc+soc):  A Framework for Heterogenious Quality-of-Service  Guarantees in Wireless Networks:  A Communication-theoretic Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Achilleas Anastasopoulos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

In wireless communication systems, users with heterogeneous information content
such as data, voice, and multimedia constrain the network by having different
reliability requirements. In this project a framework which can provide
heterogeneous reliability guarantees for the users is considered.&lt;br/&gt;This
adds a completely new dimension to the trade-off of performance in a wireless
network, and is unique to multiterminal communication systems. It is as if the
network has some amount of reliability that can be allocated among the users.
This is a very general concept and can be applied in any
multiterminal&lt;br/&gt;communication problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is
accomplished by defining individual probabilities of errors for the users in the
network. Hence for a fixed vector of rates of the users, a system can provide a
trade-off of reliabilities among the users. &lt;br/&gt;This set of achievable
reliabilities is referred to as the multiuser reliability profile of a multiuser
network. This profile is a function of the vector of transmission rates inside
the capacity region.&lt;br/&gt;For a wireless system employing multiple
antennas, this profile is referred to as multiuser diversity
gain&lt;br/&gt;profile. Further, these guarantees are directly manifested in the
physical layer and can be translated into QoS guarantees in the higher layers in
the network architecture. This is a marked shift from conventional approaches
that relegate this task to the higher network layers. Hence in a heterogeneous
wireless networks,&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous QoS guarantees can be more
efficiently realized using the techniques considered in this project. This
project is expected to have a significant impact on the design of the next
generation of wireless networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;