* 0427464
* ITR:    Collaborative Research - ASE - (sim+dmc):    Image-based Biophysical Modeling: Scalable Registration and Inversion Algorithms and Distributed Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* David Keyes, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2009
* USD 179,921.00

Abstract for Collaboration 0427985, 0427464, 0427094,0427912,0427695

A multidisciplinary team of researchers from Argonne National Laboratory,
Carnegie Mellon University, Columbia University, University of Chicago, Emory
University, and University of Pennsylvania, with collaborators from the
Universities of Graz and Lubek, will initiate a long term research project on
image-driven, inversion-based biophysical modeling. The team includes expertise
in numerical algorithms and scientific computing, fluid and solid biomechanics,
PDE optimization, inverse problems, medical image analysis and processing, and
distributed and grid computing necessary to tackle this class of problems.

This project aims to create a framework for assimilating multimodal dynamic
medical image data to produce highly-resolved, physically-realistic, patient-
specific biomechanics models. While the computational and algorithmic aspects of
the project are widely applicable, the target application will be the
construction of patient-specific cardiac biomechanics models from 4D image
datasets of heart motion. Such models are useful for medical diagnosis and
surgical planning. This places a premium on quick turnaround of the
computations, which mean they must be fast, scalable, and capable of exploiting
grid-based computing.

Research will focus on three key areas that undergird the project's overall
goals: registration, inversion, and distributed computing. The registration
research component will create multilevel algorithms to extract cardiac
deformation histories from time-varying medical image datasets via the solution
of sequences of 3D image registration problems. The inversion research component
will develop multilevel algorithms that use these deformation field histories as
virtual observations to solve inverse problems for cardiac biomechanical
parameters. The distributed computing research component will create tools for
performance prediction and resource scheduling that support simulations across
distributed computational resources.

Dovetailing with the research components, the project will undertake an
educational program designed to communicate the fruits of its work and of the
wider benefits of the integration of the biomedical sciences, computing
sciences, and computational sciences, to a more general audience of students,
disciplinary researchers, and the lay public. The professional activities of the
team members in the inversion, image registration, grid computing, and
computational science communities will be parlayed to organize workshops and
international meetings, edit volumes, teach summer schools, develop university
and short courses, and engage in outreach activities---as they have done in the
past---but with greater emphasis on the field of computational biomedicine. The
proposed image-based cardiac biomechanics modeling application will provide an
excellent opportunity to demonstrate the benefits to health and welfare that
advances in optimization-based registration and inversion algorithms and Grid
computing can provide.