* 0427376
* ITR: Collaborative Research:[ASE]-[SIM]: Dissociative Recombination of Astrophysically Important Polyatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Chris Greene, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2009
* USD 485,064.00

The project aims to extend the ability of theory to predict quantitative rates
for the destruction of polyatomic molecules by electron collision, through the
process called dissociative recombination. The goal of this research is to carry
out detailed quantum mechanical calculations of the dissociative recombination
process that occurs when an electron collides with a polyatomic molecular ion.
In almost all studies of this process to date, theoretical descriptions have
been forced to resort to models of restricted dimensionality, out of
computational necessity. Very recent studies have demonstrated, that the full 3D
vibrational motion of a triatomic target molecule can be crucially important in
some cases. Specifically, in the scattering of an electron from an H3+ ion, the
vibrational angular momentum couples to an incident electron through the Jahn-
Teller interaction, resulting in recombination rates orders of magnitude higher
than a limited dimensionality model predicts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present
proposal plans to capitalize on a recent theoretical breakthrough, to describe
the scattering of a low energy electron from polyatomic molecules, including all
degrees of freedom quantum mechanically through a divide-and-conquer
computational strategy. If this project is successful, the ability to
theoretically describe, and to qualitatively understand, the mechanisms of
interacting electron-polyatomic systems will be advanced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Note that the two main arms of this work are: (i) a
concerted study of the ab initio quantum chemistry issues, at the level of
electronic structure theory in the electron continuum, both with and without
electronic resonances present; and (ii) a detailed investigation of the coupled
electron and nuclear motions, using as tools (depending on the system) either
standard resonance theory when it is adequate, or rovibrational frame
transformation and multichannel quantum defect techniques when the most
comprehensive treatment is desired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Divisions of Physics and Chemistry under the ITR Program.