* 0427689
* Collaborative Research: ITR-(ASE)-(dmc): Overcoming Fractionation Errors in Cancer Treatment Planning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Michael Ferris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2009
* USD 625,001.00

Proposal: DMS-0427689&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael C. Ferris&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Wisconsin-Madison&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR-(ASE)-(dmc): Overcoming
Fractionation Errors in Cancer Treatment
Planning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
study the use of optimization techniques in designing radiation treatment plans
for cancer patients. In external-beam radiotherapy, beams of radiation are aimed
into the patient's body from different angles. The treatment planning process
chooses the shapes, intensities, and angles of the beams such that the cancerous
tumor receives a high dose of radiation, while critical organs and normal tissue
adjacent to the tumor are spared, to the extent possible. Radiation is not
delivered in a single dose, but rather in fractionated daily doses over a period
of up to 9 weeks. The latest generation of radiation devices allows the delivery
of highly optimized and accurate treatment plans. This project uses the power of
distributed computing and of advances in modeling and optimization to realize
the full potential of these devices. Advances are being made on two major
fronts. First, the quality of the initial treatment plan is improved by using
stochastic and nonlinear optimization methodology to construct formulations of
the treatment planning problem that take uncertainty explicitly into account.
Second, imaging data gathered at each treatment session is used to perform
adaptive radiotherapy, in which the treatment plan is adjusted between sessions
to compensate for organ movement, tumor shrinkage, and other fractionation
errors that occurred in previous treatment sessions. Handling of huge data sets
and large quantities of compute cycles is needed to perform the required
calculations in real time---in part, while the patient is lying on the couch of
the treatment device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forty percent of all cancer patients
receive radiation therapy as a key part of their treatment regimen, and devices
that deliver radiation treatments are becoming progressively more sophisticated
and powerful. This collaboration between mathematicians, computer scientists,
and medical physicists is improving the effectiveness of the treatment planning
process by choosing the shapes and intensities of the radiation beams used
during treatments to target the cancerous regions more accurately and avoid
radiation damage to healthy tissues. The optimization techniques being developed
and implemented in the project also allow for day-to-day adjustment of the
treatment plan, to account for changes in the internal organs and patient
movement during treatment. The key feature of the project is its use of advanced
computing platforms in conjunction with optimization methods to improve the
effectiveness of a vitally important medical procedure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;