* 0427029
* ITR-(ASE)-(int): Development of Efficient Real-Time Multi-mode Data Assimilation and Analysis Techniques for the Arecibo and Related Geophysical Radar Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* John Doherty, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,080,647.00

This project will develop digital signal conversion and processing techniques
for the signal from the Arecibo Observatory radar and astronomy systems. Some of
the algorithms proposed for real-time processing will be adapted from existing
post-processing algorithms while some will be de novo. The extension of the
current multi-channel digital receiver prototype will permit much more flexible
approaches to signal processing and the development of new signal processing
algorithms will advance the study of meteors, ionospheric disturbances and
pulsars. The techniques being developed eill permit better separation of
incoherently and coherently scattered radar returns and will be used to examine
short-period waves and instabilities in the ionosphere, meteors, and objects
orbiting around the sun. Coherent returns will be used to determine the orbits
of meteors and other objects in heliocentric orbits, and to distinguish meteors
of extra-solar origin. Automatic meteor detection algorithms will be extended to
four-channel interferometry to provide more accurate meteor trajectories than
can be determined using the main beam alone and better identification of the
full spectrum of meteor events. To increase the utility of the observatory, a
pulsar search algorithm will be developed that can be used when the pulsed radar
is operating. This will analyze the signals received in the intervals between
pulse transmissions. The project will take advantage of the higher bandwidth of
modern internet connections and develop a data analysis system in which the work
is distributed between Arecibo Observatory, Pennsylvania State University and
the State University of New York at Geneseo.