* 0427570
* Use of Research to Improve the Quality of Science Education in Urban High Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Kenneth Tobin, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/2010
* USD 304,963.00

The project is undertaking research in urban high schools in New York City,
involving students from circumstances of economic challenge and early career
science teachers, graduates from an alternative certification program designed
for career changers and graduates in science and related fields. Through the use
of participatory forms of research, including design experiments, the project is
identifying promising practices that are adopted in successful science classes
and the extent to which curricula are transformed by forms of research designed
to be catalytic. A network of early career urban science teachers are
collaborating through an interactive website, participating in research in their
own classrooms, and attending colloquia in which science at the frontiers and
developments in science education are foci. Students from the participating
teachers' classes also are selected to comprise a network of urban youth who
learn how to do research on the teaching and learning of science and participate
in a colloquium series including topics on the frontiers of science. A network
of college science teachers and science teacher educators also is being created
with the goal of them learning about inquiry-oriented approaches to teaching and
learning college science and undertaking research in their college science
classes. The goal is to improve the quality of teaching and learning college
science through research, in the contexts of participating in colloquia,
interacting electronically and undertaking design experiments. The project is
providing a means to coordinate science teacher education within CUNY and change
the manner in which science is taught, including the infusion of inquiry. The
research done in this project involves teachers (college science instructors and
early career urban science teachers), students, and outsiders in multi-method
research, using ethnography, design experiments and surveys. Discussions of what
happened in class, especially pertaining to the roles of teachers and students,
set a context for curriculum reform, making changes based on evidence identified
by participants. We are endeavoring to identify and resolve contradictions and
build collective responsibility for ensuring that changes are enacted as
planned. A primary goal is to mentor new science educators and formal efforts
are being made to create an infrastructure to support the scholarly growth of
promising non-tenured faculty so that they remain involved in urban science
education. What is learned from this project has the potential to change
programs for the education of science teacher candidates, approaches to the
professional development of science teachers, and policy relating to the
structures needed to sustain new teachers in urban high schools. The project
also has the potential to identify fresh approaches to improving the quality of
college science teaching, especially by infusing inquiry into the teaching of
science and assisting college instructors to undertake research in their own
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;