* 0427904
* Cross-college Collaboration of Engineering with Languages, Education, and Design
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2009
* David Ollis, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 01/31/2009
* USD 304,999.00

Eight different courses involving seven non-engineering faculty, an education
consultant, and the engineering Principal Investigator are being taught based on
the READ-USE-ASSEMBLE-CALCULATE-TEACH process related to relevant technological
devices. The student-driven sequence incorporates student-faculty contact,
cooperation among students, and active learning, gives prompt feedback,
emphasizes time-on-task, communicates high expectations, and respects diverse
talents and ways of learning. By matching appropriate devices to non-engineering
courses with appreciable technical content, cross-college faculty collaborations
are being used for co-teaching of or supplementation to existing courses in the
College of Humanities and Social Sciences (CHASS), the College of Education
(CED), and the College of Design (COD). The efficacy of this cross college
collaboration is being demonstrated by serving a diversity of students including
(i) engineering and science students in foreign language courses, (ii) pre-
service technology education students seeking teaching degrees, (iii) in-
service, practicing teachers of technology education in grades 6-12, and (iv)
industrial design majors.

Evaluation of these collaborative instruction efforts includes student
questionnaires, independent laboratory observers, and interviews of
participating faculty and a sample of students. Dissemination is being
accomplished through presentations and publications in professional society
meetings of language instructors, technology education teachers, industrial
design professionals, and engineers. The final project product will be a compact
disc (CD) containing all lab device chapters, as well as all publications and
evaluations for this effort. The product CD distribution is being distributed to
US engineering deans and engineering faculty involved in undergraduate
laboratory instruction.