* 0427196
* ITR:    (ASE+NHS) - (int+dmc):    Constraint-based Knowledge Systems for Grids, Digital Libraries, and Persistent Archives
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Michael Wan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2008
* USD 877,399.00

The management of massive amounts of data, whether in scientific collections,
education curricula repositories, or persistent archives, is an essential part
of the conduct of science and education. Each type of data management system
requires the application of multiple constraints: data sharing (sociological
controls on group interactions, access controls), data display (transformative
migrations of content, group specific view mechanisms), data federation
(consistency management) and data control (data placement, data
synchronization). The constraints may be organized in a hierarchy as global
constraints, rule-based object constraints, and process based transformative
constraints. This project investigates the specification of constraint
granularity, the implementation of constraint languages, and the development of
data management systems that support dynamic constraint specification and
application. The software is based on the Storage Resource Broker data grid
technology that supports federation of digital libraries and scientific
collections across academic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the project will be the development of adaptive middleware
technologies for distributed data management. Examples include the addition of
services to grid environments that preserve consistent metadata management, the
addition of services to digital library systems that validate new metadata
attributes for new collections, and the addition of services to preservation
environments that manage authenticity of archived material. Our goal is to
create generic distributed data management infrastructure that can be used at
the institution level, within national scale projects such as NSF Information
Technology Research efforts, and within international academic collaborations
such as the Worldwide Universities Network.&lt;br/&gt;