* 0427638
* ITR-(ASE)-(sim): Ab Initio Modeling of Self-Assembled Pattern Growth in Heteroepitaxial Alloy Films with Long-Range Elastic interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Vidvuds Ozolins, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2008
* USD 255,000.00

This award was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of Materials
Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation NSF-04-012.
Research activities covered by this award fall under the National Priority Area,
"Advances in Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus Area, "Innovation
in Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." This award supports
computational research and education to develop simulation algorithms with an
aim to study pattern formation in alloy films that could be used for directed
self-assembly of nanostructures. Spontaneous formation of two-dimensional (2D)
nanoscale patterns (stripes and disks) has been observed in several surface
alloy films composed of immiscible species. These systems exhibit regular
features on length scales that are currently inaccessible to even the most
advanced lithographic techniques, showing promise as masks for use in directed
self-assembly of nanoscale devices. Using computer simulations, the PI will
study the formation of regular arrays of stripes and disks in growing ultrathin
alloy films. The PI's research aims to make significant scientific advances in
the following key directions: 1. Identification of new alloy/substrate systems
with strong energetic tendencies to form long-period ordered patterns, which
could be used as masks for directed self-assembly. 2. Develop models of
epitaxial growth of ultrathin films that can predict optimal parameters for
achieving robust and highly regular patterning. 3. Develop efficient
computational algorithms for simulating surface systems with long-range elastic
interactions. The PI will use a range of computational research tools spanning
ab initio electronic structure calculations to lattice-based Kinetic Monte Carlo
(KMC) simulations with long-ranged elastic interactions. A goal is to construct
quantitative models of the thermodynamics and kinetics of pattern formation in
ultrathin heteroepitaxial surface alloy films. Thermodynamic models will be used
to systematically search for alloy systems that exhibit energetic tendencies to
form patterns with nanometer-scale periodicities. Besides pure theoretical
interest, there is a strong practical need to identify such systems as there are
only a few known cases of pattern-forming surface alloys that can form large-
scale defect-free structures required for directed self-assembly. Kinetic growth
simulations may help us to control the number of structural defects during the
growth stage. These models will be used to predict optimum experimental
conditions such as the composition, temperature, and deposition rate. Finally,
long-range elastic strain effects will be treated by accurate coarse-graining
methods familiar from renormalization group theory. Theoretical research will be
performed in collaboration with experimental studies of metallic surface alloys
carried out at Sandia National Labs. Education is a broader impact of this
award. It includes involving undergraduate and graduate students in
computational projects on the use of simulation in materials research and
developing an HTML- and Perl-based Web interface for research codes and use them
in teaching thermodynamics and kinetics of phase transformations and surface
growth. Perl scripts will be used to collect input parameters from a Web form,
launch the simulation on a remote LINUX server, and display the results on
dynamically generated Web pages. This approach represents a promising future
platform for integrating existing research codes with educational activities.
The acquired experience and Web scripts will be freely shared with the
community. %%% This award was made on a proposal submitted to the Division of
Materials Research under the Information Technology Research solicitation
NSF-04-012. Research activities covered by this award fall under the National
Priority Area, "Advances in Science and Engineering," and the Technical Focus
Area, "Innovation in Computational Modeling or Simulation in Research." This
award supports computational research and education to develop simulation
algorithms with an aim to study pattern formation in alloy films that could be
used as a template to assemble materials and nanostructures on the nanoscale.
Spontaneous formation of two-dimensional (2D) nanoscale patterns (stripes and
disks) has been observed in several surface alloy films composed of immiscible
species. These systems exhibit regular features on length scales that are
currently inaccessible to even the most advanced lithographic techniques,
showing promise as masks for use in directed self-assembly of nanoscale devices.
Using computer simulations, the PI will study the formation of regular arrays of
stripes and disks in growing ultrathin alloy films. Besides pure theoretical
interest, there is a strong practical need to identify such systems as there are
only a few known cases of pattern-forming surface alloys that can form large-
scale defect-free structures required for directed self-assembly. Kinetic growth
simulations may also help us to control the number of structural defects during
the growth of materials and nanosctructures. Structural defects affect the
properties of materials and nanstructures. Theoretical research will be
performed in collaboration with experimental studies of metallic surface alloys
carried out at Sandia National Labs. Education is a broader impact of this
award. It includes involving undergraduate and graduate students in
computational projects on the use of simulation in materials research and making
research codes more "user friendly" and using them in teaching thermodynamics
and kinetics of phase transformations and surface growth. The acquired
experience and Web scripts will be freely shared with the community. ***



