* 0427005
* "Collaborative Research"ITR-(ASE+EVS)-dmv+sim):Data Driven Simulation of the Subsurface: Optimization and Uncertainty Estimation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Mrinal Sen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2008
* USD 694,000.00

Intellectual Merit. Remote sensing is employed in science and engineering
problems to infer material properties when these properties can not be directly
sampled. To better understand and manage our environment for safety and economic
reasons, much progress has been made in imaging the subsurface and estimating
physical properties based on remote sensing data. Repeated observations over
targets for environmental remediation and reservoir production has become a
recognized diagnostic tool for assisting management decisions. In addition,
improved optimization techniques capable of responding to large, multi-
resolution, disparate, dynamic datasets in a fault tolerant and adaptive fashion
are a fundamental requirement for effectively estimating and minimizing the
uncertainty in any data driven application. The integrated and e_ective
treatment of these issues motivates the present project. The assembled research
team proposes to advance the mathematical, engineering and computational
foundations necessary to enhance our understanding and extend the predictive
capabilities of the physical processes that govern the subsurface phenomena at
multiple temporal and spatial scales. Target applications include management of
aquifers for water resources, optimizing oil and gas production, and monitoring
environmental risks e.g., at waste containment sites or arising from natural
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the project include:
(1) development of the next generation of accurate, multi-scale, coupled
chemical, uid, geomechanical, and geophysical simulators for modeling
instrumented subsurface environments; (2) large scale optimization techniques
(based on a hybridization of global and local approaches) to drive reliable
decision-making and a dynamic symbiotic feedback between computation and data;
(3) deployment of an autonomic Grid middleware for providing the adequate
processing substrate and data management services for (1) and (2). The
realization of the above contributions will result in the Data Driven Subsurface
Simulation Framework (DDSSF).&lt;br/&gt;