* 0427113
* ITR:    (ASE)-(INT,DMC)- Rapid-Response Adaptive Computing Environment (RACE) for LHC Physics Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Sridhara Dasu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 08/31/2009
* USD 750,000.00

The rapid information flow from the experiments being constructed at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) in the European Laboratory for High Energy Physics (CERN),
Geneva presents a major computational challenge. In this ITR proposal, the UW-
Madison team proposes to design and build a prototype Rapid-Response Adaptive
Computing Environment (RACE) that integrates their local resources with the
globally distributed computing grid, to cater to mission-critical, time-bound
needs of the CMS experiment. These RACEs will have resource management features
as well as knowledge management features. The UW team proposes to develop RACE
technology by focusing on CMS trigger system data validation and data forensics
software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work can empower individual physicists and
small groups enabling efficient, reliable, tractable and timely extraction of
LHC physics. In addition, they propose to help adapt the RACE set-up to the
needs of the UW Medical Physics researchers who expect to exploit commodity
computers for providing burst computing for their online radiation therapy
applications. The team anticipates that the software infrastructure that they
develop for knowledge management can be applied to other domains by developing
appropriate ontologies and descriptions using the same overall principles. The
graduate research assistants working on this project will benefit from applying
their research ideas to a concrete real-world application. The cross-
fertilization of ideas from their interdisciplinary team should enhance their
ability to come up with innovative ideas when they move on to work in the
industry. &lt;br/&gt;