* 0427374
* ITR:    (ASE)-(sim+dmc+int):    Computational Simulation, Modeling, and Visualization for Understanding Unsteady Bioflows
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Sharon Swartz, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2009
* USD 662,000.00

This project is to discover new distributed simulation, visualization, and
analysis tools for interacting with and understanding multi-valued volumes of
scientific data and the biological phenomena they measure. The tools will be
developed and evaluated in close collaboration with biologists studying three
independent flow-related problems: coronary artery lesion and thrombus
formation, the mechanisms and evolution of bat flight, and the mechanism and
evolution of fish propulsion and maneuvering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
includes advancing basic scientific understanding in the three biological
application areas. In addition, the experimental methodology of acquiring 3D
motion and flow data using 3D Digital Particle Image Velocimetry (DPIV) and
high-speed video will advance the state of the art for studying flow
interactions with other biological and man-made systems and may be used for
prediction, risk-assessment and decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
simulation and modeling work to address the biological problems will create new
simulation methods for coupling unsteady flow and structure calculations, new
methods for incorporating uncertainty into unsteady simulation results, new
methods for combining unsteady experimental and simulation data to facilitate
comparisons between them, and new methods for filling in gaps in unsteady
experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;