* 0428196
* SST: Sensor-based Real-time Feedback Control Evacuation Stategies for Buildings in Emergencies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Pushkin Kachroo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2009
* USD 200,009.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0428196&lt;br/&gt;Mahendra Singh&lt;br/&gt;Virginia
Tech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a sensor-based real-time
feedback control scheme for time-optimal and safe evacuation of people form
large complexes with several exits, entrances, elevators, and stairs in an
emergency scenario such as a major conflagration. The control scheme will
interpret, use, and synthesize the data collected from sensors to formulate a
feedback control command to be delivered through speakers, TV monitors or
lighted matrix displays installed at strategic locations to channel an organized
flow of entrapped people to safe locations in shortest time. The feedback
control system will employ temperature sensors, smoke sensors, video cameras,
and other people counting devices. It will assimilate the sensor data with the
physical characteristics of the building considering the number of people
trapped and the availability and capacities of various egress locations. This
evacuation system can also be used for crises management of crowds in other
chemically or biologically initiated emergencies, if appropriate sensor data are
collected and effective control actuation delivery mechanisms are used. Software
with animation features will be developed to visually demonstrate on computer
screens the effectiveness of the proposed scheme under simulated fire emergency
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under Sensors
Initiative NSF 04-522.&lt;br/&gt;