* 0428289
* SIRG: Photonic Microcantilever Arrays for Chemical and Biological Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2005,02/28/2006
* Joseph Ng, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2006
* USD 1,575,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0428289&lt;br/&gt;Nordin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microcantile
vers that are properly functionalized with chemo- or bioselective coatings have
been shown to be extremely sensitive to chemical and biological analytes in both
vapor and liquid media. Microcantilevers therefore exhibit great promise as
molecular and atomic recognition sensors for an extremely diverse set of
applications including environmental monitoring, industrial process control,
biological research, and homeland defense. Microcantilever operation is
characterized by chemical reaction or adsorption of molecular species at the
microcantilever surface which results in a change in the microcantelever's
deflection and in properties such as its resonance frequency. While these
induced changes can be very small (sub-nanometer cantilever deflection, for
example), they are readily measurable with a laser beam reflection technique
developed for atomic force microscope (AFM) cantilever
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the full promise of
microcantilever sensor technology, arrays of individually functionalized
microcantilevers are required to enable the simultaneous detection of multiple
target molecules while rejecting interference from other chemical species in the
environment as well as stochastic noise such as thermal fluctuations. A critical
problem is that current cantilever measurement methods do not lend themselves to
practical implementation for large numbers of cantilevers that are suitable for
high sensitivity operation in both vapor and liquid ambients. This proposal
focuses on a solution to this problem based on waveguide cantilevers combined
with a receiver waveguide splitter structure that enables differential detection
of cantilever deflection. Combining these elements with recently invented
compact waveguide components and with grating couplers to enable fiber coupling
to off-chip detectors and an off-chip optical source permits the realization of
a small microcantilever-based sensor with interchangeable or disposable
microcantilever array chips. Compatibility of the waveguide structures with
batch microfabrication techniques suggests that such arrays can be produced very
inexpensively. Initial analysis indicates that the proposed waveguide cantilever
array sensor appears to offer an attractive path for the realization of
practical, highly functional sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of
Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work concentrates on the
development of a general photonic microcantilever array-based sensor platform
that relies on a compact integrated optical readout mechanism to realize
scalable, small area microcantilever arrays. A successful research and
development effort will lay the foundation for microcantilever arrays to become
a common and easy to use high sensitivity sensor for many application areas. The
elements of waveguide microcantilever sensors to be explored in the proposed
work build directly on the experience and expertise of the four senior
personnel, which includes photonic device design and fabrication, chemistry and
materials science, biology, and industry experience in cantilever process
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
evidenced by its status as an EPSCoR state, Alabama has been historically viewed
as less than a full participant in the national science and engineering
enterprise. The proposed work will help North Alabama become a center of
microcantilever sensor research and development. Moreover, the proposal contains
funding to support two undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to
come to UAH and work during each summer in UAH's recently expanded 8,000 square
foot Nano/Microfabrication Facility (NMF). As described in the proposal,
outreach to students in predominantly minority local high schools is also
planned, as well as activities for elementary school students to stimulate their
interest in science and engineering. These activities are intended to foster
interaction with local elementary and high school programs. Graduate student
mentoring will also be a key aspect of the proposed work. In addition, as
described in the proposal, partnership with Oak Ridge National Laboratory will
be significantly expanded.&lt;br/&gt;