* 0428040
* SST-Sensor Network Design For A Secure National Electric Energy Infrastructure
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Vijay Vittal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2009
* USD 406,000.00

The events of September 11, 2001, have highlighted the impact of malicious
attacks on critical national&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure components. This has
resulted in an increased appreciation for improving the physical security
of&lt;br/&gt;critical electric power system components like substations,
transmission lines, and generators. These observations&lt;br/&gt;together with
the major North East blackout of August 14 th , 2003 highlight the importance of
the electric grid as an&lt;br/&gt;energy transport medium and its critical
importance to the nation's economy and global competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;The
electric power grid is a highly automated network. A variety of information
networks are interconnected to the&lt;br/&gt;electric grid for the purpose of
sensing, monitoring, and control. Any disturbance or dislocation in the
electric&lt;br/&gt;network is sensed primarily by observing the electrical
behavior of the power system via the observations and&lt;br/&gt;analysis done
using the data obtained using measurements of electrical quantities. The sensor
technology that&lt;br/&gt;aids the deployment of distributed sensing systems has
improved vastly in the recent past. However, even though,&lt;br/&gt;standards do
exist for physical security of substations, very few modern sensing mechanisms
have been utilized to&lt;br/&gt;meet the physical security
standards.&lt;br/&gt;With this scenario in mind we will undertake the following
research in the sensing and information processing of the&lt;br/&gt;electric
grid: (1) examine new sensors to sense physical quantities in power systems; (2)
design a wireless sensor&lt;br/&gt;information network to transmit these
measurements to the central control center; (3) develop algorithms for
sensor&lt;br/&gt;placement, data aggregation, fault diagnosis, and load
balancing for the sensor information network; and (4) fuse
the&lt;br/&gt;physical sensor data with conventional electrical sensor data to
devise more effective control strategies following&lt;br/&gt;large disturbances.
We will demonstrate the developed techniques and validate them on a test bed
that we have&lt;br/&gt;created to emulate a large power system using an operator
training simulator. The key elements of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;approach consist
of the following steps:&lt;br/&gt;1. Design structure of the wireless sensor
information network that maintains connectivity under a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;contingency scenarios in two modes, a) Partial mode that helps in
detection of failures, and b) Full mode which&lt;br/&gt;helps in diagnosis of
the problem.&lt;br/&gt;2. The sensor network in Partial Mode will be used to
zero in on portions of the power grid where the system&lt;br/&gt;would like to
get physical sensor information to fuse with existing electrical sensors to
detect disturbance, and&lt;br/&gt;or catastrophic failures based on: a) On-line
risk based engine, b) Unusual or abnormal measurements from&lt;br/&gt;certain
sensors like temperature, motion, or chemical sensors, or c) Weather and unusual
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;3. This leads to a decision on transferring to Full Mode
operation where more information collection via sensor&lt;br/&gt;activation and
deactivation, communication network connectivity, and power usage considerations
will be made&lt;br/&gt;from the critical local portion of the power grid
identified by the above analysis.&lt;br/&gt;4. This information leads to further
diagnosis of the network condition that is used by central control center
to&lt;br/&gt;invoke appropriate control action to safeguard the power
network.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in
developing novel concepts for integrating a broad range of&lt;br/&gt;sensors
that monitor both physical security and operational security of the nation's
most critical infrastructure the&lt;br/&gt;electric grid. The project aims at
using the combined data from these sensors together with the detailed
development&lt;br/&gt;of the associated communication and information network to
enhance the security and reliability of the power grid.&lt;br/&gt;The team has
combined their expertise to take a fresh view at the different kinds of sensors
currently available and&lt;br/&gt;extract appropriate data from them for several
key issues related to power system physical security.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this research will be two fold. First, it will enhance the state of
art in sensing, monitoring,&lt;br/&gt;and controlling the electric power grid by
combining the multidisciplinary expertise of the investigators. Second,
the&lt;br/&gt;new sensor network will be applied to develop an emergency
response system for the national electric grid, which is&lt;br/&gt;essential to
the vitality of the nation's economy, and will provide protection to
it.&lt;br/&gt;Education: Our educational goal is to train the next generation of
students, train new cadres of doctoral researchers&lt;br/&gt;and most
importantly, share the excitement that comes with working in engineering with
the youngest of students, in&lt;br/&gt;the K-12 program, to attract them into
science and engineering. The college of engineering at Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;has a dedicated effort to attract minority scholars into
the graduate program and the university has an ongoing&lt;br/&gt;program to
employ high school students and teachers in research programs during the summer.
We will leverage&lt;br/&gt;these efforts.