* 0428540
* SST:  Development of a Micro Mass Spectrometer and the Design of a Spectrometer-Based Distributed Sensor Network
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Christopher Bower, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2009
* USD 753,623.00

0428540&lt;br/&gt;Glass&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design, development, and
testing of a microfabricated, miniaturized magnetic sector mass spectrometer
("micro mass spectrometer") with a mass resolution of 1 atomic mass unit (amu),
a mass range of 1 - 300 amu, and a sub part-per-billion (ppb) sensitivity to
chemical species is proposed. The design of a distributed sensor network
specifically for a system of such spectrometers will also be undertaken. The
micro mass spectrometer has, as its enabling component, a icrofabricated, carbon
nanotube (CNT) field-enhanced ionization source and ion optic lens, and designed
so that the ion beam is oriented parallel, not perpendicular, to the substrate
surface. Electron impact ionization and field ionization arrays will both be
investigated. The proposed effort will focus on the development and testing of
this device for applications in gas-phase environmental sensing. The team is
comprised of a group of scientists from Duke University&lt;br/&gt;and MCNC-RDI,
a microelectronics research and development institute. Scientists at Duke
University bring expertise in surface science, field emission, and gas phase
chemistry and will work in tandem with researchers at MCNC-RDI, who offer
expertise in MEMS design and microfabrication, sensor development, and vacuum
microelectronics. With respect to intellectual merit, the prime novelty and
device concept are conveyed in Figure 1, showing a schematic representation of
the proposed micro mass spectrometer and an SEM micrograph of a demonstrated
field emission device. In addition to the design, development and
microfabrication of this important sensor and its various components, the
proposed research will enable an investigation of the subtle and important
differences between field emitter and field ionization arrays within the same
microsystem. An electron field emitter array will generate ions indirectly
through electron impact ionization and dissociation and will have both energy
and pressure dependences. Higher energies and pressures will lead towards more
dissociation of the gaseous species, producing ion fragments at the detector. In
contrast, direct, field-enhanced ionization is expected to be less sensitive to
both energy and pressure, above a specific ionization threshold. A fundamental
study of these parameters in addition to electrode materials and geometries and
their combined effects on gas phase kinetics and ionization will lead to a
greater understanding of sensor design and detector optimization. With respect
to broader impact, this proposal focuses on environmental gas sensing
applications; however with proper source characterization and system design, the
technology can be used in applications ranging from chemical warfare agent
detection to biomedical diagnostics. Also, the technology platform created by
this research, an on-chip ion and/or electron workbench, can be applied to a
number of far ranging applications, including ion propulsion for miniature
spacecraft, miniaturized X-ray tubes, UV light sources, and microwave devices.
The successful completion of this program will lead to a new fundamental
understanding of microscale gas phase ionization, reaction kinetics, and ion
measurement, as well as enabling the development of a new paradigm for analyzing
and detecting chemical species in gaseous environments.&lt;br/&gt;