* 0428552
* SIRG: Underwater Optical Modem: The Last Hundred Meters
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Lee Freitag, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2007
* USD 839,000.00

The ocean sciences are beginning a new phase in which scientists will enter the
ocean environment and adaptively observe the earth-ocean system using ocean
observatories that provide power and communication to access and manipulate
real-time sensor networks. Instruments will be plugged into the infrastructure,
and hence areal sensor coverage will require the costly and time-consuming lay
of numerous cables around a site of scientific interest. This limitation could
be reduced with the development of "wireless" technologies suitable for
operation underwater. Wireless bi-directional data links would enable remote
operation of autonomous deep vehicles over the Internet. This would allow high
cost, high capability sensors to be concentrated on a few mobile platforms
capable of operating over an extended region in an adaptive manner. The ocean is
essentially opaque to electromagnetic radiation except over the visible light
range, and hence "wireless" underwater communication requires the development of
optical modem technology. High data rates (1-10 Mbit/s or more) are achievable
in the blue part of the spectrum over ranges of order 100 meters, and more under
good conditions. The PIs propose to design, fabricate, test, and validate a bi-
directional optical modem intended to link a mobile deep submergence vehicle to
a fixed node which is in turn connected to an ocean observatory by fiber optic
cable. Multiple nodes per cable will be supported, enabling the coverage of
relatively wide areas. With further development, the optical modem technology
will be able to simultaneously support many sensors per node, resulting in an
underwater network analogous to a cellular telephone system. Fundamental
research includes work on optical propagation in random media, low-power optical
signal generation, plus acquisition and detection over a wide field of view. In
addition, devising an optical communications system explicitly for operation on
a mobile vehicle poses novel technological challenges. Finally, underwater
optical communications technology to link mobile platforms to ocean
observatories would be scientifically enabling in a wide range of disciplines,
including biological, chemical, physical, and geological
oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;