* 0428929
* "SST: An Autonomous Underwater Blue Laser System for Fine-Scale Distributions of Chlorophyll Fluorescence Lifetimes and Yields"
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Mark Moline, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2009
* USD 620,171.00

P.I. Moline, Mark (Cal Poly) Proposal #: 0428929&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to develop an AUV-base blue diode laser system
that instantaneously assesses 10-meter vertical distributions (at millimeter
resolution) of chlorophyll fluorescence and the kinetics of fluorescence to
derive physiological rate measurements at a vertical resolution of millimeters
using a streak camera/CCD array. This novel tool will increase the sampling
resolutions in regions of high spatial/temporal variability, such as coastal
environments, benthic habitats and ice-covered regions. The application of a
blue diode laser system to examine vertical distributions phytoplankton
distribution and photophysiology will expand our knowledge of complex ocean
environments. Characteristics of blue lasers in seawater, the pulse timing,
pulse width, peak power, stability, imaging distance, laser frequency spectrum
are all areas that may lead to other application is oceanography Finally, the
continued challenge to reduce the size and power requirements of oceanographic
sensors is illustrated in this proposed work. An improved understanding of
phytoplankton dynamics, habitat change and primary productivity in response to
environmental forcing in complex ecosystems will translate into improved
regional carbon budget estimates. Progress will also be made in understanding
the function and efficiency of food webs. Finally, this work continues the
effort to apply autonomous systems in the marine environment for increased data
density and development of sensor networks that can adequately address the
scales of ocean processes.&lt;br/&gt;