* 0428329
* Sensors SST:  Correlation-Based Collaborative Advanced Communication Protocols for Wireless Sensor Actor Networks (WSAN)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

This Sensor proposal focuses on the development of sensory information
processing front-ends for a minimally-attended visual surveillance network. We
intend to use mixed-signal hardware computation methods in a system-on-a-chip
architecture. Image processing algorithms are implemented at the focal-plane,
using compact circuits that operate at microwatt power levels to minimize
battery weight and form factor. Furthermore, the sensory front-end must
demonstrate operational autonomy (i.e. in decision making) and robustness (i.e.
to changes in environmental conditions). Intellectual Merit: The proposed system
will replace traditional computer vision systems (cameras, digitizers and
processors) with a computational sensor. Using wide-dynamic range imaging, with
local gain control, circumvents the limitations of standard cameras.
Spatiotemporal feature extraction is used to highlight moving targets. The shape
formed by the features is identified using kernel learning in silicon; alarms
are generated based on the similarity of the targets to preprogrammed shapes.
Without these types of smart, ultra-low power, compact imaging and computational
microsystems, practical sensor networks for visual surveillance may not be
realizable. Broader Impact: The sensors are primarily intended for surveillance
of large, remotely located areas, where limited manpower is available, e.g.
border patrolling. Their low power and small size obviates a variety of mobile
applications. The multi-disciplinary nature of this work will result in the
development a pipeline of students, educators and researchers with the broad
skills required to succeed in modern high technology industry and academics.
Their education will be rounded with exposure to issues in homeland security,
privacy rights and international law.

