* 0428673
* Sensors: Biosensor Arrays from Intact Receptor Proteoliposomes Immobilized onto Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Charles Maldarelli, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2008
* USD 371,497.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;Couzis, Alexander et al&lt;br/&gt;CUNY City
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Sensors: Biosensor Arrays from Intact Receptor
Proteolipsomes Immobilized onto Surfaces"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dominant
receptor family involved in molecular sensing and signal transduction by the
cell are the G protein-coupled membrane receptors (GPCRs) which are responsible
for detecting extracellular molecular signals and transducing the signals via
the coupled heterotrimeric G protein. GPCRs sense an expansive range of ligands,
including neurotransmitters, odorant molecules and growth factors. The GPCR
sensor molecular machinery is therefore a natural system to be used in the
design of biosensors. The aim of this research grant is to develop biomimetic
sensor arrays composed of GPCRs. The primary limitation with using GPCRs as a
sensing element is that these receptors require a specialized lipid bilayer
membrane environment to maintain activity ex vivo. Previous efforts in this
direction have incorporated the GPCRs into planar bilayer structures on surfaces
in order to fulfill the requirement of a lipid environment to maintain GPCR
activity. The research approach of this grant is based on the immobilization of
intact GPCR-liposomes (proteoliposomes) onto nanostructured surfaces with
domains of controlled terminal functionality. These liposomes will contain the
membrane protein receptors in the lipid bilayer and, more importantly, also
encapsulate G proteins and their downstream targets such as phospholipase C, in
the core of the liposome. This approach stands to significantly enhance the
senstivity of GPCR arrays by harnesing the natural applification mechanisms of
the cell due to the potential for encapsulation inside the proteoliposome. In
principle, the design can be scaled-up using microfluidic concepts to explore
the interactions in a multitude of combinations of ligand, receptor, G proteins
and their downstream effectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team consists of
investigators with an established record of collaboration from the City College
of New York, combining backgrounds in biophysics, bioengineering, interfacial
engineering, biochemistry, chemical engineering, and genetics. It is the
intention of this team to develop the science and required technology to achieve
such a design and along the way provide a unique, multidisciplinary educational
experience for the graduate, undergraduate, and post-graduate students that will
be involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, this provides a unique
opportunity to interface graduate and undergraduate training efforts in surface
science (NSF 9972892) and soft materials (NSF 0221589) already funded by the NSF
with biochemistry training efforts funded by the NIH (RCMI, MARC, &amp; RISE)
that would otherwise function independently of one another. All the co-PIs are
involved in one or more of the above mentioned efforts. These training efforts
will provide additional resources such as undergraduate research funding and
first-year graduate student funding. In addition, this proposal will take
advantage of the recent successful efforts to secure infrastructure funding from
the NSF and the DoD.&lt;br/&gt;