* 0428326
* New Directions in Signal Processing for Digital Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Palghat Vaidyanathan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2008
* USD 271,696.00

The transmission of information over a communication channel often involves
channels whose characteristics are unknown. The information is therefore
distorted by an unknown channel which in addition adds random noise to the
message. If the channel characteristics are known, then the non random part of
the distortion can usually be compensated at the receiver, and the problem is
one of detecting the messages buried in noise. If the channel characteristics
are unknown, then a crucial step is to estimate the channel first. Under certain
conditions it is indeed possible to do this estimation from the received data
itself. This approach, called blind identification of channels, has been studied
in the past. The investigator studies new methods for such identification based
on frequency domain information of the channel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent
years the tremendous power of redundant filter bank precoders has been
established. Precoders not only allow linear distortions introduced by known
channels to be cancelled with finite duration filters at the receiver, they also
allow the identification of unknown channels without training sequences and
without the need for fourth order statistics. The research studies several new
methods for blind identification and channel equalization based on filter bank
precoders. One of these is blind channel identification directly in the
frequency domain. This offers tremendous simplicity in computations. The
research also seeks to explore tradeoff of complexity between transmitters and
receivers. In the past, precoders have emphasized low transmitter complexity of
zero-padded systems. The investigators study zero-jamming at the receiver as an
alternative. The research also addresses a number of important issues which
arise in the context of designing systems that are resistant to channel
nulls.&lt;br/&gt;