* 0428585
* Sensors: Statistical Algorithm Development for Distributed Sensor Networks with Application to Structural Health Monitoring and State Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Luciana Barroso, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2008
* USD 162,541.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0428585&lt;br/&gt;PI: John Sweetman&lt;br/&gt;Texas
Engineering Experiment Station&lt;br/&gt;New statistical and random vibration
techniques are developed and applied to interpret measured data from distributed
sensor networks. The new methods build statistical distributions of selected
random variables developed from the data and dynamic numerical models of the
structure. The overall goal is to develop methodologies to identify relatively
minor structural damage or changes in structural state prior to initiation of a
major structural failure. Application within the project is marine risers on
offshore oil-production structures and to structural health monitoring of
onshore structures; each of these applications makes use of extensive measured
data. &lt;br/&gt;The offshore application addresses vortex induced vibrations of
marine risers, a complex problem due to irregular variations in system mass
caused by fluid-structure interaction. These vibrations are a dominant design
consideration for marine risers in high current, deep-water areas. The onshore
application offers an improved methodology for monitoring the structural
condition of various civil structures. &lt;br/&gt;The work is being done jointly
between two campuses of Texas A&amp;M University (College Station and
Galveston). The project and its results will enhance the graduate and
undergraduate engineering curricula at both campuses. The project also directly
increases interaction between the two campuses, which will lead to greater
future collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the Sensors
Initiative NSF 04-522.&lt;br/&gt;