* 0428127
* Energy and the Environment:  Educating K-16 Students to Improve Energy-Related Technological and Environmental Literacy
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Susan Powers, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 06/30/2010
* USD 305,000.00

This project is identifying the knowledge and skills necessary to increase our
technical and environmental awareness of energy issues and to improve the
implementation of project-based energy and environment curricula in K-16
classrooms, particularly in New York State. There are two primary components of
the project: 1) interdisciplinary PhD research that is defining the intersection
between technical and environmental literacy related to energy issues and the
means of improving the integration of the latest research findings into
communication materials to improve our literacy and 2) the use of this research
work for a range of activities that result in the preparation, assessment
and&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of project-based educational materials for K-16
classrooms. Teacher workshops are being conducted to disseminate the curricular
materials. In addition, two posters that capture the key concepts defined by the
research component are being widely&lt;br/&gt;disseminated to increase the use
of the materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshops are also being conducted for
college faculty to expand their interest and capabilities in providing effective
K-12 outreach in a manner that is valued by academic institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination and assessment activities are planned for
each component of this award. Surveys, evaluation forms, and traditional
measures of assessing the quality and quantity of research will be
employed.&lt;br/&gt;