* 0428455
* SST:    Patchy Sensor Surfaces for Selective Dynamic Adhesion of Micron and SubMicron Objects
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Jeffrey Davis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2008
* USD 715,487.00

Abstract

Proposal Number: CTS-0428455 Principal Investigator: Maria M. Santore
Institution: University of Massachusetts Amherst

Title: Patchy Sensor Surfaces for Selective Dynamic Adhesion of Micron and
Submicron Objects Merit: This program will develop the science for robust field-
ready sensors for particles with sizes from 50 nm to 5 um, applicable to the
detection of bacteria, spores, viruses, inorganic fines, and chemically-
sensitive scavenging particles from aqueous and airborne environments. Focusing
on reversible dynamic adhesion as these objects flow over detector surfaces that
spontaneously recover after a .detection event., the program targets a new
sensing concept that will screen and discriminate classes of biological cells or
inorganic particles based on their surfaces. This class-level selectivity will
not require steps that lyze cells, extract proteins or genetic material, or
conduct molecular recognition. Multiple applications are therefore targeted. At
the heart of this new sensing technology lies a heterogeneous or patterned
surface which is robust to pH, temperature, and other environmental factors, and
which selectively adheres target particles while rejecting those outside target
ranges in size or surface character (mean density or nanoscale distribution of
surface charge, nano-meter scale patches of hydrophobic and hydrophilic
chemistries, scale of roughness and other aspects of surface topography, and
even specific peptide sequences). The sensor surfaces present nanometer-scale
patches of different sizes and chemistries, and micron-scale hydrodynamic
features that generate a landscape of competing colloidal and hydrodynamic
forces to discriminate approaching colloidal particles based on their dynamic
signature, including reversible adhesion, rolling, skipping, and arrest. The
proposed collaboration between Santore, Coughlin, and Davis spans the
disciplines of polymer interfaces, synthetic chemistry, and fluid mechanics.
Through combined experiment and modeling, the team will develop design rules for
collector surface patterns, robust detector chemistry, and operating strategies
that manipulate concentration, ionic strength, and flow rates. With model
particles capturing the essential features of spores, bacteria, viruses, resins,
and minerals, the program will probe adhesion and detachment rates on patterned
collector surfaces with systematic variations in the scale and chemistry of
surface features. Surface features will be designed with particular colloidal
forces (electrostatic, Van der Waals, hydrophobic, and polymer mechanical) and
hydrodynamic fields in mind, exploiting the versatility of block copolymer
architectures, and flow fields engineered to manipulate particle-surface
encounters. Broader impacts. The new sensing technology will benefit society not
only in terms of homeland security, but also in terms of public welfare: The
sensing principles employ active surfaces which could be produced at modest
cost, and designs which can operate unattended and automatically, in chemical
processes and public buildings such as hospitals and schools, and ultimately the
home. The program, while rooted in the interdisciplinary fields of nanochemistry
and colloid science, impacts the fields of polymer surface chemistry,
biophysics, and pattern recognition, and will initiate a surface fingerprinting
database of single cell organisms. Graduate students will carry forward the bulk
of the fundamental science while a liaison program will benefit engineering,
chemistry, and physics undergraduates via a hybrid industrial / university
research experience. Undergraduates will spend a summer in industry on a project
with science parallel to that in the Santore / Davis/ and Coughlin labs,
returning to UMass to conduct a related research project during the academic
year. Integrated teaching and research will be accomplished with a special
topics course on smart interfaces, and with guest lectures in key courses in the
undergraduate curriculum of two UMass colleges. The program will target
underrepresented groups by recruiting students from local colleges who take
courses at UMass.

