* 0428216
* Engineering the Unexpected:  Sociotechnical Issues in the Design of Management Systems for Biohazardous Emergencies
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2011
* Allen Batteau, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 02/28/2011
* USD 1,050,000.00

Engineering the Unexpected: Socio-technical Issues in the Design of Management
Systems for Biohazardous Emergencies &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary
team of anthropologists, computer scientists, medical doctors, and technology
specialists proposes to create a socio-technical model of information systems
used in disaster management. This model will be constructed from interviews,
first-person observations, public reports, and other sources of data on actual
emergencies in the Detroit/Windsor international metropolitan area over the past
five years. The model will focus on the information systems that public and
private agencies in the United States and Canada use to coordinate their
preparation and response. The model will be used (a) to evaluate specific
hypotheses regarding the effective integration of socio-technical issues into
the design of disaster management systems, and (b) to provide guidance for the
effective design and use of emergency management IT. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed model will be a hybrid of functional and agent-based models: In
preparation for, response to, and consequence management of disasters,
functional imperatives and self-organizing dynamics play differing roles. The
model will incorporate representations of the cultures of the different groups,
public authorities, medical professionals, first responders, families,
communities, and even the media, insofar as these cultural differences have
consequences for communication and the use of information. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here builds on a unique collaboration among
multiple disciplines and capabilities at Wayne State University, and an
international partnership with the Police, Fire, EMS, and other practitioners.
This partnership has identified a critical issue in our Nations ability to
respond to future threats: the coordination of multiple agencies in a
jurisdictionally complex environment, and the development of systems appropriate
to that complexity.