* 0428208
* Sensors:  Polymer Materials with Integrated Deformation Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Christoph Weder, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 12/31/2008
* USD 352,199.00

This Sensors and Sensor Networks (Sensors) Individual Investigator (SII) grant
provides funding for the development of processes that allow the production of
new polymer materials with integrated mechanical deformation sensors. The
targeted materials are based on the incorporation of small amounts of
fluorescent dyes into conventional polymers. The sensing mechanism relies on the
formation of nanoscale aggregates of these dyes in the polymer matrix. It
further exploits that mechanical deformation can transform the nanophase-
separated systems into molecular mixtures. Because the dye molecules are
tailored to form excimers when aggregated, this phase transition is concomitant
with a shift of the dyes' fluorescence color. This experimental research program
encompasses (i) the development of fluorescent sensor molecules, which are
rationally designed for the targeted sensing principle, (ii) the investigation
of the phase behavior of blends of these sensor molecules and selected,
technologically relevant polymers, and (iii) the development of protocols, which
allow for the production of adequate polymer/dye nanocomposites by conventional
melt-processing techniques. To demonstrate the value of the novel sensing
scheme, a complete system consisting of material, optical detection module, and
data analysis interface will be assembled. The primary goals of this work are to
determine how polymer/sensor nanocomposites can be reliably produced by
conventional fabrication techniques, and how their supramolecular architecture,
and therewith fluorescence color, changes as a function of external stimulus. If
successful, the results of this research will lead to a predictive understanding
of the thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of nanoparticle (de)formation in blends
of polymers and low-molecular, organic guest molecules.

If successful, the resulting knowledge may provide a broad intellectual basis
for the future design, processing and application of advanced functional
nanomaterials. The new platform of polymers with built-in sensors has the
potential to enable a variety of technologically relevant applications that
range from early failure indicators in structural materials to tamper-resistant
packaging.