* 0428715
* ITR-(ASE+NHS)-(dmc): Rational Genomic Annotation Systems: Integration, Mining and Modeling of Biological Data
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Simon Kasif, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,951,201.00

Boston University has been awarded a grant to develop Rational Genomic
Annotation Systems for integration, mining and modeling of biological data. The
research, which includes scientists and students at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Tufts University, is aimed at developing a systematic methodology
for the integration of multiple sources of evidence involving both predictive
inference and learning. The PIs propose to develop an information-integration
framework based on probabilistic graphical models, with a modular interface that
will support different data types. This research will facilitate the development
of a new generation of extensible gene annotation systems that will provide a
greater coverage and accuracy than existing systems. It will also produce new
computational algorithms to support these novel forms of integration as well as
a systematic new methodology for building novel probabilistic model integrators.
&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on a collaborative effort of several
investigators emphasizing interdisciplinary research and education, training of
a new generation of leaders with expertise in both system biology and computing
sciences. The infrastructure and techniques proposed are aimed to provide the
basic tools for novel wide international community efforts involving both
computational biologists and experimental scientists to produce and validate the
functional role of thousands of newly sequenced genes. &lt;br/&gt;