* 0428010
* SST: Highly sensitive, selective, self-signal amplifying molecular DNA sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Jinsang Kim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2007
* USD 690,985.00

0428010&lt;br/&gt;Kim&lt;br/&gt;This research reflects the investigators joint
efforts to uniquely combine the specificity of biosystems and the tunable signal
amplification property of synthetic conjugated polymers to develop molecular
bio-sensors with ultimate sensitivity and selectivity. Highly sensitive, self-
signal amplifying molecular DNA sensors for rapid organism detection are to be
developed through hybrid material design of conjugated polymers and biological
materials. The these molecular sensors are composed of a conjugated polymer
backbone, peptide nucleic acid side chains, negatively charged ionic side
chains, non-ionic water-soluble side chains, and oligonucleotide molecular
beacons. Each of the components is designed to be cooperative toward the
necessary sensory properties for rapid organism detection, such as water-
solubility, self-signaling property, high sensitivity through signal
amplification, high accuracy via false signal suppression, and easy
immobilization property on a solid substrate for DNA microarray fabrication. The
rationally designed components will be integrated into the molecular sensors
through organic chemistry, bioconjugated synthesis, and molecular assembly.
These molecular DNA sensors will open a new era of rapid specific organism
detection based on their DNA signature, without the costly and time-consuming
PCR (polymerase chain reaction) amplification, labeling with fluorescent dyes,
and thorough purifications of analyte DNA.