* 0428241
* ITR-(NHS)-(DMC):  A National Center of Excellence for Infectious Disease Informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2011
* Daniel Zeng, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2011
* USD 1,290,166.00

Infectious disease outbreaks, either naturally occurring or caused by terror
attacks, pose a critical threat to public health and national security.
Information systems and infectious disease informatics (IDI) research are
playing an increasingly important role in developing a comprehensive approach to
prevent, detect, respond to, and manage infectious disease outbreaks.
Computerized datasets on infectious diseases are currently used for disease
reporting, including those developed by various federal, state, and local
health, agriculture, and environment/wildlife agencies. However, such datasets
are typically not interoperable, particularly in across jurisdiction and across
species contexts, reducing their effective use in data modeling and analysis,
disease surveillance, and disease management-related decision-making. In
addition, the information management environment used by public health officials
and researchers to analyze large amounts of infectious disease data and develop
predictive models needs major improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A partnership
has been developed with expertise in IDI, mission-critical Web-based
interoperable systems, data security and access control, advanced data mining
and visualization techniques, disease surveillance and predictive modeling, and
information systems evaluation. The partnership includes: (1) the Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory at the University of Arizona, (2) the Information
Systems Group at the University of Utah, (3) the New York State Department of
Health and its partner Health Research, Inc., and (4) the California State
Department of Health Services and its partner PHFE Management
Solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on ongoing IDI research and
infrastructure development efforts, research is aimed at (a) developing an
integrated and scalable information sharing, monitoring, and analysis
environment across jurisdictions and species for major infectious diseases, (b)
developing novel data analysis, surveillance, and visualization techniques to
meet the critical needs of IDI, and (c) gaining a systematic understanding of
related policy, user evaluation, and technology adoption
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intended intellectual contributions are
threefold: (1) developing and evaluating system performance and scalability
models and related algorithms needed for the efficient operation of large-scale
realtime information query and monitoring/surveillance systems such as the
NIDII, (2) developing and evaluating a set of novel spatio-temporal data
analysis and online surveillance techniques which can be used in both IDI and
other applications needing similar capabilities (e.g., crime analysis), and (3)
developing a comprehensive user evaluation and technology adoption framework and
conducting a detailed user evaluation and organizational impact study of the
developed IDI system and related technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work will have the following major broader impacts: (a) The research team will
develop a working infectious disease information system across jurisdictions and
disease types, providing an integrated data sharing, access, analysis,
visualization, and surveillance environment for researchers, public health
officials, and law enforcement and national security officials who need to
assess risk of and respond to biological terror attacks. (b) The work will bring
together previously disparate research and practitioner communities to conduct
IDI research of significant practical relevance. In addition, it will foster
cross-fertilization between law enforce and national security research and
IDI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;