* 0428900
* SIRG: Development of Sensor Networks for Aquatic Nanoparticle Characterization
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Alexander Groisman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,499,997.00

P.I. Papen, George Proposal #: 0428900&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles, or colloids in aquatic environments, have sizes
ranging from 1 to 1000 nm and are at the boundary between soluble chemical
species and sinking particles. They are the most abundant particles in the ocean
and other aquatic environments and account for a significant portion of
"dissolved" organic carbon. In situ characterization of the physical and
biochemical properties is crucial for a wide range of fundamental applications
including: 1) ocean biogeochemistry 2) ocean optics and 3) aquatic biological
hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the characteristics of nanoparticles are
important for a variety of applications, their complex heterogeneous nature and
small size makes the in situ determination of their physical and chemical
characteristics extremely challenging. To date, most characterization techniques
are laboratory-based and are thus limited. This project will develop in situ
sensor networks for aquatic nanoparticle characterization that can address a
broader range of applications and test them in an ocean environment. The
research program consists of the development of microfluidic-based techniques
that can preprocess and help analyze heterogeneous assemblies of aquatic
nanoparticles and bacteria and the development of a pipelined suite of advanced
optical techniques using the amplitude and the phase of the optical fields,
multiple wavelengths, multiple scattering angles, polarization properties, and
parallel interrogation volumes, which sequentially classify particle
characteristics over a wide range of variables. The program will culminate in
the deployment of a prototype in situ sensor network node that can measure both
the physical and biogeochemical properties of aquatic nanoparticles forming the
basis of a complete sensor network for in situ spatial and temporal
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;