* 0428284
* Individual Nomination of Richard E. Ladner for PAESMEM Award
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Richard Ladner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daphne Y. Rainey
* 06/30/2009
* USD 10,000.00

HRD-0428284&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Richard Ladner is Professor of Computer Science and
Engineering at University of Washington; the nomination indicates that he has
been active in mentoring since 1985. Ladner has pioneered improved computer
networking for the deaf-blind using large print and paperless Braille displays.
He spends a week each year working with the University of Washington's DO-IT
program, and has done so since 1994. He presently advises a blind computer
science PhD student, and three of his 15 PhD graduates are women.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The panel noted that Ladner is one of the few PAESMEM
nominees who works closely with students who have disabilities. Dr. Ladner is
also supportive of undergraduate students. He has attended all of the
undergraduate research talks for the CSE Undergraduate Research seminar since
1999.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;He has also mentored women at many levels
(undergraduate, graduate, post-doc, and faculty) and worked with students with
disabilities (high school and graduate students). Ladner supports the WISE
group; he encourages women to seek balance between personal and professional
life, and provides direct mentoring via informal discussions. He is also a co-
chair for the Abused Deaf Women's Advocacy Services (ADWAS) steering committee.
Dr. Ladner's mentoring clearly extends beyond the walls of the University of
Washington in his efforts to increase the number of students with disabilities
who will pursue graduate degrees. &lt;br/&gt;