* 0428286
* Collaborative Research: The Online Ethics Center for Engineering and Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Matthew Keefer, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Laurel A. Smith-Doerr
* 01/31/2007
* USD 84,957.00

The goal of the project here proposed is to transform the Online Ethics Center
for Engineering and Science (hereafter OEC, available at
http://onlineethics.org) into a permanent, highly visible commons for
engineering and science ethics as a part of the new National Academy of
Engineering (NAE) initiative in engineering ethics. This commons will provide a
base for greater intellectual and material support for the growth of science and
engineering ethics. Currently, the OEC is known both for its wealth of cases,
problems, essays, syllabi, and ethical guidelines and advice, and for the
exceptionally high standards of "friendliness" and accessibility resulting from
its thoughtful creation of HTML that meets W3C/WAI standards and from its
intelligent use of the hypermedia capabilities of the Web. In addition, the OEC
provides an innovative model of what can be achieved with a staff composed
primarily of undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In preparation for the
transition to the NAE, the proposed project will conduct major research into the
effectiveness of typical educational uses made of the materials in the OEC with
the goal of developing and refining educational methods, tools, and
instructional modules for science and engineering ethics (SEE) instruction. This
is an important goal given the increasing use in ethics instruction of web-based
ethics materials, such as complex problem-based scenarios or cases that include
useful links to other supporting materials like ethics codes and expert
commentaries. Web access to engaging instructional materials, for courses and
for self-directed learning, is an evermore viable and attractive opportunity for
learners and educators, and though the uses of the OEC are diverse, it presently
provides one of the finest examples of a resource center for SEE instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, the availability of first-rate online materials
does not in itself guarantee improvement in the quality of SEE course offerings.
In the development phase of the educational research, an educational
psychologist will work closely with experienced SEE instructors, utilizing OEC
materials to design methods, web- based instructional tools, and assessments
that can be incorporated into self-contained SEE modules. In the test phase of
the project, these modules will be evaluated in courses taught by a range of SEE
instructors. The final modules will provide clear criteria for "best practices"
in SEE problem-based instruction. This design and evaluation research will be
based on cutting edge work in educational research and theory. It will greatly
aid educators in making the best use of OEC instructional materials and will
itself contribute to evaluation theory and methods. The project will further
prepare for the transition by offering opportunities to a wider population of
undergraduates. During the project, students at other universities will help
build the OEC through summer jobs. The project will create a special a content
management system that will ensure that new content will conform to the high
standards that have made the OEC a leader in accessibility, user friendliness,
and thoughtful use of hyperlinking, and ensure that content addition is simple
enough to allow undergraduates to continue to contribute to the construction of
the OEC. The OEC team is uniquely qualified to prepare the website to readily
incorporate and fully index pages that both meet the OEC design standards and
which undergraduates are competent to create. &lt;br/&gt;