* 0428420
* ITR - (EVS) - (int+soc+dmc): Technology Interventions for Elders with Mobility and Cognitive Impairments
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2009
* Marilyn Rantz, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2009
* USD 1,200,000.00

Americans are living longer and more fulfilled lives, and they desire to live as
independently as possible. But independent lifestyles come with risks. To
address these issues, researchers are developing "smart home" technologies to
help older adults remain independent at home while controlling costs. Smart
homes enhance residents' safety and monitor health conditions using sensors and
other devices. Such technology can help keep older adults independent while
controlling costs. The PIs have proposed a model of decline in older adults in
which mobility and cognitive impairments lead to functional decline, thereby
reducing independence. Appropriate interventions, if offered in a timely manner,
can improve functional ability. The key is early identification of changing
conditions that indicate impairments. In this project, the PIs will establish a
partnership among faculty, students, and researchers across diverse schools
within two universities, in order to develop and evaluate intervention
technology for elders. They will utilize a unique eldercare facility in
Columbia, called TigerPlace, to study technology targeting mobility and
cognitive impairments. Project objectives include: development of an integrated
monitoring system that reliably captures data about the elder residents and
their environment in a noninvasive manner and balances the needs of health
safety and privacy; collection of data in typical independent living, elder
settings, using the integrated monitoring system; development of algorithms to
extract patterns of activity from the collected sensor data; and evaluation of
the usability of the technology and investigation of fundamental issues in
human-computer interaction for the population of older adults. To these ends, a
monitoring system developed by one of the participants and incorporating gait,
physiological, and environmental sensors will be extended. An event-driven video
sensor network will be developed to generate an "anonymized" video stream that
hides identifying features of the residents, and sensor and video data will be
fused and processed for identifying patterns of behavioral activity. Fundamental
human-computer interaction (HCI) issues as related to elders will also be
investigated. Deliberative evaluation and usability studies will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will have broad
impact on our society, by offering a model for eldercare technology and by
providing policy makers with answers to complex questions of cost effectiveness
and outcomes to help guide decisions about services for older people, such as
those funded by Medicare and Medicaid (it is estimated that 12.4% of the U.S.
population was over 65 in 2000, and this percentage is projected to grow by 2030
is 20%). From the technical point of view, the research will advance the state
of the art in HCI for elders, in anonymized and compressed video, in extracting
human motion and behaviors from video data, in extracting human activity from
sensory events, and in fusing sensor and video data for identifying behavioral
patterns. In addition, the project will train both graduate and undergraduate
students and help establish an infrastructure in conducting future research
projects; faculty and administrators from Lincoln University in Jefferson City,
MO will assist the PIs in recruiting traditionally underrepresented nursing and
CIS students for multi-disciplinary teams and summer internships.