* 0428133
* ITR/ASE:    3D Sketching for Conceptual Visualization, Simulation, and Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2010
* Hod Lipson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2010
* USD 346,951.00

The enormous potential of sketch-based interfaces for conceptual engineering
design is widely recognized and has been broadly pursued, but the practical
application of these systems has remained limited because they are two-
dimensional and do not embody functionality. The PI has previously demonstrated
algorithms based on statistical machine learning that allow reconstruction of a
3D object from a 2D freehand drawing directly. By extending and combining this
work with recent mass-market pen-based hardware, the PI will in this project
create the basis of new conceptual design tools for rapid visualization,
simulation and learning for geometry-intensive domains. A new form of freehand
sketching will be explored, in which the sketch itself is spatially
reconstructed in interactive time and then can be physically simulated, a
process the PI calls "live sketching." The PI's system will enable users to
construct complex 3D models quickly and intuitively, to analyze them, to change
viewpoints while sketching, and to communicate and collaborate on spatial
concepts with other designers more easily. To this end, the PI will first extend
his reconstruction algorithms through context sensitivity and temporal scene
segmentation so they can handle more complex geometries than is currently
possible, including curved surfaces. This effort will then be combined with
existing simulation and analysis codes of various disciplines and will be
integrated into a prototypical platform allowing construction of 3D models by
successive piece-wise sketching, reconstruction, and interactive simulation. The
resulting tools will fundamentally alter the way engineers interact with design
systems, bringing together traditional computer-aided engineering and simulation
tools so they can play a role much earlier in the critical preliminary design
stages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The outcomes of this project will
positively impact any design domain where it is necessary to predict the
behavior of spatial geometries, including many application areas of mechanical,
civil, MEMS, and architectural CAD. Live sketching will also make engineering
tools for modeling and simulation much more accessible to non-engineering
designers, students and teachers, by removing interface barriers. The PI will in
addition develop and make available online a live sketch application for
teaching structure and kinematics, which will allow students and teachers to
explore and demonstrate kinematics and structural analysis of trusses and solid
structures by sketching structures, applying loads, and seeing the resulting
mechanism trajectories, exaggerated deformations, and colored stress
concentration for various shapes, in real time while sketching. This project
will be made available on-line in open-source format, so that additional types
of simulation can be integrated into it by others as required.