* 0428856
* ITR:   (ASE+NHS+ECS)-(int+dmc+sim):    Generation of Complex Environmental Flow Patterns for Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* John Hollerbach, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,153,215.00

A goal of virtual reality is the simulation of the physical world and convincing
displays of the simulation. Although progress has been made in developing
visual, auditory, and haptic displays, virtual environments are still generally
unconvincing. One hypothesis is that a totality of sensory effects is necessary
to create a realistic sense of immersion, including atmospheric effects such as
wind, smell, and radiance, yet there has been little systematic research on
incorporating such effects. In this project, the PI and his team will create the
Treadport Active Wind Tunnel (TPAWT), a 3D wind display enhancement for the
Treadport locomotion interface, which comprises a large tilting treadmill, a
CAVE-like visual display, and an active mechanical tether attached to the torso.
Taking into account geometrical constraints such as the presence of frontal
screens, a system of controlled directional vents will be placed around a user.
Air will be discharged from the vents using a dedicated programmable air-
handling unit. Flows will be precisely mixed, based on model reduction
techniques, and controlled to produce a sensation of wind from any direction and
up to speeds of 20 mph. Nonlinear feedback controllers will be devised to sense
and regulate airflow near a user. Odors and chemicals will be displayed to users
by injection into the airflow system, while infrared lamps arrayed in the
ceiling will generate radiant heat. The PI expects the integration of 3D wind
and olfactory capabilities into the existing Treadport system to reinforce the
graphical, auditory and locomotion effects will result in a new degree of
realism in the immersive virtual reality interface. To test out and fine-tune
the system, wind generation will be incorporated into an urban virtual
environment, which includes pedestrians and cars generating noises and smells.
The simulation of the magnitude and direction of the wind, as well as the
dispersion of odors or air-borne chemicals, will be based on the QUIC (Quick
Urban &amp; Industrial Complex) dispersion modeling system, which provides fast
simulation of the flow field around buildings and the concentration fields of
chemical plumes. One experimental application will relate to developing methods
for tracing the source of noxious chemicals released into the environment. With
a real-time wind and plume dispersion simulation, response and training
scenarios can be developed. Small mobile robots with chemical sensors can be
placed on the treadmill to track plumes using algorithms that take into account
wind direction, wind speed and local
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The generation of 3D
airflow is a new research topic, which will allow realistic wind and olfactory
displays for virtual environments, and offer an alternative to traditional wind
tunnels by placing airflow at a local region of interest without immersing a
whole structure, and by simulating meandering wind. By simulating plume
dispersion of chemicals around city structures, training and emergency response
scenarios can be developed for the release of chemical agents into the
atmosphere. The research adds fluid mechanics and control to the already highly
interdisciplinary Treadport project that also includes psychology, biomechanics,
robotics, and computer graphics, and will result in the training of a sizable
number of graduate students competent to conduct interdisciplinary research.