* 0428831
* Sensors:    Models and Algorithms for Efficient Design and Operation of Wireless Sensor Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Halit Uster, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 12/31/2009
* USD 196,000.00

This grant provides funding for an investigation of effective and efficient
deployment (strategic), topology discovery (tactical), and data routing
(operational) decisions in wireless sensor networks. These decisions will be
considered in an integrated fashion and special emphasis will be given on three
desirable attributes regarding sensor networks simultaneously. These attributes
are energy efficiency, fault tolerance, and exploitation of communication versus
computation trade-offs. Integer and nonlinear mathematical models that aim to
capture these characteristics simultaneously and minimize the energy consumption
and/or maximize effective sensor network lifespan will be developed. These
models will provide sufficient flexibility to be used for making the above
strategic-tactical-operational decisions both simultaneously and/or
individually. On the methodological side, efficient solution algorithms that
provide high quality solutions in reasonable time frames will be developed.
These algorithms will include approaches that utilize the specificities of
sensor network structures and operations in an effective
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this grant will
introduce new avenues of research in the theory of wireless sensor networks and
provide novel analytical models and solution methodologies for important
practical problems in this developing area. The results will provide desirable
design and operation characteristics for sensor networks so that the benefits
from these rather unusually constrained networks are maximized. In addition, a
network-planning framework that underlines the interrelationships among
different decision levels under the umbrella of unique sensor network attributes
will be developed. This framework will help us understand the dynamics involved
in making decisions where time frames for different level decisions (strategic-
tactical-operational) are not as different as in the traditional contexts. The
proposed work will also contribute to the computational tools and methodologies
available for integer and nonlinear optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;