* 0428366
* SST/Collaborative Research:  Self-Powered Wireless Sensor Array for Pressure, Volume, and Temperature Monitoring of Injection Molding
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Robert Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2009
* USD 375,748.00

The objective of this Small Sensor Team (SST)/Collaborative Research project is
to significantly improve the observability in polymer processing operations by
providing feedback of pressure, temperature, flow rate, and other process states
at multiple locations within the mold cavity, for real-time process and quality
control. This objective will be achieved through simultaneous in-mold pressure-
temperature sensing, multi-domain signal processing, and injection molding
process analysis.

The benefit of this research is that it will introduce a new generation of
miniaturized sensors that can be placed at practically anywhere within the mold
cavity that are previously not possible, and in much less time than previously
required to modify a mold for placing a conventional sensor. The broader impact
of this research is three-fold: 1) it represents a radical step forward from the
current wired sensors that have been used for decades, and has the potential to
significantly improve molding productivity wherein each percentage point
improvement corresponds to cost savings over $40 million per year, 2) the new
sensing technique will not only be applicable to injection molding, but also to
other high-energy manufacturing processes, and 3) the research will contribute
substantially to multidisciplinary education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students and enhance manufacturing curriculum development at the
PIs' institutions.