* 0428737
* SST Smarter Sensing: Integrating payloads, Navigation, and Vehicles for Underwater Exploration
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Brian Bingham, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2007
* USD 763,134.00

P.I. Hanumant Singh Proposal #: 0422364&lt;br/&gt;Project Title: Smarter
Sensing: Integrating payloads, Navigation, and Vehicles for Underwater
Exploration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses the need for
advanced chemical sensing in the ocean environment by developing a new mass
spectrometer and integrating the instrument into the operation of an autonomous
underwater vehicle (AUV). The mass spectrometer's sampling capabilities and
energy requirements present an opportunity for an intelligent integration scheme
to increase the instrument's scientific capability. Through feedback from other
onboard sensors and vehicle navigation interdependent sensing strategies will
make autonomous data-driven decisions, re-tasking the sensing and guidance based
on estimation of the environmental state. These techniques will increase the
overall efficiency of deep ocean exploration in dynamic and complex environments
such as the chemical processes found in both cold and hydrothermal bottom seeps.
The engineering research necessary to realize the capabilities of an integrated
mass spectrometer operating from an AUV include: development of an integrated
mass spectrometer specifically designed for integration into the hardware and
software of an existing AUV; development of an environmental representation for
assimilating networked oceanographic sensor data, mass spectrometer data, and
vehicle navigation in real-time; development of a mission specification process
for specifying event driven surveys and analyzing the performance and robustness
of these missions; combining the above components into a control system for a
data-driven AUV survey. The primary scientific driver for this work is the study
of seafloor vents and seeps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;