* 0428341
* SST: Integrated Fluorocarbon Microsensor System Using Catalytic Modification
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Habtom Ressom, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2009
* USD 667,670.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: SST: Integrated Fluorocarbon Microsensor System Utilizing
Catalytic Modification

Proposal Number: CTS-0428341

Principal Investigators: M. C. Wheeler

Institution: University of Maine

Selective, sensitive, and reliable sensors are urgently needed to detect air-
borne halogenated volatile organic compounds (VOCs). This broad class of
compounds includes chlorine, fluorine, bromine, and iodine containing
hydrocarbons used as solvents, refrigerants, herbicides, and more recently as
chemical warfare agents (CWAs). It is important to be able to detect very low
concentrations of halocarbon solvents and insecticides because of their acute
health effects even in very low concentrations. For instance, the nerve agent
sarin (isopropyl methylphosphonofluoridate), first developed as an insecticide
by German chemists in 1938, is so toxic that a ten minute exposure at an
airborne concentration of only 65 parts per billion (ppb) can be fatal. Sarin
became a household term when religious cult members on Tokyo subway trains
poisoned over 5,500 people, killing 12. Sarin and other CWAs remain a
significant threat to the health and safety of the general public.

The goal of this project is to design a sensor system to detect and identify the
composition and concentration of fluorinated VOCs. The system should be small,
robust, compatible with metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) technology, cheap, if
produced in large scale, and has the potential to be versatile in terms of low
power consumption, detection of other gases, and integration in a portable
system. The proposed VOC sensor system has three major elements that will be
integrated into a microreactor flow cell: a temperature-programmable
microhotplate array/reactor system which serves as the basic sensor platform; an
innovative acoustic wave sensor, which detects material removal (instead of
deposition) to verify and quantify the presence of fluorine; and an intelligent
method, "support vector machines," that will analyze the complex and high
dimensional data furnished by the sensor system. The superior and complementary
aspects of the three elements will be carefully integrated to create a system
which is more sensitive and selective than other CWA detection systems that are
commercially available or described in the research literature. While our sensor
system will be developed to detect fluorinated VOCs, it can be adapted for other
applications in which a target analyte can be catalytically converted for
selective detection. Therefore, this investigation will examine the
relationships between individual sensor element performance and joint sensor
platform performance, integrated with state-of-the-art data analysis techniques.
During development of the sensor system, the investigators will consider
traditional reactor design concepts such as mass transfer and residence time
effects, and will apply them to the emerging field of microsystems. The proposed
research will provide the fundamental basis and understanding for examining
multifunctional sensor platforms designed to provide extreme selectivity to
targeted molecules. The project will involve interdisciplinary researchers and
students and will connect to K-12 and RET programs for underrepresented students
from rural areas.