* 0428427
* ITR:    (NHS+ASE) - (int+dmc) - Activity-Driven Computing and Communication for Cooperative Distributed Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Rajit Manohar, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2010
* USD 981,000.00

Natural and man-made disasters are, by their very nature, unpredictable and rare
and thus any monitoring infrastructure for detection of such events will operate
with an extremely low duty cycle. Coverage, scalability, and longevity are the
key metrics to judge the effectiveness of such networks rather than traditional
metrics like latency and bandwidth. This investigation examines monitoring
networks from the perspective of minimizing energy usage at all levels of
abstraction: circuit, node architecture, signal&lt;br/&gt;processing,
communication, and networking. The overall goal is to develop technologies that
enable sensor networks that have unprecedented longevity---on the order of years
rather than days or weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on node design focuses
on the development of an ultra-low-power asynchronous microprocessor optimized
for sensornetwork applications. Asynchronous circuits enable extremely fine-
grained power management, and lead to a significant reduction in energy per
operation as well as transition times between active and idle states. Research
on communication and networking focuses on collaborative signal processing
techniques. Nodes in the system cooperate at the physical layer, resulting in a
simultaneous reduction&lt;br/&gt;in the energy and latency required for
information extraction. Both these research vectors are to be evaluated in the
context of an experimental hardware testbed developed over the course of
this&lt;br/&gt;project.&lt;br/&gt;