* 0428301
* SST:      Polymer Fiber and Waveguide Sensors for Perofmance-Based Assesment and Health Monitoring of Civil Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Tasnim Hassan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/2008
* USD 451,996.00

Abstract 0428301 T. Hassan NC State Univ

The research described in this proposal aims to develop polymer waveguide
sensors for the performance-based assessment and health monitoring of civil
infrastructure systems. Although the sensors to be developed can be utilized to
measure strains under a variety of load conditions and structural materials,
this research program will focus on application of the sensors to concrete and
steel structures subjected to dynamic load conditions. In order to truly
understand the failure mechanisms of structures, it will be essential to have
reliable sensors that can measure large strains, at least up to 10%, at high
strain rates, up to 3% per second. The specific objectives of the proposed
research are to develop (1) an interferometric polymer optical fiber sensor for
the measurement of distributed strains and/or localized strains and (2) a
minimally invasive, high sensitivity polymer planar waveguide sensor for
embedment into particular structural systems. The objectives of the research
will be achieved by sensor design, which includes finite element modeling of the
sensors and optimization of their response through a genetic algorithm. Sensor
development will be evaluated by a combination of lab and field studies in
conjunction with non-linear response history analyses. The polymer sensors to be
developed will have significant immediate implications for structural testing as
researchers would gain previously unavailable insight into the mechanisms of
inelastic deformation and damage accumulation. Furthermore, since polymer
waveguide sensors can be embedded within structures, they have great potential
in the field of health monitoring of composite structures and asphalt concrete
pavements. Through the educational plan proposed, one graduate student will work
with the international collaborator, Professor Calvi, on the historic structures
located in Italy. In addition, pre-college students will participate in the
project through the expansion of an existing program at North Carolina State
University.