* 0428325
* ITR - ASE - (int+sim): Exploring the Lagrangian Structure of Complex Flows with 100 Terabyte Datasets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,598,338.00

AST-0428325&lt;br/&gt;Vishniac&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cutting-edge science has
become extremely data-intensive, and therefore the inability to store and
analyze multi-Terabyte datasets today (and Petabytes tomorrow) is increasingly
limiting scientific progress. One important, long-standing problem, described by
Feynman as the last unsolved problem in classical physics, is turbulence in
magnetized and unmagnetized fluids. A formidable obstacle is that the intrinsic
physics of the turbulent cascade takes place in a Lagrangian frame, so that
fluid particles must be tracked backward in time. This requirement holds true in
other fields, such as cosmogenesis, where galaxies need to be tracked back
through past encounters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present research project will
develop a new approach to large-scale numerical simulations, saving almost every
time step in a database and thus permitting subsequent analysis by relatively
simple computation, only over a lot of data. The new idea, which has already
been tested, is to avoid the bottleneck of moving data to compute nodes, and
instead combine low-level, indexed data access with processing that occurs right
inside the database. This method permits the intended novel assault on the
problem of turbulence, combining a forefront science project with a
demonstration of the simulation environment of the future. It requires the
development of tools and procedures to organize the data in multiple formats,
each appropriate for a particular kind of statistical analysis, running either
inside or closely integrated to the database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resultant
improved understanding of magneto-hydrodynamic turbulence will have a broad
impact throughout astrophysics; and the new approach and concrete tools to be
created will affect most areas of science.