* 0428940
* ITR-(ASE+NHS)-(int): A Digital System Paradigm For Yield Enhancement and Graceful Degradation Via Error Acceptance
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Melvin Breuer, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,099,998.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;ITR-(ASE+NHS)-(int): A Digital System Paradigm For Yield
Enhancement and Graceful Degradation Via Error
Acceptance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite extensive research into improving
fabrication processes, continued VLSI scaling will be inhibited by high
variations in process parameters, higher defect densities, and higher
susceptibility to external noise. We propose two notions, namely error-tolerance
and acceptable operation, to facilitate imprecise computation: these notions
systematically capture the fact that an increasingly large class of digital
systems can be useful even if they do not perfectly conform to a rigid design
specification. We propose to develop a systematic methodology for design and
test of this class of digital systems that will exploit the notion of error
tolerance, to enable dramatic improvements in scale, speed, and cost. In the
proposed methodology, system specification will include a description of the
types of errors at system outputs, and the thresholds on their severities, that
are tolerable. The design methodology will exploit this information to obtain
designs that provide higher performance and/or lower
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the next 15 years, the proposed approach will
provide dramatic improvements in scale, speed, and cost for a wide class of
digital systems, including many integral to NHS. This will enable development
and wider deployment of devices with advanced capabilities in areas such as
speech processing, real-time translation of spoken natural languages, and
biometrics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;