* 0428708
* SST: Enabling Concepts in Embedded Sensors, Sensor Manufacturing and Integration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Sanjay Sampath, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2009
* USD 747,013.00

The research goal of this Sensor Small Team (SST) award is to develop the
fundamental science associated with thermal-spray-based sensors, a nascent,
emerging technology. Direct-Write Thermal Spray has the capability to fabricate
and embed sensors directly onto engineering components. The approach will be to
focus on three important sensing testbeds: mechanical, thermal, and magnetic
sensing. Within each topical area, a testbed sensor has been selected to explore
the scientific aspects including its operation, design, optimization, and
modeling. The sensors for mechanical, thermal, and magnetic sensing are
capacitive strain gauges, heat flux sensors, and magneto-resistive sensors,
respectively. In addition to their importance, these particular sensors
represent a well-balanced testbed for the various research tasks. It is further
expected that the resulting scientific results will be readily transferred to
similar sensor components. The research approach incorporates a balance of
sensor design, materials processing, experimental validation and analytical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the benefits of this research will
enable integrating thermal-spray-based sensing technology into a wide variety of
engineering components. The sensors will provide vital information on component
status and health, resulting in improved efficiencies, predicting and avoiding
catastrophic failure, and scheduling optimal times for maintenance. The
scientific advances made through this program will go a long way towards the
adaptation of Direct-Write Thermal Spray to industry and end-users. By
addressing issues of reliability, repeatability, feasible operating range, and
design parameters, Direct-Write Thermal Spray sensors can be deployed on a much
larger scale, and with a degree of confidence not currently available. This can
only be done through a systematic scientific approach. In terms of educational
impact, this project is truly interdisciplinary, enjoying contributions from
materials science, manufacturing, mechanical and electrical engineering,
chemistry and physics, and interaction is a necessity, rather than an option.
This project can engage students across a very wide range of disciplines and at
a broad range of levels.