* 0428004
* ITR - (NHS+ASE) - (dmc+int):    Distributed Communications and Control for Multiple Miniature Unmanned Air Vehicles
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Arnold Swindlehurst, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,136,194.00

Unmanned air vehicles (UAVs) are playing increasingly prominent roles in the
nation's defense programs and strategy. There are innumerable uses for such
devices in not only military, but civilian, commerical and homeland security
applications such as surveillance and reconnaissance, rapid deployment of
communication networks, border patrol, sensing hazardous environments, search
and rescue, precision agriculture, etc. The focus of this research is on the use
of multiple miniature UAVs (MUAVs) for these applications rather than their
larger military counterparts such as Predator and Global Hawk. MUAVs have a
number of significant advantages over larger platforms, such as their difficulty
in being detected or tracked, their ability to more easily avoid threats, to fly
at low altitudes and collect more localized data, to be launched without special
equipment or a runway, and to spread out and provide a wide ``aperture'' for
performing tasks such as geolocation or providing communications
links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of MUAVs do not come without cost,
however. There are a number of difficult challenges that must be overcome before
their potential can be realized. These challenges include the following: How can
a distributed group of MUAVs cooperate and communicate given their constraints
on size, power and motion, and in the presence of interference? How are
discrepancies in their individual data sets accounted for so that consensus on
strategy can be reached? Their mobility is both a blessing and a curse; can the
ever-changing shape of an array of MUAV platforms be adequately tracked or
maintained for high-resolution localization or imaging tasks? This research
effort is devoted to answering questions such as those above.&lt;br/&gt;