* 0428975
* SST: GOALI: MIMO Techniques for Remote Sensing of Physiological Motion
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Anders Host-Madsen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 03/31/2009
* USD 375,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;A means for unobtrusive and ubiquitous detection and monitoring of
heart and respiration activity &lt;br/&gt;from a distance could be a powerful
tool for health care, emergency, and surveillance applications, yet
&lt;br/&gt;remains a largely unrealized goal. Without contact or subject
preparation (special clothing, attachments, &lt;br/&gt;etc.), this could better
extend health monitoring to the chronically ill in routine life, allow wellness
&lt;br/&gt;monitoring for a large population without known predisposition for
risk or harm, and provide alarm and &lt;br/&gt;data in emergencies. Such
technology could also be used to detect lost or hidden subjects, to help assess
&lt;br/&gt;emotional state, and to compliment more cumbersome measurements as
pre-screening. Doppler radar &lt;br/&gt;remote sensing of vital signs has shown
promise to this end, with proof of concept demonstrated for &lt;br/&gt;various
applications by the UHM PI.s and others. Unfortunately, this principle has not
been developed to &lt;br/&gt;the level of practical application, mainly due to a
lack of an effective way to isolate desired target motion &lt;br/&gt;from
interference. However, by leveraging recent advances in signal processing and
wireless &lt;br/&gt;communications technologies, this technique has the
potential to transcend mere novelty and make a &lt;br/&gt;profound impact on
health and welfare in society. &lt;br/&gt;We propose to explore robust radar
monitoring techniques by isolating desired radar return signals &lt;br/&gt;from
unwanted motion through recent developments in multiple input multiple output
(MIMO) signal &lt;br/&gt;processing techniques, developed to enhance wireless
communications channel capacity through &lt;br/&gt;constructive use of multipath
phenomenon. The approach would involve three primary areas of research:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) development of spatial-frequency algorithms for single and
multiple source radar, (2) active radar &lt;br/&gt;system implementation using
wireless terminals and/or silicon radar chips, and (3) development of an
&lt;br/&gt;effective .pseudo-passive. sensing system where radio signals in the
environment are harnessed for radar &lt;br/&gt;monitoring without control or
specification of the signal source. The project will culminate with the
&lt;br/&gt;demonstration of robust Doppler radar MIMO system capable of
isolating and determining the number of &lt;br/&gt;subjects in the monitoring
field, and measuring their heart and respiration rates. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed three-year collaborative
research effort between the University of Hawaii at Manoa &lt;br/&gt;(UHM) and
Bell laboratories (BL) would explore techniques for making non-contact Doppler
radar &lt;br/&gt;sensing of cardiopulmonary activity a practical alternative or
supplement to more cumbersome and &lt;br/&gt;invasive technologies that
necessarily limit application. Recent work by the UHM PI and one Co-PI
&lt;br/&gt;(Lubecke) to implement Doppler sensing by leveraging
telecommunications technology, including the &lt;br/&gt;detection of heart and
respiration signatures with wireless terminals, has attracted international
attention &lt;br/&gt;for its potential. The second UHM Co-PI (Host-Madsen) is an
established expert in statistical and &lt;br/&gt;communications signal
processing with numerous publications in multi-user detection, estimation
theory, &lt;br/&gt;and adaptive signal processing. The industry partner, BL, is
widely considered the leader in the field of &lt;br/&gt;MIMO and other wireless
systems technology. In related work, graduate students working with the PI
&lt;br/&gt;have won three student paper competition awards in major IEEE MTT and
EMB conferences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The outcomes
of this project can lead to valuable tools beneficial for society in the areas
of health &lt;br/&gt;care, emergency response, military, and security
operations. The research would present a particularly &lt;br/&gt;motivating
educational opportunity that leverages Hawaii.s unique needs for remote
healthcare tools, and &lt;br/&gt;reaches out to a diverse population of ethnic
minority students that have been historically underserved by &lt;br/&gt;local
educational and industrial opportunities. Thus, an important aspect of this
program will be &lt;br/&gt;interactions of UHM students with BL industrial co-
advisors, involving extended periods of training in the &lt;br/&gt;highly
relevant fields of communications and bio-sensing engineering, beyond the limits
of the University &lt;br/&gt;(and Hawaii), at BL in a world-class research
environment. The partnership established will allow UHM &lt;br/&gt;students and
faculty to complement UHM resources by leveraging BL.s considerable expertise
and &lt;br/&gt;facilities without charge, including a broad range of wireless
test systems.