* 0428889
* Shear Stress Measurement in Liquid Environments Using MEMS Sensor Arrays
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Beth Pruitt, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 08/31/2008
* USD 390,900.00

Proposal Number: 0428889&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Beth
Pruitt&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation: Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;Sensors: Shear
Stress Measurement in Liquid Environments using MEMS
Sensor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) shear stress
sensors offer the potential to make measurements in fluids with unprecedented
sensitivity, spatial and temporal resolution. The sensor arrays to be developed
under this grant will facilitate hydrodynamic measurements which simply cannot
be made now, e.g. in ocean reef environments, cardiovascular mockups,
turbomachinery components, and flowing cell cultures. MEMS processes offer tight
tolerances, reduction in size and power requirements, and parallel fabrication
of several designs of floating element direct shear stress sensors in one
iteration. These sensor arrays provide an exciting platform to explore factors
affecting wall shear stress, such as roughness, floating element and gap size,
as well as spatial variation along and across a flow. Additionally, indirect
thermal hot wire sensors will be fabricated near and on several of the direct
floating element sensors to explore and compare the limits in dynamic response
and resolution in varied flow conditions for each sensor type. While most MEMS
sensing devices have been developed for measurements in air and utilize
unreliable indirect methods, the proposed research addresses the
characterization and implementation of direct sensing elements in harsh liquid
environments. The goals of this project include: (1) Fabrication of calibrated
shear flow sensing arrays suitable for operation in harsh liquid environments,
e.g. an ocean surf-zone at depths of 10 to 30 meters. The smallest sensor size
to be evaluated is 50 micronmeters, less than the diameter of a human hair; (2)
Measurements using the sensors in steady and unsteady flows of saline solutions,
and characterization of flows with and without the sensor; and (3) Simulation
and analysis of the flow-structure interactions of the sensing elements under
varied flows. Optimization of geometry for sensitivity and to minimize flow
perturbations. The intellectual merit of this work lies in the development of
new shear stress measurement tools, calibration methodology, and accompanying
models. Longer term applications of the arrays will enable improved model
validation and predictive tools for turbulent flows, fragile coastal ecosystems,
and algorithms for control in complex flows. This work will support innovative,
interdisciplinary research and development of miniature floating element
sensors, designed and calibrated for hydrodynamic measurements to provide
useful, real-time shear stress measurements with high resolution and dynamic
response. The program integrates theoretical and experimental approaches in a
balanced manner. The methodology and equipment developed under the program will
lead to new and enhanced educational demonstrations, e.g. utilizing this
benchtop system for unsteady flow analysis and measurements in portable channels
or in field environments (e.g. oceans, rivers). The intersection of disciplines
is wide open for new researchers with no predisposition to background or
connections; this program provides particularly important opportunities for
underrepresented groups in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;