* 0428259
* ITR: Collaborative Research - (ASE) - (sim + int): Building Biologically Based Immune System Simulations for Education and Training
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Andries van Dam, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2008
* USD 471,328.00

This project explores the use of computer simulation for helping students of
biology at all levels master an increasingly complex body of information. This
simulation faithfully represents the state of biological knowledge, displays
information in visual form, and is fully interactive and engaging to novice
users. The simulation is of the human immune system. These simulations play a
critical role in understanding the functioning of the immune system itself. The
most valuable first use of the model will be to make difficult concepts in the
immune system easier to understand. The simulation is the basis for a highly
interactive, compelling educational game for teaching immunology at the high
school and freshman college levels. The learning objectives and instructional
strategies will be developed in consultation with biology teachers, at both the
high school and college freshmen levels, and with learning research scientists.
The project involves a multidisciplinary team with expertise in: (a) the
complexities and subtleties of the underlying biology; (b) the information
technology needed to build complex simulations and visualizations; (c) the
instructional objectives and strategies best suited for the target audience; (d)
application of the software tools to build games that people in the targeted age
groups will find engaging and motivating; and (e) evaluating the impact of
game/exploration-based instruction. This project will build on work on
development of an instructional game for immunology supported by the National
Institutes of Health and research on learning technologies supported by several
public and private resources.