* 0428157
* SIRG: "Being There": User-centric Wireless Image-based Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Mark Bocko, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Andreas Weisshaar
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,206,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This Sensor proposal focuses on addressing the limitations of large
scale wireless networks of&lt;br/&gt;imaging sensors, namely limitations of
sensor power and network bandwidth and human limitations&lt;br/&gt;in the
capability to absorb and integrate large amounts of image data. The ideal system
provides&lt;br/&gt;the user with an integrated view from the multiple imagers,
providing the feeling of being there&lt;br/&gt;along with the capability to
navigate the space while allowing the network to run unattended
for&lt;br/&gt;long periods of time. Achieving these goals requires a cross-layer
design that encompasses all levels&lt;br/&gt;from the application to the
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: We propose developing adaptable low
power imagers, distributed image&lt;br/&gt;fusion algorithms, and an overarching
sensor management protocol. The imagers will be able to&lt;br/&gt;capture scenes
with adaptable resolution, both spatially and in terms of image bit-depth,
and&lt;br/&gt;perform compression for a fraction of the power required by
existing systems. To present the&lt;br/&gt;image data to the user in a more
integrated fashion, we will develop image mosaicking algorithms&lt;br/&gt;that
work with uncalibrated cameras and non-planar scenes. Finally, we will develop
intelligent&lt;br/&gt;sensor management techniques that use application-level
information to appropriately configure the&lt;br/&gt;sensors and the network
itself.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: (1) Providing a being there experience will
have a profound impact on&lt;br/&gt;distance-based viewing applications, from
surveillance to tele-presence. (2) The PIs are committed&lt;br/&gt;to training
students and will integrate this research with their teaching. (3) The cross-
disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;nature of this research and the potential for high
societal impact will hopefully attract students&lt;br/&gt;from under-represented
groups. (4) The PIs will develop a sensor network tutorial and use
this&lt;br/&gt;with the demonstration image-based sensor network to spark the
interest of the community in this&lt;br/&gt;exciting field of study.