* 0428403
* Sensors: Design of smart miniaturized sensor and interpretation of sensor data in intelligent diagnosis of mechanical-pneumatic systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Imin Kao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/2009
* USD 296,552.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0428403&lt;br/&gt;Imin Kao&lt;br/&gt;SUNY at Stoney
Brook&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at integration of smart sensors and
methodology in the interpretation and collaboration of sensor data for the
diagnosis of mechanical-pneumatic systems. The objectives of this research
project are to: (i) design and fabricate miniaturized, multi-function, and
telemetric sensor, integrated to engineering systems, and (ii) interpret sensor
data in decision-making process for fault detection and diagnosis (FDD) with
both model-based and feature-based approaches. Using new smart multi-function,
telemetric, and integrated sensors as "intelligent nodes" in systems will
provide necessary sensory information (e.g., pressure, flow, and temperature)
for the next-generation diagnosis. University at Stony Brook, in collaboration
with Festo Corporation, Hauppauge, NY, and Bremen University, Germany, will
perform the fundamental research on smart sensors and intelligent diagnosis to
investigate advanced telemetric MEMS sensors design and various techniques to
enhance the selectivity, speed, and robustness of systems. This project has
GOALI collaboration with Festo Corporation to apply research results in MEMS and
FDD to mechanical-pneumatic systems, and to maximize the broader impact of the
technology, in addition to broader educational impacts involving the
incorporation of research results in curriculum and various focuses in
education.&lt;br/&gt;This is a GOALI project supported under the Sensors
Initiative NSF 04-522.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;