* 0428850
* SENSORS: Networked Oceanographic Sensor Array (NOSA) for Sensing the Chemical and Biological State of the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Zbigniew Kolber, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2010
* USD 374,839.00

The PI's propose to develop a Networked Oceanographic Sensor Array (NOSA), an
instrument frame with a well-defined Ethernet interface that will operate as a
network object in the marine environment. Its small size and low power
consumption will make NOSA deployable on a variety of existing, and emerging
platforms, including cabled seafloor and moored observatories, moorings,
remotely-operated/autonomous underwater vehicles (ROVs, and AUVs), floats, and
gliders. The instrument functionality will be defined by a set of plug-and-play
sensors carried in standardized sensor sockets. The instrument frame will be
equipped with a 32-bit processor running Linux and Java, and will operate as a
field-reconfigurable remote sensor server. The object-based communication
software will allow access to the instrument using a standardized set of object
methods and properties, common for all the NOSA-compliant sensors, and the
instrument data will be distributed in XML (eXtended Markup Language), or netcdf
format.

The nonproprietary, well-defined and documented mechanical/electrical
architecture of NOSA will allow development of future sensors by a third party,
promoting development of a new family of instruments. These instruments will be
easily adaptable to specific applications and requirements, by simply modifying
the sensor configuration, while maintaining the generic character of the NOSA
electronics and software. The open software architecture will permit an
implementation-independent interface, simplifying the logistics of instrumenting
a vide variety of observational programs. The first implementation of the
proposed NOSA instrument will carry a Fast Repetition Rate Fluorometer (FRRF)
sensor to measure photosynthetic pigments and to characterize
oxygenic/anoxygenic photosynthesis, a dissolved oxygen sensor, and a pCO2/pH
sensor. In this configuration the instrument will measure the most critical
chemical/biological properties related to the carbon and energy cycle in the
ocean.