* 0428483
* ITR: Collaborative Research: Looking Ahead: Designing the Next Generation Cyber-infrastructure to Operate Interactive Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Ronald Johnson, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephen Meacham
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,749,940.00

This project involves research and experimentation with cyberinfrastructure
components in order to develop and prototype new approaches to information
technology for ocean observing systems. The goal is to develop and test ways of
managing data from ocean observatories as well as mechanisms for facilitating
the operation of ocean observatories. A centerpiece of the work is the
initiation of a prototype ocean observatory grid that links submarine facilities
off the Pacific coasts of Mexico, the U.S. and Canada, the "Laboratory for an
Ocean Observatory Knowledge INtegration Grid (LOOKING)," using experimental
wireless networks, optical networks, and Grid technology. The LOOKING framework
provides middleware to facilitate and enable instrument and infrastructure
control, data generation and distributed storage, data assimilation through
comparison with ocean simulations, integrative data fusion and analysis,
visualization, and spontaneous user collaboration. The effort needed to develop
this involves three parts: a physical layer based primarily on network
connectivity provided by the OptIPuter and ROADNet projects; research on shore-
side software technology based on web-service based implementations of a variety
of tools including ocean ontology-based semantic search tools, event-detection
in real-time data streams, the integration of OPeNDAP and SRB, and data
visualization; and ocean-side research focused on instrument monitoring and
control, as well as data-flow management. As part of the proposed work a
converged data grid model for the MARS and ROADNet data systems will be
developed, data from CODAR sites, ships, cabled observatories and surface buoys
will be integrated into the system, and a variety of user services will be
implemented. The expectation is that lessons learned from this activity will
inform the design of cyberinfrastructure systems for future ocean observatories
such as those envisaged within the ORION project. If successful, this project
could have a significant impact on the success of the planned ORION ocean
observatory project by developing data management and observatory control
approaches that can be implemented in ORION and by developing effective user
interfaces to a collection of ocean observing systems. Research challenges
include developing a software infrastructure suitable for heterogeneous real-
time data streams, monitoring and control in non-robust networks, and real-time
event detection and characterization. This project involves numerous
institutions and combines the efforts of computer science researchers and
oceanographers. It leverages, or links to, a number of existing or funded pilot
observatory, networking and data system projects including: SCCOOS, MARS,
NEPTUNE-Canada, ROADNet, and OptIPuter. New approaches to ocean observing
systems involve large arrays of sensors and many mobile, robotic platforms for
research and educational activities throughout the ocean basins. Innovative
full-ocean-depth observatories in coastal, regional, and global settings can
vastly expand human tele-presence within, and the basic understanding of,
interlinked processes that modulate climate, create energy and mineral deposits,
influence the carbon cycle, drive major hazards, such as earthquakes, tsunami's
and violent storms, and support the recently discovered volcanically hosted
microbial biosphere-a potential analog for life on other planets.