* 0428026
* Workshop/Conference  for Probability Models and Statistical Analyses for Ranking Data
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Joseph Verducci, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 04/30/2005
* USD 7,000.00

abstract PI: Joseph Verducci proposal: 0428026

Workshop/Conference for Probability Models and Statistical Analyses for Ranking
Data

The workshop, geared toward young researchers, is comprised of five week-long
background courses and a lecture series of current research topics. The five
short courses for ranking data are 1) Probability Models; 2) Experimental
Designs and Analysis; 3) Simulation Based Methods; 4) Paired Comparisons; 5)
Tests of Independence. Current research topics include Ranking Methods for
Search Engines, Connections with the Theory of Group Representations, and Random
Effects in Consumer Preferences. The conference, geared more toward specialists,
consists of invited and contributed papers from diverse areas, including Machine
Learning, Algebra, and Utility Theory. Contributed papers emphasize current
applications.

Data in the form of rankings may be found everywhere: in marketing, rankings are
the key to studying subtle changes in consumer preferences under changing
conditions; in sports, for determining everything from college team seedings to
Olympic medals; on the internet, thousands of similar sites must be ranked in
different ways to meet the needs of diverse clients. Accurate analysis of such
data requires specialized methods. Historically these methods were studied in
three eras, the pre-computer era, where simple models were constructed, largely
based on theories from psychology and economics; the early computer era, where
many models were categorized and implemented; and the modern era, where models
are being tailored to complex problems. The workshop/conference is designed to
lead young researchers through the diverse literature to the current state of
the art.

