* 0428662
* RSVP Advanced Planning
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Peter Nemethy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* MARVIN GOLDBERG
* 06/30/2007
* USD 5,710,001.00

The scientific purpose of the Rare Symmetry Violating Processes (RSVP) project
is to observe extremely rare processes that would signal a breakdown of
fundamental symmetry laws of the Standard Model (SM) of Elementary Particle
Physics. In doing so, RSVP will seek answers to three of the most compelling
questions in particle physics: What new particles and fundamental interactions
exist beyond the highest energies achievable with the highest energy colliders;
what is the origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe; and is
the degree of CP (charge-parity) symmetry breaking in the K meson and B meson
systems the same, as predicted by the SM.

The RSVP project will deploy two types of measurement toward these ends, both of
which utilize intense proton beams (provided by the Brookhaven National
Laboratory Alternating Gradient Synchrotron) that enable the search for
extremely rare processes at a "sensitivity frontier", thus complementing the
traditional approach of searching for new particles at the "energy frontier."
One approach will search for the direct conversion of a muon into an electron, a
process that becomes possible in theories of physics beyond the SM. This
subproject is called MECO for "Muon to Electron Conversion." This transition
violates lepton flavor conservation and is strictly forbidden in the SM. MECO
will observe this process even if only one in 1016 of the muons undergoes the
transition, a sensitivity that is more than one thousand times better than
previous measurements. If no muon-to-electron conversion is observed at this
sensitivity, some of the leading supersymmetric models for physics beyond the SM
would be ruled out. Thus, even a negative result would be of great importance.

The second approach employed in RSVP is to observe CP (charge-parity) symmetry
breaking in the decay of the long-lived neutral kaon (K0) to a neutral pion
(p0), a neutrino, and an anti-neutrino (KOPIO). Only one in 40 billion kaons are
expected to decay in this manner. KOPIO is one hundred thousand times more
sensitive than previous measurements. A measurement of CP violation in this
system will complement and greatly strengthen the many analyses of CP violation
in B mesons being conducted in other major experiments around the world. Any
difference between CP violation in the K and B mesons would also signal physics
beyond the SM. In another important context, the violation of CP symmetry is
required to understand the evolution of the early universe into the present
matter-dominated universe.

Education and Outreach: KOPIO and MECO are state-of-the-art experiments that
address important questions at the frontiers of physics. The potential to
leverage RSVP to enhance education at the K-16 levels, to stimulate public
interest in science, and to involve underrepresented groups is high. Planning
for education and outreach activities is part of the scope of this award.