* 0428917
* SST:  Control-oriented Optimal Multisensor Design and Microfabrication for Structural Vibration Suppression in Mechatronic Systems (GOALI)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Richard White, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/2008
* USD 380,001.00

Abstract 0428917 Robotp Horowitz Univ Calif/Berkeley

In this project magnetic hard disk drives are used as the context to examine two
problems in sensor development. First, how many sensors are necessary and what
are their optimal placements for closed-loop and vibration suppression control
of a flexible structure? Second, how can micro-scaled strain and vibration
sensor fabrication techniques be incorporated into traditional manufacturing
environments? Novel control-oriented techniques for the integrated design,
fabrication and placement of multiple sensors for vibration suppression control
and monitoring in mechatronic systems will be developed and integrated with MEMS
sensor fabrication techniques on steel substrates to develop such a technology.
Hutchison Technologies Inc. (HTI), the industrial partner in this project, will
assemble the fabricated substrates with the finished sensors into prototype-
instrumented suspensions for magnetic hard disk drives. These instrumented
suspensions will be incorporated into dual-stage servo systems with MEMS
microactuators already fabricated by the project research team, for evaluation
of their performance.

The project will provide students with the opportunity to learn mechatronic
design approaches that cohesively integrate control systems theoretic design and
analysis methodologies with CAD, FEM and mechanical design optimization
methodologies, while simultaneously developing new MEMS processing techniques
for embedding sensors into metal-mechanic devices.

This is GOALI project supported under Sensors Initiative NSF 04-522.