* 0428644
* SENSORS SST: Novel Hyperspectral Imaging Sensor with Spectral Zooming Feature
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Wang, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

Hyperspectral imaging sensor acquires and analyzes 3-D data consisting of 1-D
spectral and 2-D spatial image information. It offers more accurate information
extraction than possible with conventional imaging technique. Especially in
infrared spectral band, hyperspectral imaging sensor can be used for materials
identification, chemical and biological agents identification, military
target/decoy discrimination identification and tracking, intelligent missile
seeking, space weather sensing, remote monitoring of pollution sites, etc.
Existing hyperspectral imaging devices use fixed spectral band and are too slow
to analyze large amount of 3-D data and thus cannot meet real-time application
requirements. We propose to develop a novel hyperspectral imaging sensor with
spectral zooming feature. Using a special fiber bundle, we can expand the
spatial domain and allow the dispersion of spectral information to be acquired
simultaneously by the imaging camera. Thus, the 1-D spectral and 2-D spatial
image information can be acquired at the same time without the need for
sequential acquisition as commonly done by existing spectral imaging devices. It
is preferred that the hyperspectral imaging sensor can offer wide spectral band
for searching target of interest that emit certain spectral information. It is
also preferred that it can offer high spectral resolution. Using limited
spectral pixels, the spectral information can still cover wide spectral band
(spectral course view) and narrow spectral band (spectral fine view) through the
spectral zooming feature. The device is capable of contour mapping of designated
spectral ranges for pin pointing specific target area and capable of rapid
processing spectral image data. The successful development of hyperspectral
imaging sensor along with high sensitive sol gel film has significant scientific
and engineering value since the hyperspectral imaging is of vital importance to
the sensing field. The proposed research will also benefit university education,
academic research, and photonic material development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;