* 0428738
* ITR - (ASE+ECS)-(int):    Synthetic Reality:    Physically Rendering Dynamic 3D Objects from Programmable Matter
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2011
* William Messner, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 03/31/2011
* USD 1,534,278.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues research to develop a form of programmable
matter, called Claytronics, and investigates how it can be used to create
dynamic 3D physical artifacts. Claytronics is an ensemble of individual
components, called catoms, each of which is a self-contained computer that can
communicate, move, and adhere to other catoms. Using Claytronics, this research
investigates new forms of communication media, called "pario", which can be used
to capture and&lt;br/&gt;reproduce dynamic 3D objects. Using pario, the project
seeks to develop science and technology to enable applications such as "pario-
conferencing", which, unlike video-conferencing, renders participants and their
environments as actual physical objects that can interact, rather than as images
on a video screen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In pursuit of this long-range vision,
the project is designing and building prototypes that will scale in both catom
count (towards millions of catoms) and catom size (towards microns in radius).
This entails research along many fronts, including: new materials, methods of
locomotion, packaging, 3D capture, distributed planning and programming,
networking, and simulation. The project is developing the means by which users
can program an ensemble of catoms as a single entity and make it appear to act
as a single entity even though each catom operates
independently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like the telephone (audio) and the
television (video), the advent of Claytronics (pario) is expected to have
significant ramifications by increasing the quality of communication between
humans. On the scientific front, Claytronics will be a testbed for solving some
of the most challenging&lt;br/&gt;problems we face today: how to build complex,
massively distributed dynamic systems. The research is a step towards
integrating computation directly into our physical environment, by integrating
it into the very artifacts around us and allowing them to interact with the
world.&lt;br/&gt;