* 0428571
* Collaborative Research: Sensors: Inductively Coupled Flexural Wave Resonator Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Todd Kaiser, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 08/31/2009
* USD 198,275.00

Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) have been developed into numerous physical
sensors. While individual sensors have demonstrated the viability of the
technology, many applications require arrays of many different sensors.
Development of efficient methods to monitor resonant sensor arrays is proposed
including the integration of the monitoring system with micromechanical sensor
arrays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microsystems for monitoring temperature, pressure,
acceleration, rotation, stress, chemicals, biological agents and other physical
parameters have been developed. Often information for more than one parameter or
single parameters at numerous locations is required. A method to probe numerous
sensors simultaneously will be developed. The method is based on energy
absorption of resonant sensing circuits. Energy absorption techniques are well
known in spectroscopy but have not been applied to sensor arrays. Rather than
look at the energy emission and absorption of atomic transitions in materials,
energy absorption of sensing arrays will be investigated using similar
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensor that will initially be integrated
into the sensing system will be the flexural plate resonator. This sensor was
chosen because it has been demonstrated for both chemical and biological agents,
operates in liquid and vapor environments, has resonant frequencies in the
megahertz range and can be easily microfabricated using standard techniques. The
resonant sensor will be manufactured to have a resonant frequency that is within
the electrical absorption &lt;br/&gt;frequencies of an inductor-capacitor
circuit. Electrical energy will inductively couple into the electrical circuit
and drive the sensor into resonance. The absorption of the electrical and
mechanical energy will effectively change the impedance of the driving circuit,
the maximum change being at the mechanical resonance of the sensor. The resonant
frequency will vary with changes in the mass and stresses of the structure. This
is made sensitive to different agents by coating the resonant surface with thin
film sorption layers. Combining numerous sensors will create an absorption
spectrum that can be used to monitor resonances by FM spectroscopy techniques.
The system will sweep the frequency and lock to each resonance, record the value
then continue the sweep to the next resonance, much like the scan button on car
radios. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is the
development of wireless sensor interrogation technology and the application of
these technologies to interdisciplinary problems that require sensors. The goal
of this research is to develop a wireless telemetry system for remotely
interrogating arrays of resonant MEMS sensors based on the absorption of
electrical energy through inductive coupling. These sensors and sensing system
would have applications as chemical vapor and biochemical detectors, as well as
strain, humidity, pressure and acceleration sensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this research is the continued integration of sensor
technology with microelectromechanical systems and radio frequency
identification. This work will lay the foundation to create a system that will
passively monitor parameters, store the information through electrical or
mechanical means and transmit the data when probed. This research will increase
the investigators knowledge base and expertise in system performance assessment,
and this research will also impact the education of both graduate and
undergraduate students through the respective university curriculum and student
research programs. The multi-disciplinary features of this research will require
graduate students of mechanical, electrical and chemical engineering to interact
to solve the stated problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;