* 0428696
* Sensors: High Selectivity Gas Sensing by Photostimulation of Semiconducting Metal Oxides
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Harry Tuller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2008
* USD 256,000.00

The ability to sense an ever larger number of chemical species is essential for
safeguarding the environment, protecting workers against toxic industrial
chemicals, securing our nation against chemical weapons, insuring indoor air
quality, improving productivity via closed loop process control and improving
medical diagnosis. Semiconducting Metal Oxide Gas Sensors (MOGSs), while
exhibiting high sensitivity to different vapor species and simple construction
do, however, suffer from relatively limited selectivity inhibiting wider use.
Furthermore, unlike polymers, MOGSs require heating to above 200C to insure
sufficiently rapid kinetics thereby increasing complexity and power demands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research program, we explore a novel approach for
activating sensitivity and tuning selectivity of MOGSs by using monochromatic
light to promote charge-transfer interactions between the sensor and adsorbed
gas molecules thereby eliminating the need for thermal excitation. Towards these
ends we will examine the sensitivity and selectivity of illuminated n-type
SrTiO3 thin films, prepared by PLD with controlled orientation and
microstructure, to a number of reducing and oxidizing gases. DC and AC impedance
and photo-current spectroscopy measurements will be performed, in situ, in a
unique microprobe system for achieving an improved understanding of the sensing
mechanisms. Small arrays of MOGSs with integrated LEDs will be assembled to
demonstrate the ability to monitor a number of gases with high selectivity at
room temperature. Similar devices will be prepared to serve as the basis of a
laboratory experiment for undergraduate and high school students for
demonstrating principles relating to semiconductor junctions under illumination,
and their relevance to gas sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success along these
lines would serve as a major breakthrough in the field of solid-state gas
sensors and would create possibilities for the selective detection of numerous
additional gases, improve device stability and lifetime as well as contribute to
an improved fundamental understanding of the gas sensing phenomenon.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;