* 0428020
* ITR-(NHS)-(dmc)-TREEWORLD: Probabilistic Tree Transducers for Machine Translation and Natural Language Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Kevin Knight, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,250,000.00

Many recent advances in natural language processing (e.g., speech recognition
and information extraction) are due to widespread use of finite-state automata.
These automata probabilistically transform input strings into output strings,
and they can be quickly assembled to tackle new jobs via generic mathematical
operations like composition and forward application. However, these automata are
a bad fit for many important problems that require syntax-sensitive
transformations and large-scale re-ordering (such as language translation and
summarization).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are investigating tree automata as an
alternative building block for new natural language systems. These automata walk
over input trees and produce output trees. Fortunately, there is an extensive
mathematical theory associated with these devices. These automata also fit many
of the ad hoc models recently proposed in natural language research. However,
there are several critical missing pieces: (1) how to design efficient computer
science algorithms for generic tree operations, (2) how to design efficient
machine learning algorithms for inducing tree automata and probabilities from
linguistic data, and (3) how to use automata to accurately model problems in
automatic language translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We expect this research to
yield several benefits. Many researchers who currently use finite-state tools
will switch to more powerful tree-based automata and obtain more accurate
language processing systems. Also, tree automata will enable better
understanding of how to model language translation more deeply and accurately,
and -- importantly -- in such a way that syntactic and lexical translation
knowledge can still be acquired fully automatically by the machine from text
corpora.