* 0428912
* ITR - (ASE) - (sim+dmc):     Computational Toolbox for the Investigation of Multiscale Surface Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Richard Alkire, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,225,000.00

This project focuses on the development of a computational toolbox for
investigation of multiscale&lt;br/&gt;surface processes that are central to
nanotechnology as well as other current technologies. Two
physical&lt;br/&gt;systems will be studied that span from nano-scale phenomena
to large-scale deterministic transport&lt;br/&gt;phenomena. The algorithms and
software, developed to simulate and extract information from
multiscale&lt;br/&gt;systems, are generic over a broad class of problems, and
will contribute well beyond the applications used&lt;br/&gt;in their
development.&lt;br/&gt;The physical systems include electrodeposition of
metallic nanoclusters with additives to achieve&lt;br/&gt;specific shapes, and
environmental degradation through interaction of pits, crevices and cracks.
The&lt;br/&gt;physical systems, chosen for their computational structure, are
characteristic of a large class of systems&lt;br/&gt;where controlled shape
evolution is exploited to produce desired structures. Key issues are to
understand&lt;br/&gt;how small-scale surface interactions guide spontaneous
self-organization, how to extract insight from&lt;br/&gt;noisy data and
uncertain fundamental understanding, and how to insure quality control at
multiple scales&lt;br/&gt;in manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;Computational tools will
be developed for simulation and sensitivity analysis in multi-
phenomena&lt;br/&gt;multiscale systems that require methods for coupling of
stochastic and deterministic models. Challenges&lt;br/&gt;for deterministic
simulation include the effective use of parallel computers, and dealing with
moving&lt;br/&gt;boundaries, ill-conditioning and stiffness. We will explore
classes of preconditioners for the iterative&lt;br/&gt;methods that solve large
linear systems of equations at each time step, in particular a newly-
developed&lt;br/&gt;multigrid method that is well-suited to moving boundary
problems. Challenges for stochastic simulation&lt;br/&gt;include stiffness,
which has only recently been recognized as a barrier to efficiency for
stochastic&lt;br/&gt;simulation.&lt;br/&gt;Sensitivity analysis is an important
part of this effort. For the deterministic computations, we will&lt;br/&gt;make
use of recently developed methods that are adaptive in space and time. We will
develop new&lt;br/&gt;sensitivity analysis methods and software for stochastic
systems, and couple them to deterministic&lt;br/&gt;sensitivity analysis for the
physical systems of interest. We will facilitate the use of our toolkit
by&lt;br/&gt;extension to larger-scale software systems of a recently-developed
environment for the rapid creation of&lt;br/&gt;GUIs for scientific and
numerical software.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the National Priority Area
of Advanced Science and Engineering (ASE), and&lt;br/&gt;the Technical Focus
Areas of Innovation in computational modeling or simulation in research
or&lt;br/&gt;education (sim) (primary), and of Innovative approaches to the
integration of data, models,&lt;br/&gt;communications, analysis and/or control
systems, including dynamic, data-driven applications for use
in&lt;br/&gt;prediction, risk-assessment and decision-making (dmc)
(secondary).&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
impact the National Priority Area of ASE through the development
of&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and software to enhance the use of high performance
computers in the investigation of&lt;br/&gt;multiscale surface processes. The
availability of such a toolbox will accelerate fundamental
scientific&lt;br/&gt;research and engineering design in an area with the
potential for large economic impact. Software&lt;br/&gt;developed as a result of
this project will be widely distributed in the scientific and engineering,
computer&lt;br/&gt;science and mathematical sciences communities.&lt;br/&gt;The
educational activities feature a multidisciplinary, cross-institutional approach
to graduate&lt;br/&gt;education. Students will work in multidisciplinary teams,
with joint thesis advisors from a primary and a&lt;br/&gt;secondary discipline.
This approach has recently been undertaken at UCSB with some success; we
plan&lt;br/&gt;to institutionalize this approach to graduate education in
Computational Science and Engineering (CSE)&lt;br/&gt;at UCSB, and to export the
model to UIUC. The model also includes industrial internships,
career&lt;br/&gt;development workshops, and mentoring of undergraduates. Both
UIUC and UCSB have been pioneers&lt;br/&gt;in developing graduate programs in
CSE and have programs with a similar structure which will
facilitate&lt;br/&gt;the sharing of educational ideas and innovations across the
institutions.