* 0428584
* Sharing the Message of Global Change Through Multimedia, Vertically Integrated Outreach Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel P. Maki
* 04/30/2009
* USD 305,000.00

This project is developing a Web-based curriculum about how different regions
are affected by climate change. It is an expansion of education programs
currently being implemented by the PI, which target graduate, undergraduate, and
K-12 students. The new curriculum is based on the near-real-time
ecophysiological data being collected at the PI's research sites in arctic
Alaska, San Diego's Mediterranean-type ecosystem, and the La Paz desert in
Mexico. The new curriculum highlights the importance of climate change, the
real-world application of scientific data and concepts, and how climatic events
in one region (e.g., El Nino events) affect climate change in other regions
(e.g. arctic oscillations). Through the NSF-sponsored GK-12 "Partnerships
Involving the Scientific Community in Elementary Schools" (PISCES) Project, a
limited number of Web-based lessons are in early development. The current
project is not only enhancing existing lessons with additional on-line
components and structure, but also improving teacher and parent content
knowledge, reaching a larger public audience, and impacting undergraduate
ecology courses. The curriculum is designed to be more dynamic, more intensive
in its links to additional sources of global change research and project
information, and to reach a broader spectrum of users. Data to be used in this
project include temperature, precipitation, carbon flux, soil moisture, soil
radiation, wind speed and direction, evapotranspiration, and soil and air
temperatures. Access to the curriculum and the results of the project will be
disseminated through (1) Internet-accessible curriculum lessons for classroom
and public use; (2) videoconference feeds between students in different regions;
(3) "science night" opportunities for the community and parents to learn about
global change; (4) a public lecture series introducing the curriculum to
teachers and the community; (5) involvement of students in two undergraduate
ecology classes at San Diego State University with enhancements to the
curriculum; and (6) freestanding, interactive kiosks with Internet-connected
computers to be installed at central community areas (heritage or community
centers, schools, or museums) in Barrow, Alaska, San Diego, California and La
Paz, Mexico. Workshops via videoconference have been highly successful in the
past at reaching K-8 teachers and students in Alaska and La Paz, utilizing
facilities at San Diego State University, the San Diego County Office of
Education, the North Slope Borough School District, and the Centro de
Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste (CIBNOR). The Web-based component of the
project provides a versatile means of reaching the geographically diverse
intended audience, as well as potentially reaching other audiences around the
globe.

