* 0428885
* SST:  Ligand-Gated, Ion Channel Sensing Membranes Coupled to Novel, Fluorescence-Based Waveguide Platforms Through Conducting Polymer Supports
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Henry Hall, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: S. Scott Saavedra &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0428885&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project focuses on the
development of new optical/electrochemical, channel waveguide-based sensing
platforms which respond to analytes that interact with chemically-gated ion
channel receptors (KATP channels in the first phases of this research)
reconstituted into a planar supported (poly)lipid bilayer (PSLB). The proteo-
lipid membrane transducer will be tethered to a self-assembled, conducting
polymer (SA-CP) film, co-polymerized with low concentrations of ion-sensitive
fluorescent dyes, supported on a electroactive channel integrated optical
waveguide (EA-CH-IOW). The sensor platform will transduce the binding of
analytes into both electrochemical (potentiometric/impedance) and optical
(absorbance/fluorescence) responses to provide a mechanistic understanding of
sensor responses and allow optimization of the transducer layers. Backcoupled
(near-field) waveguide detection of the fluorescence response is one of the
unique features of this proposed sensor, and its development will enable a
significant new chip-like sensor technology, with integrated, in-plane
excitation and detection. &lt;br/&gt; Specific challenges and milestones for
include:&lt;br/&gt;a) Multilayer channel waveguides must be developed with dual
optical confinement geometries that provide both strong evanescent fields for
excitation of ion-sensitive chromophores and a mode structure that enhances
waveguide back-coupling of their luminescence response. This should lead to
sensors with optical components seamlessly integrated with biomimetic sensing
materials, which are easy to make, deploy, and integrate into optical
communications systems.&lt;br/&gt;b) The upper layer of the waveguide will be
electroactive, an essential feature of our mechanistic studies, where absorbance
and luminescence responses are tracked simultaneously with
potentiometric/impedance responses. The creation of the EA-CH-IOW requires
optimizing deposition technologies, and solving material compatibility issues to
integrate them with "soft" transducer layers.&lt;br/&gt;c) An ultrathin,
hydrophilic CP film, composed of a functionalized (poly)thiophene and a
(poly)counter-ion, will be self-assembled on the waveguide surface. The SA-CP
layer will function as a water-swollen "cushion" for the PSLB with embedded ion
channels, to create the proper environment for electrochemical transduction of
changes in transmembrane ion flux. Ultra-sensitive spectral detection modalities
will be facilitated by co-polymerization of the (poly)thiophene layer with
crown-ether-modified dyes that exhibit significant changes in their luminescence
properties upon metal ion binding. Self-assembly will be used to confine these
dyes near the waveguide/CP interface, which is critical to the realization of
back-coupled fluorescence detection modalities.&lt;br/&gt;d) New polymerizable
lipid technologies, which produce stable, conformal lipid bilayers, will be used
to reconstitute transmembrane K+-channels (prototypes for more complex ligand-
gated channels), creating bioactive transducer layers that combine the stability
of a cross-linked polymer with the biocompatibility of a lipid membrane.
Demonstration of ligand-gated, ion transport through ITO/CP-supported PSLBs will
open the way for broad implementation of sensors based on biomimetic poly(lipid)
membrane chemistries.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to the cross-
disciplinary training provided for graduate and undergraduate students and
postdoctoral fellows at the University of Arizona, many of whom are members of
groups under-represented in science, several Education and Outreach activities
are envisioned for this effort, including: i) Development of a new interaction
with Yavapai College (Prescott, Arizona), providing research opportunities for
some of their second year students, in addition to research opportunities for
undergraduate students at Arizona; ii) Development of a new web-based curricular
module on ATR waveguide technologies, integrated into the EHRDO activities of
our NSF Science and Technology Center - Materials and Devices for Information
Technology (University of Washington, lead institution).&lt;br/&gt;