* 0428958
* Sensors:  C-MEMS Based Microbattery Arrays for Miniature Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Marc Madou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 375,000.00

This Sensors and Sensor Networks (Sensors) Individual Investigator (SII) grant
will fund the development of advanced 3D microbatteries and smart battery arrays
for miniature sensors. The work involves the manufacture of microbatteries based
on 3D carbon electrode arrays fabricated by the pyrolysis of photo-
lithographically patterned photoresist. The use of 3D carbon electrode arrays
enhances the surface to volume ratio of the microbattery, resulting in increased
reaction surface area and decreased ion diffusion distances. With each electrode
composed of thousands of electrode elements, pairs of such electrodes will be
fabricated in a novel type of switchable array of microbatteries so that
different voltages and currents can be continuously accessed depending on the
need of the application at hand. Completed C-MEMS Li-ion rechargeable
microbatteries are expected to feature superior energy densities and very fast
charge/discharge characteristics compared to current 2D batteries. The work
entails the following major tasks: optimization of the microbattery design
through modeling and electrochemical experimentation with arrays of differently
shaped and differently arranged C-MEMS posts, design and implementation of
switching patterns, optimization of C-MEMS materials properties such as surface
roughness and porosity, improvement of Li-ion charging/discharging
characteristics of the negative electrodes (including the use of doping of the
carbon electrodes), and the fabrication of positive electrode posts and an
electrolyte.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the new material and
manufacturing approach for batteries developed here can also be used for novel
miniaturized electrochemical sensors, super capacitors and fuel cells. The new
advanced batteries could be integrated into remote sensor networks,
optoelectronics and implantable biomedical devices. The work will foster
interdisciplinary interactions with postdocs and students at all levels and from
various backgrounds including mechanical engineering, electrical engineering,
chemistry and materials science. The information and results of this project
will be broadly disseminated to enhance scientific and technological
understanding through presentation at scientific conferences and publication in
scientific journals. This research project should effect graduate and
undergraduate education in MEMS and nanotechnology but also will try to raise
the awareness in MEMS and NEMS for high school students in the local area (UCI
has a summer program set-up just for this).