* 0428193
* ITR:     Collaborative Research:    (ACS+NHS)-(dmc+soc):    Machine Learning for Sequences and Structured Data:    Tools for Non-Experts
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Fernando Pereira, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2008
* USD 333,867.00

Sequential and graph-structured data arise naturally in a wide variety of
scientific, engineering, and intelligence problems, such as handwriting and
speech recognition, text mining, gene finding, and network analysis. While
researchers have recently made significant progress on machine learning methods
for processing structured data, these methods are much less accessible to
scientists, engineers, and analysts than the better understood statistical
learning techniques of classification and regression.

This project is researching methods to advance the state of the art in machine
learning for structured data, building on recent work in conditional random
fields and weighted transducers. The project is also developing a software
toolkit to make the results of these advances accessible to researchers working
in a wide range of disciplines and application domains. The toolkit will enable
users to define, train, and apply models for structured data without requiring
advanced expertise in machine learning. The functionality of the toolkit will
include methods for specifying features relevant to an application,
automatically selecting the most relevant features, adjusting parameters to
optimize suitable training objectives, and combining models that pertain to
different facets of an application.

The software, which will be freely distributed, will be tested with selected
users in several application domains, and be carefully documented. The project
will thus provide the scientific and engineering community with the first
generally usable tool for learning from structured data, serving a role that is
parallel to that of the more standard tools for classification and regression
that are already widely used.-