* 0428220
* SST: Novel Sensor Platforms Based on the Structural Integration of an Organic Light-Emitting Device, a Luminescent Sensing Element, and a Thin Film Si-Based Photodetector
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Vikram Dalal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 09/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

0428220&lt;br/&gt;Shinar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is
to develop novel photoluminescence &lt;br/&gt;(PL)-based sensors that are fully
structurally integrated: The light &lt;br/&gt;source, the sensing element, and
the photodetector (PD) and associated &lt;br/&gt;filter, are fabricated on
transparent substrates and attached &lt;br/&gt;back-to-back. The resulting
sensors could therefore be extremely &lt;br/&gt;compact, robust, selective,
fast, autonomous, consume little power, and &lt;br/&gt;inexpensive. The proposal
focuses on sensing oxygen, a key tool in &lt;br/&gt;medical, environmental,
(bio)chemical, and food monitoring, and Bacillus &lt;br/&gt;anthracis toxin
(anthrax).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit. The central concept is
the novel total &lt;br/&gt;structural integration of the foregoing components.
The light source is &lt;br/&gt;an array of organic light-emitting device (OLED)
pixels. The sensing &lt;br/&gt;elements include porous films with an embedded
dye, surface immobilized &lt;br/&gt;species whose PL is selectively analyte-
sensitive, or microfluidic &lt;br/&gt;channels/wells with recognition elements
in solution. The PD and filter &lt;br/&gt;are multilayer thin films of
hydrogenated nanocrystalline Si, SiGe, &lt;br/&gt;and/or SiC. The geometry will
be "back detection," i.e., the OLED and PD &lt;br/&gt;pixels are fabricated on
the same side of the substrate. The array of &lt;br/&gt;long-pass filters and PD
pixels is fabricated first, followed by the &lt;br/&gt;OLEDs in the gaps between
the PD pixels. The sensing element is &lt;br/&gt;fabricated on a separate
substrate and attached to the OLED/PD &lt;br/&gt;substrate. In the complete
device, the electronic circuitry (including &lt;br/&gt;instruction receiver and
data transmitter), readout, and battery will be &lt;br/&gt;positioned "behind"
the PD. Hence the whole device would be ~2.5"x5"x1", &lt;br/&gt;far more compact
and less costly than any sensors currently available. &lt;br/&gt;The work
results in a new platform for PL-based sensors, which can be &lt;br/&gt;further
developed to multianalyte sensor microarrays. Innovative &lt;br/&gt;elements are
(i) the complete integration of all the sensor components, &lt;br/&gt;and (ii)
the development of sensing elements utilizing microfluidic
&lt;br/&gt;architectures and films/surfaces tailored for specific recognition
&lt;br/&gt;molecules, which will enhance the sensitivity and shorten the
response &lt;br/&gt;time. Moreover, the OLEDs will be operated in a pulsed mode,
which will &lt;br/&gt;increase their lifetime and generate negligible heat,
which is crucial &lt;br/&gt;for heat-sensitive recognition elements and agents.
Oxygen will be &lt;br/&gt;monitored via the PL lifetime, thus eliminating the
need for frequent &lt;br/&gt;calibration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different
approaches will be evaluated to generate robust sensors for &lt;br/&gt;real-
world applications. The oxygen sensor will be based on the &lt;br/&gt;dynamical
quenching of the PL of oxygen-sensitive dyes, initially with a &lt;br/&gt;green
OLED and Pt octaethyl porphyrin (PtOEP) dye. We will compare the
&lt;br/&gt;sensors with dyes embedded in solid films with dyes solutions. The
&lt;br/&gt;anthrax sensor will be based on the cleavage of certain peptides by
&lt;br/&gt;anthrax lethal factor. Labeled peptides will be synthesized at the
&lt;br/&gt;Protein Facility of Iowa State University (ISU), with a Forster
&lt;br/&gt;resonance energy transfer donor and acceptor on either side of the
&lt;br/&gt;cleavage site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts. The sensors
for the two aforementioned agents will &lt;br/&gt;be ideal for a broad range of
applications in areas such as homeland &lt;br/&gt;security, medical,
environmental, biological, food/brewing, and &lt;br/&gt;health/safety. Beyond
these impacts, the devices define a new sensor &lt;br/&gt;platform for chemical
and biological agents, which could lead to &lt;br/&gt;extremely compact and
inexpensive multianalyte sensor microarrays. The &lt;br/&gt;proposed work will
serve as a basis for the development of this &lt;br/&gt;platform. It will also
expand the basic knowledge in &lt;br/&gt;embedding/immobilizing recognition
elements, sensor design, and sensor &lt;br/&gt;engineering. It will also have a
broad educational impact, promoting the &lt;br/&gt;growth of the
interdisciplinary biophysics program at ISU and training &lt;br/&gt;students in
condensed matter physics, electrical engineering, &lt;br/&gt;biophysics,
chemistry, and molecular biology. It will be integrated with &lt;br/&gt;teaching
by developing new experimental course modules for graduate &lt;br/&gt;students.
Significant participation of undergraduates, including &lt;br/&gt;minorities and
women, is planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;