* 0428090
* SST:  Microtubule-Based Immunosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Edgar Meyhofer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 08/31/2007
* USD 414,813.00

0428090&lt;br/&gt;Hasselbrink&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the use
of biomolecular motors as the basis for a completely novel, molecule-specific
transport mechanism that could have powerful applications
in&lt;br/&gt;biomolecule sensors. This research combines biomolecular motor
transport with an immosensing strategy that literally allows one to program
sensor molecules to grab specific biomolecules from a liquid solution, and then
carry them to a fixed detection window. The operation of such a sensor can be
summarized as follows: a liquid sample is placed in a reservoir containing a
solution of microtubules derivatized with antibodies, plus ATP, an oxygen
scavenger. Labeled (or enzymelinked, or bead-bound) antibodies are then added.
Fast (non- diffusion limited) and highly specific "sandwich"-type binding
between microtubules, target analyte, and labeled antibody occurs, and a plunger
is placed atop the reservoir and pressed to inject of this mixture into a cavity
in a microfluidic chip. Within this cavity, the microtubules will translocate
autonomously (using ATP omnipresent in the solution as fuel), but in a
programmed direction towards a detection window on the chip, where they will
concentrate for highly sensitive detection by LED/photodiode fluorescence.
Microtubule directional programming is achieved using a patterned film of
CytopTM (spin-on fluoropolymer) on the microfluidic chip inner surfaces. The
film works by both allowing for selective patterning of kinesin, and by
providing mechanical guides that direct the microtubules along the desired path
of translocation. Proof-of-principle experiments have been performed, and
demonstrated a rudimentary sensor based on this concept. Numerous questions
regarding the specificity, speed, and sensitivity of sensors exploiting these
phenomena remain to be answered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is to
test the generality of this microtubule-based immunoassay approach to a variety
of antibodies, and to characterize the efficiency and speed of this approach in
a variety of microdevices. Statistical studies will characterize and optimize
translocation paths using image processing-based "particle tracking" studies of
microtubule translocation. Concentrator designs will also be studied and
optimized so that the highest possible signal may be obtained from simple,
integrated LED/photodiode detection systems in the shortest possible time.
Experiments on the robustness of microtubules under fluid shear, and
dependencies of sensor performance on poorly-controlled variables such as
temperature, will also be conducted.