* 0428249
* ITR - (NHS) - (int) Multi-level, Active Attention Surveillance
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Alan Murray, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,300,000.00

ABSTRACT

This proposal seeks to advance security surveillance monitoring by introducing
event-based reasoning. The team will use a formal event-discovery protocol to
uncover event categories and the temporal structure of events. This results in
an event template hierarchy. The event template hierarchy is supported by the
enabling technologies of smart sensors, a reconfigurable network, and the use of
persistent models for tracking. The result is an autonomous sensor network that
can be effectively coupled to human operators in order to allow top-down control
of the resources as well as the ability to modify the models for event and
background activities. While the methodology is suitable for a wide variety of
application domains, the work is grounded in a campus security and surveillance
paradigm.

By integrating research from Cognitive Science, Geography, and Computer Science
(Graphics, and Vision), the team can create a paradigmatic shift in the way that
surveillance systems are viewed and developed. The data stream is no longer
composed merely of video and perhaps some low-level alarms; the focus is now
extended to include events. Data and information no longer move toward a
usersitting in front of a wall of monitors. Event contexts, set by higher-level
events as well as by operators-in-the-loop, direct and focus attention in order
to detect differences from a dynamic model of background activity. The result is
that the information is more meaningful, the surveillance systems more focused,
and the cognitive skills of the operators more efficiently utilized. A prototype
system will be made available for pertinent security personnel to train and
test. The work will contribute to training methodologies of security personnel.
Under the purview of broader impact, the proposed work strives to include under-
represented and minority student groups through targeted training in the use of
video technology. Finally if successful, event-based strategic surveillance
networks can provide alternatives to racial profiling. The individuals are
judged only by their actions as encoded in the event models.

