* 0428428
* Sensors: Magnetoshapememory Effect Harnessed for Power Generation and Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Norman Miller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/2007
* USD 270,249.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0428428&lt;br/&gt;H. Sehitoglu&lt;br/&gt;Univ.
Illinois&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project proposes to undertake an
effort in understanding the ferromagnetic shape memory alloys to ultimately
accelerate their utilization in new power generation and sensing systems. By
harnessing the change in magnetization associated with external stress and/or
displacements, the work will investigate how to generate power for sensor,
actuator and other devices with a wide range of applications. Experimental tools
for measuring in-situ deformation and magnetization are investigated, and the
mechanical and magneto-mechanical response of promising ferromagnetic shape
memory materials studied. These new materials include CoNiAl, FeNiGa and CoNi in
single crystalline and polycrystalline forms. The work also describes ways to
improve the thermal treatment and composition of these materials so they can be
utilized more reliably in applications for both sensing and power generation.
The experimental results are expected to provide the constants for the magneto-
mechanical model as well as screen materials. Combined as a whole, an
experimental, theoretical and device design methodology program with significant
potential benefits is envisioned. The project further provides an opportunity to
train graduate students as well as undergraduate students in understanding
transforming materials, ferromagnetism, shape memory behavior, and sensing and
power generation devices. The outreach activities will include a short course on
magneto shape memory effect for engineers and collaborating with industrial and
federal organizations interested in remote sensing and power
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;