* 0428404
* ITR - \(ASE+NHS\) -\ (dmc+int\): Toward a Multi-Layered Architecture for Reliable and Secure Large-Scale Networks:  The Case of an Electric Power Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Marija Ilic, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/2010
* USD 2,307,000.00

ITR - \(ASE+NHS\) -\ (dmc+int\): Toward a Multi-Layered Architecture for
Reliable and Secure Large-Scale Networks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops an information technology (IT) framework that addresses basic problems
in critical national infrastructures that can lead to catastrophic failures,
especially when the system operates near full capacity. These systems use large
stand-by reserves to manage the variations in operating conditions and equipment
status. When the system is under stress, reserves make up for lack of flexible
decision making. Current modeling, monitoring, and decision tools assume that
system response to disturbances is local, and that it is also locally manageable
without on-line coordination. While these tools generally result in reliable
operations, the occasional costly and life-threatening blackouts, explosions,
and water main breaks are proof that the tools and "conservative" operating
practices can fail. Continued growth, technology change, aging equipment, and
regulatory changes alter the system, making the old models and practices less
reliable. Operating these infrastructure systems to achieve higher performance
along with greater reliability and security requires advances in modeling,
simulating, and operating complicated systems. This project focuses on the
electricity grid, using the widely accepted representations. While
simplifications of reality, these representations of the infrastructure grid are
highly complex models. The project research treats the following important
issues: (1) Handling Complexity. The project develops layers of simpler models
that run in real time and capture different time and space resolution scales,
with a "systems manager" layer that corrects for the "externalities" caused by
approximate decomposition. (2) Monitoring. A network using sparse sensors
strategically placed measures the most relevant data at the location of impact.
(3) Characterization of the System Dynamics. Unlike the state-of-the-art static
state estimators used in current power grids, this project develops a "quasi-
dynamic state estimator" (QDSE) that uses the current knowledge (estimate) of
the state to update the current estimate of the network state. (4) Institutional
Environment. This project seeks to integrate the regulatory restructuring and
operations models have not been integrated for the electricity
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project (a) develops an IT framework
for smooth, reliable, and efficient operation of a complex network
infrastructure over a broad range of inputs/disturbances and topological
changes; (b) creates a family of models that allow informed decisions through
better representations of the network state and dynamics; (c) identifies the
information and models required to run the network reliably and efficiently, and
(d) seeks the most cost-effective way to gather and process the required data,
and build a better model of system dynamics. To simplify computation and allow
the model to run in near real time, models are decomposed using a "systems
manager" to correct for the externalities arising from inexact decomposition. An
Interplay of physical, financial/economic, regulatory, and IT signals drives the
complex infrastructure system. These general concepts are applied to the
electric power infrastructure, which has recently been challenged for its lack
of reliability and inability to support efficient markets. This project
demonstrates the outlined techniques by assessing the performance of several
candidate architectures of the evolving electric power industry. &lt;br/&gt;