* 0428073
* SST:    Collaborative Research:    Capacitive Sensing for Liquid Crystal-Based Chemical and Biological Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Robert Lindquist, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 07/31/2008
* USD 310,127.00

0428073&lt;br/&gt;Lindquist&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have formed a sensor
small team (SST) of electrical, chemical and biological engineers to explore
capacitive sensing for liquid crystal (LC) based chemical and biological
sensors. Lead by the efforts of one of the investigators on this proposal, LC
systems have proven to be excellent candidates for low cost, portable, field-
deployable, highly selective chemical and biological sensors. In these sensors,
the molecular alignment of liquid crystal is altered by the presence of targeted
chemical or biological agents. The collective behavior and high anisotropy of
the LC molecules allow for the detection of extremely low levels of targeted
agents. This investigator has demonstrated surface-driven orientational changes
of LC molecules in both chemical and biological systems with sensitivity levels
as low as ten parts per billion. In these examples, visual inspection is used to
sense the deformations within the LC material. The PIs propose to change the
transduction method from an optical to a capacitive technique. To exploit
capacitive sensing, the PIs will bring together expertise in chemical and
biological engineering from Professors Nicholas Abbott and Juan de Pablo's group
at The University of Wisconsin and expertise in electrical and computer
engineering from Professor Robert Lindquist's group at the University of Alabama
in Huntsville. The team will take a systems approach that covers the fundamental
issues of capacitive sensing in partially ordered systems, detailed dynamic
modeling of the LC deformation and its impact on capacitance, optimal material
and electrode designs for both chemical and biological sensors, and finally
device integration issues.