* 0428344
* ITR-(NHS)-(sim):    Computational Models for Gene Silencing:   Elucidating a Pervasive Biological Defensive Response
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Richard Helm, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,500,000.00

CMGS (Computational Models for Gene Silencing) - used in RNA interference
(RNAi), post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS), or gene silencing explores
the potential for transgenic research, therapeutic intervention, drug discovery,
and development of novel biological agents in RNAi technologies. A current trend
is the development of high-throughput RNAi screening technologies and commercial
enterprises built around such capabilities &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMGS system, by blending molecular modeling,
sequence analysis, data representation, and inferencing algorithms into a
coherent methodology, serves as a template for understanding how complex systems
biology frameworks can be designed. CMGS will hence not only aid in its
particular domain of application but also systems biology software projects with
similarly broad scope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhanced participation of under-represented
groups: Students from under-represented groups will spend, the summer in
research labs at VT, monitored by the PIs, and their students. &lt;br/&gt;Every
GBCB student is educated both in biology and in computation, and hence the
program contributes to the immediate national (defense, public health and
national priorities) need for young life scientists to be trained in the nature
and value of bioinformatics tools and approaches.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the
GBCB program may attract more women into advanced computational science research
than traditional computer science.&lt;br/&gt;CMGS will also be delivered as a
web-based system for use by the broader biological systems modeling community to
support interactive prediction and inferencing scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;We will use
CMGS in courses offered under Virginia Tech's GBCB program, demonstrating the
utility of multiple modes of investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;