* 0428330
* ITR-(ASE)-(dmc+int): Reconfigurable, Data-driven Resource Allocation in Complex Systems: Practice and Theoretical Foundations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Evgenia Smirni, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2008
* USD 413,941.00

Reconfigurable, data-driven resource allocation in complex
systems:&lt;br/&gt;practice and theoretical foundations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
web servers are developing into central components in the information
infrastructure of our society, it becomes challenging to serve their ever-
increasing and diversified customer population while ensuring high availability
in a cost-effective way. The complexity of today's web servers systems and the
variability of their workload often make effective resource allocation an
elusive goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks support for the
development of a data-driven performance-engineering framework to automate the
process of robust, workload-aware resource allocation and management in today's
complex web server systems. The researcher's focus is on the development of
better understanding of the workload resource demands, on the development and
implementation of efficient methodologies for bottleneck identification and
resource allocation at the system level, and on the development of efficient
analytic methodologies for performance prediction. To meet the above targets the
following research tasks will be accomplished:&lt;br/&gt;o A better
understanding of the workload resource demands in web servers that serve dynamic
pages will be obtained, focusing on identifying the different resource
bottlenecks and the workload conditions under which these bottlenecks are
triggered.&lt;br/&gt;o A data collection mechanism at the system level will be
devised that will gather statistical information, which can prompt scheduler
reconfigurations. This mechanism will provide a better understanding on what
system and workload data, and at what level of detail, needs to be monitored at
run-time to readily provide to the allocation policies information about the
state of the system.&lt;br/&gt;o New, data-driven scheduling policies will be
developed and will be implemented at the system level for the various bottleneck
resources that will allow quick system recovery under transient overload
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;o New theoretical results will allow modeling of the
workload and resource allocation policies with compact and tractable models.
These models will guide parameterization of the resource allocation
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research will
advance science and engineering by integrating data and analytic models for the
development and implementation on actual systems of both workload-aware and
system-aware algorithms to modulate resource allocation in web servers serving
dynamic pages under constantly changing workload conditions. The proposed
research, even assuming that not all results are positive, will attempt to
answer several fundamental questions for the development of cost-effective,
autonomic systems. The theoretical contributions of this research will advance
the state-of-the-art in modeling of complex systems that are subject to
continuous and severe changes in workload intensities and
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The impact of this research will
affect that state-of-the-practice in actual off-the-shelf systems via industrial
collaborations, specifically Seagate Research, by providing algorithms and tools
that can modulate and automate the process of resource allocation in complex
environments. Through this project, the researcher will also be able to impact
the education of several students, preparing them to better meet industry
demands in the areas of performance modeling and resource allocation in complex
environments.&lt;br/&gt;