* 0428446
* Energy-aware GUI Design and Run-time Application Adaptation, and Power Management/Scaling for Mobile Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

Energy-aware GUI Design and Run-time Application Adaptation, and Power
Management/Scaling for Mobile
Computers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern mobile
computing systems are an integral part of the lives of millions of users.
Although the latest microprocessors enable these devices to provide improved
services, reducing energy consumption remains a major design challenge. Energy
reduction techniques for interactive mobile systems are not well understood. The
objective of this work is to develop methodologies and tools to reduce energy
consumption of interactive systems from the display, application and operating
system (OS) perspectives. The problems that we will tackle are as follows:
Energy-efficient graphical user interface (GUI) design, Energy-aware application
adaptation framework, and OS-supported dynamic power management (DPM) and
dynamic voltage scaling (DVS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the research
will be made available on the Web. It will also be disseminated to the industry
through the companies affiliated with the NJCST Center for Embedded System-on-a-
Chip Design that the PI heads. Currently, three companies are commercializing
tools developed in the PI's group. This offers additional avenues for technology
transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;