* 0428263
* Sensors:    Multilayer Modification for Microcantilever Biosensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Haifeng Ji, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 08/31/2008
* USD 225,000.00

Research that leads to a clear path for the development of low cost, fast,
rugged, and extremely sensitive sensors for real-time monitoring is of high
demand to homeland security. The goal of this research proposal is to develop
sensitive and selective microsensors for continuous monitoring of
organophosphorus compounds by using multilayer modified microcantilevers. The
general concept and methods developed here will also find applications in
environment, food safety, clinical diagnostic, and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Microcantilevers have proven to be an
outstanding sensor platform for extremely sensitive chemical and biological
sensors. So far, three approaches have been used to immobilize the molecular
recognition agents to the microcantilever surface: polymer films, self-assembled
monolayers, and surface conjugation chemistry. It is anticipated that the Layer-
by-layer multilayer technique can overcome many drawbacks from these methods.
The multilayer modification is easy to operate, reliable, and will offer
stronger bending amplitude. The PI proposes to develop and interpret the
mechanism of enzyme reaction-induced microcantilever bendings. This will help to
predict cantilever bending responses when other enzymes are used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: An educational program in MEMs Sensors
will serve to instruct scientists and engineers in applications of MEMs in
chemistry and biology. The project will also benefit students in our new MS
program in "Molecular Sciences and Nanotechnology", which may be the first
graduate degree in the nanotechnology area in the country. Through research and
learning, students will be more aware of the role of science and technology in
homeland security. Louisiana Tech maintains close tires with the neighboring
Grambling State University, a well-known HBCU institution. The project is
expected to have a broad and lasting impact on the education and training of the
next generation of scientist and engineers as well as increasing the number of
under-represented minorities and women in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;