* 0428046
* Sensors: Perfluorinated Matrixes as New Materials for Receptor-Doped Chemical Sensors with Extreme Robustness and Selectivity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Philippe Buhlmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 367,172.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Sensors: Perfluorinated
Matrices as New Materials for Receptor-Doped Chemical Sensors with Extreme
Robustness and Selectivity&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0428046&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Philippe
Buhnmann&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on new materials
for receptor-based ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) for analysis in clinical
laboratories, process control, the food industry, and environmental
applications. Commercial ISEs have shortcomings in terms of selectivity,
detection limits, and robustness. The research program addresses these
challenges by introducing new matrix materials based on fluoropolymers. These
materials are hypothesized to improve biofouling resistance as well as
selectivity of the electrodes. A key goal of the research is to prevent the
extraction of electrically neutral lipophilic compounds into sensor membranes
and to take advantage of the increased selectivity related to minimizing
solvation of interfering ions in the sensor membrane. Synthesis of new
perfluorocarbon sensor membranes and characterization of their properties will
be performed. The perfluorinated materials are hypothesized to be promising for
sensor applications because they are chemically inert, have been shown to resist
cell growth, are highly insoluble in compounds that are lipophilic, and may
exhibit higher selectivity than sensors based on other materials. In terms of
the broader impacts, undergraduates will be actively recruited for the project.
This work could lead to a new generation very highly selective sensors, which
could be used to diagnose and treat disease, assess environmental problems, and,
in general, monitor processes throughout the food processing chemical,
petrochemical, pharmaceutical, and biotechnology industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;