* 0428756
* SST: Mid Infrared Avalanche Photodiodes Based on Nanoscale Quantum Dots
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Majeed Hayat, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* eric johnson
* 09/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

0428756 Krishna

The aim of the proposed effort is to develop a high sensitivity, mid-infrared
sensor called QDAP (Quantum Dot Avalanche Photodiode), based on intersubband
transitions in nanoscale QDs in conjunction with avalanche multiplication.
Intersubband QD sensors are perceived as a promising technology for mid infrared
regime since they are based on a mature GaAs technology, are sensitive to normal
incidence radiation, exhibit large quantum confined stark effect that can be
exploited for hyperspectral imaging, and have lower dark currents than their
quantum well counterparts. However, the low quantum efficiency of QD detectors
has limited their operating temperature to 70-80K. State of the art photonic
detectors are based on the narrow bandgap mercury cadmium telluride (MCT)
material, which offer higher single pixel performance at the same operating
temperature. However, non-uniformity issues associated with native defects have
limited the progress of MCT-based focal plane arrays. Presently all mid infrared
photonic detectors operate at cryogenic temperatures (4-100K) and have
complicated cooling requirements that include multi-stage sterling coolers. A
high-sensitivity mid infrared sensor operating at temperatures achievable by the
relatively inexpensive Peltier coolers (150-250K) would represent a major
technological leap and lead to a significant reduction in the cost and
complexity of infrared sensors and imaging systems. Based on our preliminary
calculations, we estimate that the operating temperature of QDAPs would be about
100K higher than that of conventional QD detectors.

Intellectual Merit: In this proposal, a novel device called QDAP is proposed
which is expected to have a higher sensitivity and improved performance over
conventional QD detectors. In the QDAP, an intersubband quantum dot detector is
coupled with an avalanche photodiode (APD) through a tunnel barrier. While the
tunnel barrier reduces the dark current more effectively than the photocurrent
in the QD section of the device, the APD provides the necessary photocurrent
gain required to increase in the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). In particular, the
APD provides the large gain necessary to overcome the readout noise and achieve
a significantly enhanced shot-noise-limited SNR, which comes at the slight
expense of the avalanche excess noise. With this novel combination, we can
achieve a higher sensitivity at the same temperature (D* responsivity) or have a
comparable performance at higher operational temperatures. Moreover, the APD
could be operated in the linear mode or in the Geiger mode (single photon
counting mode). Photon-counting systems are regarded as the ultimate in photon-
sensing techniques from a sensitivity perspective. Such sensors would be
extremely useful for sensing ultralow-level images and signals in many
scientific and engineering fields stretching from microscopy and medical imaging
to astronomy and astrophysics, where the photon flux is very limited. Presently
there are no single photon detectors available for the mid infrared regime. The
PI`s group has recently reported three color QD detectors operating in the mid
wave infrared (MWIR, p ~ 4m), long wave infrared and very long wave infrared.
These designs would be incorporated into the sensor proposed in this project to
realize multi-color detectors with high sensitivity. Theoretical modeling of the
proposed structures has revealed that the coupling of the QD detectors with both
homostructure and heterostructure APDs is possible, thereby providing the
opportunity for optimizing the APD for either linear- or Geiger-mode operation
through bandgap engineering of the APDs multiplication region. This project
draws from the complementary expertise of the PIs who have an established record
of active collaboration. The self- assembled InAs/(In,Ga)As quantum-dot APDs
will be designed, optimized, grown, fabricated, and characterized by the PIs at
the University of New Mexico (UNM). Testing of the Geiger-mode operation of the
devices will be undertaken in collaboration with researchers at the University
of Sheffield (support letter attached).

Broader Impacts: The PIs have a commitment both to classroom education and to
involving undergraduates in theoretical and laboratory research. Last year, the
PIs involved four undergraduates (including two minority students and two
students sponsored by the NSF REU program) in their research activities. This
tradition will continue in this project with the additional participation of
local high school students. Additionally, results from this project will impact
two courses that have already been developed by the PIs in optoelectronic
devices and optical communication. These courses are intended for launch on Web-
CT platforms and be offered at multiple institutions simultaneously. In
addition, through our interaction with our international collaborators at the
Univesidad de Concepcion, Chile, our students will have an opportunity to
receive additional practical training at the TIGO observatory facility in Chile,
in which near infrared Geiger-mode APDs are used for satellite tracking. The
project would lead to a broader dissemination of knowledge in forums such as the
New Mexico Nano-Science Alliance and NSF's National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network (NNIN) program, of which UNM is a team member.