* 0428916
* SST:  Dynamics of Microbeam Sensor Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jeffrey Moehlis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

1&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary: SST: Nonlinear Dynamics of Microbeam
Systems&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In the proposed study we aim to improve
the operation of SPM cantilevers in&lt;br/&gt;air and vacuum by investigating
important effects due to nonlinearity, shape, and coupling to
nearby&lt;br/&gt;cantilevers. Simultaneous operations of microbeam arrays can
lead to significantly increased&lt;br/&gt;throughput in applications including
chemical and force sensors, imaging, and data storage. These&lt;br/&gt;effects
can lead to dynamically interesting phenomena, including localization and
parametric&lt;br/&gt;instability. By understanding these effects, design and
operation can be proposed which allow the&lt;br/&gt;cantilevers to synchronize,
leading to sensor enhancement. This proposed work will
involve&lt;br/&gt;modeling, analysis, and experimentation. In this work the
nonlinear response of microbeams near&lt;br/&gt;resonance will be investigated
in detail and features will be mapped out that are important
for&lt;br/&gt;performance. The analytical investigations will focus on
perturbation, symmetry, and phase&lt;br/&gt;reduction techniques applied to
weakly nonlinear models for microbeams, which will allow one
to&lt;br/&gt;predict the response near resonance. Experimental work will be used
for parameter identification,&lt;br/&gt;model verification, and to explore
operating regimes suggested by the analysis.&lt;br/&gt;The work will focus on
the response of individual microbeams and one-dimensional arrays
of&lt;br/&gt;microbeams, such as those being developed for increased throughput
of chemical sensors. These&lt;br/&gt;arrays are composed of several nearly
identical beams that are weakly coupled to their nearest&lt;br/&gt;neighbors.
Systems with these general characteristics are known to experience instabilities
and&lt;br/&gt;localized responses, wherein synchronization is lost and the
vibration energy is concentrated in a&lt;br/&gt;small subset of beams. The
analytical part of the work will concentrate on how these
instabilities&lt;br/&gt;and localization are influenced by system and excitation
parameters, and the manner in which they&lt;br/&gt;affect overall performance of
the sensor. In addition, analytical models that employ
intentional&lt;br/&gt;patterns of mistuning will be considered, which are known
to minimize the effects of instability and&lt;br/&gt;localization. The
experimental work will be used to guide and confirm the analysis, and to
test&lt;br/&gt;systems that are designed to operate in a synchronous
manner.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: An integrated educational plan has been
proposed which integrates outreach&lt;br/&gt;with graduate education.
Specifically, the goal would be to incorporate demonstrations
and&lt;br/&gt;explanations of observable phenomena that can be accounted for
through an understanding of&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear vibrations and dynamics, as well
as topics from microscale and nanoscale engineering, to&lt;br/&gt;existing
outreach programs. The mechanics principles behind simple cantilever sensors can
be used&lt;br/&gt;to illustrate how simple physics principles are used to
develop sensors, and show practical, exciting&lt;br/&gt;application of science.
At UCSB these programs will be developed through collaborations with
local&lt;br/&gt;teachers. At least one of these relationships has already been
solidified with a teacher at Santa&lt;br/&gt;Barbara Jr. High. At MSU, this
outreach would occur via the MSU High School Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Institute,
which targets secondary school students and actively encourages participation in
the&lt;br/&gt;engineering sciences.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact in graduate
education and technology transfer will be achieved in part
through&lt;br/&gt;partnerships with Veeco, a local company. Veeco has a long-
standing relationship with UCSB.&lt;br/&gt;Veeco is currently a member of the
California Nanosystems institute, and has funded graduate&lt;br/&gt;student
interns at Veeco, including one from the PI's group. Veeco is interested in the
technology&lt;br/&gt;we plan to study in this effort, and will allow students to
utilize equipment unavailable at UCSB.&lt;br/&gt;Teaming: The proposed effort is
a collaboration between Kimberly Turner (UCSB), Steven Shaw&lt;br/&gt;(MSU), and
Jeffrey Moehlis (UCSB), and will be carried out at their home institutions. The
students&lt;br/&gt;and PIs on both teams will be involved in all aspects of the
project, keeping up to date via electronic&lt;br/&gt;communication and by
regular visits by the MSU group to the facilities at UCSB.