* 0429781
* COMPILERS: A Novel Approach for Software Pipelining of Multi-Dimensional Loops
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 11/30/2007
* USD 312,000.00

The PI proposes a novel approach for software pipelining multi-dimensional
loops, called SSP&lt;br/&gt;(Single-dimensional Software Pipelining). SSP
provides a unique framework where software pipelining can&lt;br/&gt;be applied
at any desirable loop level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on the established collaboration and combined
expertise of the&lt;br/&gt;PIs in software pipelining, register allocation,
compiler optimization, architecture design, and
experimental&lt;br/&gt;evaluation. The foreseen contribution to the society is a
novel compiler framework for achieving the available&lt;br/&gt;parallelism in
loop nests as well as for providing opportunities for exploring other objectives
in compilation.&lt;br/&gt;The main contributions of this research will be the
following:&lt;br/&gt;* Development of the initial SSP methodology into a
comprehensive framework for optimizing multi-&lt;br/&gt;dimensional loops able
to effectively handle general forms of loop nests.&lt;br/&gt;* Development of
register allocation techniques for multidimensional loops that are integrated
with SSP.&lt;br/&gt;* Implementation and experimental evaluation of SSP, the
register allocator, and modified loop trans-&lt;br/&gt;formation phases with
experimental evaluation of such properties as performance, code size,
and&lt;br/&gt;compilation time.&lt;br/&gt;* Investigation of SSP and its
relation to and interaction with high-level loop transformations, as well
as&lt;br/&gt;comparison with approaches that combine loop nest transformation
and traditional software pipelining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact.&lt;br/&gt;*The developed framework provides opportunities for exploring
other optimization&lt;br/&gt;objectives and implementation issues, targeted to
specific architectures &lt;br/&gt;* Basis for exploring SSP for architectures
such as multithreading cellular architectures, and streaming
applications.&lt;br/&gt;* The PIs plan to organize an annual combined CIS and
ECE undergraduate poster forum which will include the participating
undergraduates and contain a strong mentoring component.&lt;br/&gt;*Small
experimental study components of this research will be developed to be used as
research projects in&lt;br/&gt;graduate compiler courses in both CIS and ECE.
&lt;br/&gt;*Since a robust, open source infrastructure is being used in trhis
work, the resulting compiler with our techniques is highly available and easily
disseminated to large groups.