* 0429457
* NEES Permanently Instrumented Field Sites - UCSB Equipment Site Upgrade Proposal
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Jamison Steidl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2005
* USD 33,551.00

This award provides funding for University of California - Santa Barbara (UCSB)
to purchase advanced instrumentation and do associated work for the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) - Permanently
Instrumented Field Sites at - Wildlife site in Garner Valley, that will be
operated by NEES Consortium, Inc., as a national shared use facility during FY
2005 - FY 2014. This award provides funding for the necessary instrumentation to
augment the field measurements to provide additional critical data for future
analyses and compare it with the data from old site that has been instrumented
since 1982.. This will address the major challenges outlined the 2003 National
Research Council report entitled "Preventing Earthquake Disasters: The Grand
Challenge in Earthquake Engineering Research - A Research Agenda for the Network
for Earthquake Engineering." The instrumentation was selected with input from
project advisory committee and includes: a fifth downhole accelerometer in the
liquefiable layer in the downhole accelerometer array, replacing the analog
instruments with modern instruments (two shallow episensor force-balance
accelerometers) to allow telemetering of the data to NEESgrid, replacement of
surface accelerometer and analog DAQ with K-2 system, and three electrically
transduced piezometers to measure pore pressures. This augmented instrumentation
will enable researchers to provide additional data to fully analyze response of
the Wildlife sites to future earthquake shaking and to allow comparison and
verification of future records with those recorded during 1987 Superstition
Hills earthquake. This award is funded by the NSF NEES Major Research Equipment
and Facilities Construction (MREFC) project and is a component of the National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).