* 0429211
* Quantum and Classical Complexity of Continuous Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2005,06/30/2008
* Joseph Traub, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 06/30/2008
* USD 360,644.00

For some 40 years, computing has been driven by Moore's law which is the
empirical observation that computing power doubles about every 18 months. This
has made it possible for people to have computers in their homes as powerful as
computers owned by corporations just 20 years ago. It has made the internet
possible. Finally, powerful computers are indispensable to our national
security. Computer chips and wires are getting so small that there is a
consensus among technologists that Moore's law will end in 10 to 15 years using
current silicon technology. Since it is critical for our country to maintain the
Moore's law trajectory, new ways to compute are being considered. One of the
most promising ideas is to use the principles of quantum mechanics to do quantum
computing. The investigators and their colleagues are studying the following
question: If physicists and chemists succeed in building quantum computers, for
which problems are there the big payoffs? That is, what are the killer
applications?

The goal of information-based complexity (IBC) is to create a theory of
computational complexity and optimal algorithms for problems with partial,
contaminated and priced information, and to apply the results to solving
specific problems in varied disciplines. The theory is developed over abstract
spaces while the applications are for multivariate problems. Since the
information is partial and contaminated, only approximate solutions can be
obtained. IBC studies computational complexity and optimal algorithms for
computing approximations in various settings, such as the worst case, average,
probabilistic and randomized settings. A new area of IBC research is quantum
computing. The best known algorithms due to Shor and Grover are for discrete
problems. But many problems occurring in science and engineering are continuous.
Examples include high-dimensional and path integration, high-dimensional
approximation, partial differential equations and integral equations. To
understand the power of quantum computation for continuous problems one must
know the computational complexity of these problems on a classical computer in
various settings. This is exactly what has been studied in IBC. Questions to be
answered include: For what problems is quantum computation exponentially or
polynomially faster than classical computation? For what problems is there
provably no speedup of quantum over classical computation? In addition, the
investigators study randomization, breaking intractability by using additional
domain knowledge, and a statistical model for a medical application.

INTELLECTUAL IMPACT The investigators have been working together on the core of
IBC since 1973. Today there are many scores of researchers around the world
working on IBC. The Journal of Complexity contains mainly IBC papers; in 2004
the Journal published 1000 pages in 6 issues. The investigators and their
students participate in many international conferences and workshops. In
addition to developing the core of IBC, the investigators apply it to a number
of disciplines. The interdisciplinary research is published in journals of the
application discipline. Examples are economics, physics, and mathematical
finance.

BROADER IMPACT OF THE RESEARCH The investigators teach a graduate course,
"Continuous Algorithms and Complexity" which teaches students the fundamentals
of IBC. The course is also offered every year through the Columbia Video
Network. Starting in Spring 2004, the investigators offered the first course on
quantum computing at Columbia University. The investigators' graduate students
attend professional meetings and present talks when they have done significant
work. One of their graduate students, Krysta Svore, is working on quantum
computing. She has presented a number of talks at international conferences.