* 0429567
* Collaborative Research:     Formal Methods for Behavioral Subclassing and Callbacks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Gary Leavens, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 119,999.00

Proposals 0429894/Naumann 0429567/Leavens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research:&lt;br/&gt;Formal Methods for Behavioral Subclassing and
Callbacks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David A. Naumann and Gary T.
Leavens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For evolvability, scalability, and productivity,
software systems must be composed of extensible components. Features of object-
oriented programming languages such as inheritance and dynamic dispatch,
and&lt;br/&gt;techniques like callbacks and downcalls, are crucial but they
invert the usual layering of abstractions. Aliasing among objects is crucial for
efficiency but can breach encapsulation boundaries. Yet
abstraction&lt;br/&gt;and encapsulation are necessary to separately validate
individual components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the theory
of specification, development, and verification for object-oriented software,
focusing on behavioral subclassing, alias confinement, and callbacks. Core
features of the&lt;br/&gt;Java Modeling Language (JML) for behavioral interface
specification will be studied, using a confinement discipline to control
aliasing and model programs to specify callbacks. The ideas will be
presented&lt;br/&gt;in a cogent, simple, and robust theory, to facilitate
applications by tools, comparison between alternative proposals for
specification notations and proof rules, and teaching. The theory will be
encoded&lt;br/&gt;in a theorem prover and key results machine-
checked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide theoretical guidance for
the designers of programming and specification languages. The results will also
help clarify and improve techniques used in practice. Direct application is
expected in projects based on JML and in work by our Brazilian collaborators.