* 0429084
* GSE/RES  Investigating Gender-Based Differences in Perception and Use of IT as Factors in IT Career Choice
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Shelia Cotten, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2008
* USD 539,385.00

University of Maryland Baltimore County is studying the interrelationships among
gender, digital media technology usage and perceptions, self-efficacy, and
career intentions. The following nine questions are examined through a
combination of individual interviews, naturalistic observation, focus groups,
and surveys involving approximately 2500 middle school (6th -8th grade) students
attending Baltimore County and Howard County Maryland Public Schools:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. Are there gender differences in how technology is
defined? &lt;br/&gt;2. Do gender differences exist in the level of usage of
digital media technologies? &lt;br/&gt;3. Are there gender differences in how
digital media technology is used? &lt;br/&gt;4. Are perceptions of digital media
technology different for boys versus girls? &lt;br/&gt;5. How does use of
digital media technology influence perceptions of IT? &lt;br/&gt;6. How do
perceptions and use affect self-efficacy in IT career intentions? &lt;br/&gt;7.
How do perceptions, use, and self-efficacy influence decisions related to taking
elective IT courses? &lt;br/&gt;8. Are gender differences in IT career
intentions mediated by digital media technology perceptions, usage, and self-
efficacy? &lt;br/&gt;9. Understanding the influence of these factors, what
digital media or digital media technology would beeffective in positively
impacting these perceptions? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The social cognitive career theory (SCCT) of Lent et al.
serves as a foundation for this project. SCCT builds upon Bandura's social
learning theory, and holds that career interests develop over time, and are, in
part, determined by individuals' self-efficacy and outcome expectations. We
expand SCCT by incorporating the potential mediating effects of digital media
technology usage and perceptions as we suggest that they should impact self-
efficacy and ultimately the relationship between gender, self-efficacy, and
career outcomes. This research will provide a better understanding of these
interrelationships, drawing on a diverse research team representing computer
science, gender studies, industrial engineering, information science, media, and
sociology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected outcomes include: (1) An understanding
of the interplay between experience with and perceptions of digital media
technology, students' self-efficacy, and early IT career decisions. (2) A
prototype survey tool to predict levels of interest in IT courses, programs,
and, potentially, careers, based on current digital media technology use and
perceptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there have been Human-Computer
Interaction and sociological studies tangential to this research, the focus on
relationship between technology and gender and future career decisions is
innovative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings
and the resulting survey tool can provide guidelines for educators and
researchers developing behavioral interventions or digital media applications of
technologies that will attract both girls and boys to IT career fields. The
research addresses the under-representation of women in IT and the needs to
increase interest in IT in all students, to promote computer literacy, and to
increase the numbers of degrees in IT generally, by offering insight about
students at the middle school level. &lt;br/&gt;