* 0429299
* SGER: Performance-based Probabilistic Multi-Model Climate Change Scenarios
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Lisa Goddard, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/2005
* USD 25,000.00

This research is addressing the questions: How is anthropogenic forcing likely
to affect regional climate? With what certainty? To what degree? The work
consists of two main parts: (1) Verification of the performance of 20th Century
temporal characteristics, such as the trends in multi-decadal means and the
interannual variability about those means, from the Atmosphere-Ocean Global
Circulation Models (AOGCM)s used for 21st Century climate change predictions;
and, (2) Construction of probabilistic multi-model scenarios for 21st Century
climate and its variability, using the results from (1) as an objective basis
for assigning weights to the model predictions.

For the verification analysis, a probabilistic skill metric will be applied to
the AOGCM ensembles relative to an ensemble of synthetic observations, each of
which possesses the same temporal characteristics of the observed climate over
the 20th Century. Similarly, sub-sets of the observations will be used to
construct the probability distributions of the expected skill score. For regions
where the probability distributions of the Monte Carlo skill scores for the
AOGCMs and observations are significantly similar, the model performance for the
20th Century will be deemed credible.

For the probabilistic multimodel change scenarios, a Bayesian approach will be
applied using the prior assumption that 21st Century variability may be
represented by the observed 20th Century variability. The analyses will be
performed spatially from the grid scale to the regional scale for seasonal (i.e.
3-month mean) near-surface air temperature and precipitation. The results from
this research are intended for inclusion in the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC). The methods employed in this
research, applying techniques of multi-model ensembling that are based on model
performance, have not yet been applied in the context of climate change
predictions and can pilot further research for future IPCC reports. The findings
of this research also can be used to set the longer-range context for seasonal-
to-interannual climate variability and predictions. The suggestion here is that
proper synthesis of seasonal forecasts, and longer-term assessments, taking into
account the uncertainties of each, provides the best opportunity to minimize
losses, take advantage of opportunity, and work toward sustainable practices.

Broader impacts include the training of a post-doc and the societal benefits to
be realized from credible estimates of the performance of climate prediction
models.