* 0429223
* SGER:  Sequestration of Dietary Toxins in Toad- and Mollusk-Eating Snakes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Jerrold Meinwald, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 05/31/2006
* USD 148,795.00

Many animals employ toxic or distasteful chemicals as a defense against
predators. Such chemicals may either be synthesized from nontoxic molecules or
obtained directly from the animal's diet and sequestered in the tissues.
Sequestered defensive compounds (SDCs) have been documented in many
invertebrates. Herbivorous insects often sequester toxic molecules from host
plants, thereby becoming distasteful themselves. In contrast, SDCs have been
reported rarely from vertebrate animals. The only known cases involve a few
groups of specialized ant-eating frogs, such as poison dart frogs, that store
potent toxins obtained from their prey. However, recent evidence suggests that
other specialized vertebrate predators sequester defensive toxins from their
diets. The investigators will explore the evidence for sequestration, and its
physiological consequences, in two such groups, snakes that consume toads and
snakes that feed on slugs. This project will be the first to study toxin
sequestration in any amniote vertebrate (reptile, bird, or mammal) and the first
to study sequestered toxins derived from vertebrate prey (toads). Toxin
sequestration has important implications for behavior, community ecology, and
conservation biology. Ecologically, SDCs link species across three trophic
levels; the protection an individual enjoys against its own predators depends
upon chemicals obtained from its prey. Therefore, if its natural prey becomes
rare or extinct (as with the current decline in amphibian populations), a
predator that relies upon SDCs can no longer acquire essential defensive
chemicals. This study also has implications for understanding the physiological
mechanisms underlying certain human cardiovascular disorders. Hypertension and
related conditions have been linked to compounds that are chemically similar to
toad toxins and are stored in the adrenal glands of mammals. Curiously, toad-
eating snakes exhibit greatly enlarged adrenal glands, but the relationship
between those glands and the snakes' diet has not been investigated further. The
investigators will determine whether these specialized snakes sequester prey
toxins and, if so, how they tolerate high levels of such normally debilitating
compounds. Comparisons of the chemistry, physiology, and anatomy of toxin-
consuming snakes will be made to the conditions in generalized species that
consume nontoxic prey. Chromatographic and spectroscopic methods will be used to
analyze tissues from these snakes to determine whether prey toxins accumulate or
are simply detoxified and eliminated by them. Second, the impact of prey toxins
on snake physiology will be determined by comparing the effect of toxic prey on
locomotor speed and stamina in specialized versus generalized predators. Third,
electrocardiography will be used to investigate the effect of toad toxins on
heart function in toad-eating specialists. Toad toxins normally have an adverse
effect on heart muscle, yet toad-eating snakes must withstand high
concentrations of those toxins. Finally, the investigators will examine the fine
structure of the adrenal glands in snakes that specialize on toxic prey to
determine which tissues within that complex gland are enlarged. Those results
will provide clues to mechanisms underlying tolerance of toxins and will assist
in understanding mammalian cardiovascular responses to similar compounds. These
integrated studies will reveal whether these specialized vertebrate predators
sequester prey toxins for defense, and how they tolerate such normally dangerous
compounds.