* 0429389
* Data Acquisition System and Instrumentation for the NEES@UCSD Large High Performance Outdoor Shake Table (LHPOST)
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Lelli VanDenEinde, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 03/31/2006
* USD 276,000.00

This award provides funding for University of California - San Diego (UCSD) to
purchase advanced instrumentation and do associated work for the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) - Large High
Performance Outdoor Shake Table (LHPOST), that will be operated by NEES
Consortium, Inc., as a national shared use facility during FY 2005 - FY 2014.
This funding is provided for the procurement of a distributed data acquisition
system and a range of sensors (displacement transducers, accelerometers and an
optical displacement measurement system) that can be deployed outdoors and used
in large-scale experimentation. Such equipment is necessary for the operation of
NEES Large High Performance Outdoor Shake Table (LHPOST).&lt;br/&gt;The
instrumentation includes: A distributed data acquisition system which will
initially consist of a central control computer, a central distribution
terminal, and eight 64-channel general purpose distributed data acquisition
system. Under this funding a total of 256 channels will be acquired; Sensotec
transducer is a 50 mm stroke transducer that will provide infinite resolution
and a maximum nonlinearity of 0.25% of full scale which will be used to obtain
quantities such as displacements, rotations, curvatures or shear deformations.
Twenty-four transducers will be funded under this proposal; The Ametek Rayelco
Model PSS-50A-HT transducer is a submersible wire potentiometer with a total
stroke of 50 inches. It will be used for measuring larger displacements. Thirty-
six transducers of this type will be purchased with funds recommended in this
proposal; The Crossbow LP series accelerometers are general- purpose linear
acceleration sensors available in various ranges. Sixteen 4 g tri-axial Crossbow
LP series accelerometers will be purchased with funds recommended in this
proposal; ShapeMonitor is a turnkey system that allows for measuring objects in
real-time. The system comprises a high-speed computer, frame grabber, dual
digital cameras for data acquisition and a target projector.
ShapeMonitor&lt;br/&gt;allows for measurement of objects whether they are static
or dynamic. The system can also be used in harsh environments and poor platform
stability where laser systems fail. The ShapeMonitor program is hardware
independent. This camera system will be used for monitoring the response and
image-post processing of the sub-assemblage and systems level specimens. This
augmented instrumentation will enable researchers to obtain quality data gained
from the landmark tests conducted by NEES users on the LHPOST using the
requested equipment and sensors. This award is funded by the NSF NEES Major
Research Equipment and Facilities Construction (MREFC) project and is a
component of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
(NEHRP).&lt;br/&gt;