* 0429359
* Starter Grant: Ecophysiology of Marine Picoeukaryotic Primary Producers
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Alexandra Worden, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

Marine picophytoplankton are a key component of marine ecosystems. These
microbes, which are only 0.2-2 mm in diameter, are highly abundant in marine
ecosystems and responsible for up to 50-80% of total primary production in the
open ocean. Despite their importance to global carbon cycling, the ecology of
these organisms is not well understood. In particular little is known about one
picophytoplankton group, the picoeukaryotes. It is critical that their
physiology, as it relates to the environment, is elucidated in order to
successfully model their ecology and global carbon cycles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is a postdoctoral starter grant as a follow-on
activity to an NSF Microbial Biology Postdoctoral Fellowship. The goal of this
project is to explore picoeukatyote photophysiology and the extent that
photoprotective mechanisms differ, contributing to their relative success. For
photosynthetic organisms the ability to regulate light absorption and control
light damage (including UV) is extremely important. The project focuses on a
newly discovered, environmentally important organism, Ostreococcus tauri, which
is the smallest free-living eukaryote known in the world. Genome analysis,
physiological growth studies and gene expression level studies will be used to
better understand the photosynthetic capabilities of this organism. Genome
sequencing of O. tauri is near completion and a survey of genes related to
photosynthesis and light-stress responses has been conducted. Laboratory
experiments will focus on the effects of high light versus UV light on cell
growth. Expression level responses of the identified photosynthetic genes
induced by high light and/or UV stress, especially stressful conditions akin to
those of oceanic surface waters, will be analyzed by quantitative PCR. The
extent of ecotypic differentiation, based on photophysiology, amongst
Ostreococcus strains and other common picoeukaryotes will be explored. This
research will contribute to knowledge of basic photosynthetic processes as well
as the underlying mechanisms which shape the distribution and population
dynamics of these important primary producers - allowing better understanding of
microbial competition, dominance of certain groups, and global carbon cycling. A
graduate student will be involved in the project from the outset, and will
receive advanced research training.&lt;br/&gt;