* 0429588
* EID: Collaborative Research: The Interplay of Extrinsic and Intrinsic Factors in Epidemiological Dynamics: Cholera as a Case Study
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,09/30/2005
* Aaron King, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2005
* USD 70,502.00

The outbreaks of many infectious diseases display pronounced seasonal and
interannual (year to year) variation. To date, investigations of the role of
environmental factors including climatic ones, have not significantly progressed
beyond simple correlative analyses. This project develops quantitative
approaches to address the role of climate and other environmental factors in the
population dynamics of infectious diseases, particularly those with temporary
(short-lived) immunity and free-living infectious stages. The work focuses on
cholera in its main endemic region (NE India and Bangladesh), but also other
regions of Asia (Vietnam) and Africa (Mozambique). Its ultimate aim is to
develop quantitative scenarios for cholera under climate change, by combining
results on disease-environmental couplings with climate models.The applicability
of the developed quantitative approaches to other diseases (particularly malaria
and other vector borne pathogens) will be examined.

The global climate is changing. The most likely avenues for impacts on disease
dynamics are through concomitant changes in the seasonal environmental variables
that drive transmission, and through changes in the dominant (interannual) modes
of variability (e.g. ENSO) that are observed in the current climate. Neither
mechanism can be understood without a solid understanding of how climate
variability has influenced disease patterns in the past. Extensive spatial and
temporal cholera records provide an opportunity to address such understanding
for an infectious disease remaining a public health problem around the globe,
particularly in Asia but also Africa, for which the role of the environment is
an important open question.