* 0429321
* Evaluating Models of Political and Economic Integration at Pusilha, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2004,08/31/2004
* Geoffrey Braswell, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2004
* USD 33,087.00

Funding from the National Science Foundation will support Dr. Geoffrey E.
Braswell, Dr. Jennifer B.Braswell, and their colleagues for three seasons of
archaeological research at Pusilha, a prehistoric Classic period(A.D. 250-800)
Maya population and political center located in southwestern Belize, Central
America. Their investigations will test current models of the political and
economic integration of archaic states through the conjunctive study of
hieroglyphic monuments, ceramic and lithic artifacts, and settlement patterns.
Phase 1 research will consist of block coverage survey of the 9 km2 that
constitute the ancient urban, residential, and agricultural zones of the site.
Data from this phase will allow the mapping team to build a geographic data base
to examine how natural resources influenced settlement patterns, and how
different segments of the population were situated in regard to those resources.
Phase 2 investigations will consist of test-pitting operations in residential
and special function groups that crosscut all periods of occupation and social
status. Artifacts gathered during Phase 2 will be used to study the level of
economic integration of elites and commoners from a diachronic perspective, as
well as interaction with much larger and more powerful polities - particularly
Copan and Caracol - located to the southwest and northeast. Phase 3 excavations
will consist of horizontal stripping operations in areas thought to have been
production zones. Data gathered from these intensive excavations will enable the
researchers to: (1) obtain fine-grain temporal information linked to
architectural strata; (2) test models regarding production loci developed
through the test-pitting research; and (3) more fully answer questions about the
economic integration of elite and commoner households. Current with all three
phases, project&lt;br/&gt;members will document and analyze the large corpus of
hieroglyphic monuments from Pusilha. These monuments describe in great detail
the founding of the site and its dynastic history, and hint that Pusilha -- for
a time -- may have been absorbed by the expanding Copan state or hegemony.
Analyses of settlement patterns and artifact distribution, therefore, will
afford the&lt;br/&gt;study of the economic effects of the political events
discussed in the ancient texts. This research will contribute most immediately
to the understanding of local and regional political and economic processes in a
largely unknown region of the southeastern Maya periphery. More broadly, it will
contribute new and refine existing models of organization, stability, and change
in Maya society, and - by extension - will be of relevance to the study of
archaic states throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;