* 0429124
* EID: West Nile Virus: Eco-Epidemiology of Disease Emergence in Urban Areas
* BIO,EF
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2009
* Uriel Kitron, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2009
* USD 1,179,179.00

West Nile virus: Eco-epidemiology of disease emergence in urban
areas&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Emergence of an infectious disease can
follow the invasion of a pathogen into a naive host population in a non-endemic
area. Successful introduction and establishment are often associated with
changes in host density and behavior, or with changes in pathogen virulence, and
may hinge on anthropogenically-determined environmental factors. Urban areas, in
particular, are disturbed ecosystems, where humans, potential disease vectors
and adapted wildlife coexist in very high densities, providing opportunities for
rapid spread and major impacts of introduced species. &lt;br/&gt;Since its
introduction in 1999, West Nile virus (WNV) has emerged as a major pathogen in
the continental U.S., impacting wildlife, domestic animals, and humans. The
rapid spread of WNV across the U.S can be studied to elucidate processes
underlying biological invasion of an exotic pathogen in real-time, as well as
the virus' impact on public health and wildlife conservation. The 2002 outbreak
of WNV in urban areas of the north-central U.S. can contribute to the
understanding of anthropogenic factors associated with the emergence of an
infectious disease. The local-scale ecological processes that result in WNV
emergence, spread and persistence in urban environments will be studied in the
greater metropolitan areas of Chicago, Illinois. Of particular notice are
historical comparative data on an outbreak associated with a related, enzootic
arbovirus, St. Louis encephalitis (SLE) virus, focused in the same geographic
region in 1975, which indicates some persistent risk factors and repeated
manifestation of disease in specific sites.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
underlying hypothesis is that three specific environmental conditions predispose
these (and other) urban areas for arboviral invasion and establishment, namely:
(1) presence of storm- and waste-water catchment, channeling, and processing
systems which create productive mosquito habitat; (2) establishment and
maintenance of urban "green spaces" which provide roosting and nesting habitat
conducive for virus susceptible bird populations and other wildlife; and (3) the
phenomenon of urban "heat islands" that elevate ambient temperature and
accelerate the extrinsic incubation period of West Nile virus in mosquitoes.
&lt;br/&gt;A spatially structured simulation model and risk maps of WNV
transmission will be developed based on: (1) determination of the demographic
and environmental risk factors for WNV and SLE in birds, mosquitoes and humans;
(2) comparison of the reservoir capacity and differential effects of WNV on
various bird species; and (3) anthropogenic features of the urban environment
that support Culex mosquito production, mosquito-bird transmission and virus
amplification. The dynamics of viral transmission over space and time using
molecular evolutionary and phylogeographic techniques will also be evaluated and
incorporated into the model. &lt;br/&gt;This integration of a complex array of
information from existing databases and field investigations with GIS-based
phylogenic and population modeling methodologies will result in: (i)
identification of the critical features for viral transmission, amplification,
and diversification; (ii) predictions about when and where future outbreaks of
WNV are likely to occur; (iii) evaluation of the efficacy that different control
strategies might have in preventing new outbreaks, and (iv) uncovering of
fundamental principles associated with the emergence and invasion of
arboviruses. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed project is a joint effort
of ecologists, entomologists, epidemiologists, geographers, ornithologists,
virologists and wildlife biologists from academia, federal agencies, state
public health departments and conservation groups in an urban setting. Beyond
the scientific outcomes listed above, this project will allow for simultaneous
consideration of public health and conservation interests. While the future
activity of WNV is still to unfold, based on its history in New York and in the
Old World, and on temporal activity patterns of related arboviruses, it appears
likely that enzootic activity will continue with occasional
epizootics/epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators and their collaborators have
vast experience in collaborations, training and communications with the public,
conservation groups and public health agencies. The urban setting will provide
ample opportunities for public involvement and training opportunities for
students, researchers, public health professionals and conservation
groups.&lt;br/&gt;