* 0429454
* Collaborative Research:    E-Government and the Preparation of Citizens for Natural Disasters
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Victoria Basolo, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 09/30/2008
* USD 229,584.00

City and county websites offer a new and innovative method to help citizens
reduce the impacts of natural &lt;br/&gt;disaster events. While most localities
prepare a disaster plan and invest in local emergency management to respond
after disasters, individual households are far less prepared, and preparedness
rates are particularly low for racial/ethnic minority households. The
traditional modes of risk and preparedness communication have failed to reach or
motivate residents to prepare for disasters. The community website is a
potentially powerful tool to increase hazard preparedness. However, there is
virtually no research on the development of local governments. web sites for
hazard preparation or the usability of this information technology by community
residents. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the use of the
World Wide Web by local governments and residents for delivering and receiving
risk and preparedness information. Study areas will be communities in the Los
Angeles and Miami; both areas are subject to natural disasters, earthquakes in
the Los Angeles area and&lt;br/&gt;hurricanes in the Miami region. Using
multiple data collection methods and sources of data, the research will examine
the local government decision-making process for website development for risk
communication and hazard preparedness; usability of local government websites
for hazard-related information; and the potential impact of risk communication
and disaster preparedness Web pages in motivating residents to take proactive
measures. Website evaluation data and resident survey data will be combined with
secondary sources for&lt;br/&gt;multivariate statistical analysis. Eight
jurisdictions will be selected for case studies. Interviews with local
government professional staff and officials will be conducted and these data,
along with background materials, will be analyzed qualitatively. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The results ofthis research will provide a unique contribution to the
E-government and hazards literature of significant intellectual merit. The study
brings together information technology, government, and citizens around a
critical community issue: preparing for disasters. It will contribute
significantly to our understanding of local government use of the web in general
as well as for hazards; provide valuable information to policy makers and
professionals about the use, coverage, and design of local government home
pages; and examine the public decision-making process surrounding technology,
community safety, and service to citizens. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
also will have broader impacts to education and society as a whole. The results
of the research will provide valuable information to policymakers about risk
communication via the web, and about impediments to use of their communities'
websites for disaster preparedness. This knowledge can be used to remove
barriers, improve hazard communication to racial/ethnic minorities, motivate
increased disaster planning by citizens, and thus, promises to contribute to a
reduction in human and property losses from disasters.