* 0429110
* US-Turkish Cooperative Research: A Preliminary Study of Mantle Processes during African-Anatolian Convergence
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Philip Janney, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 40,050.00

0429110 &lt;br/&gt;Flower&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
collaborative research between a U.S. team including Dr. Martin Flower,
Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Illinois, Chicago,
Illinois, Dr. Philip Janney, Isotope Geochemistry Laboratory, The Field Museum
of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois and Dr. Elisabeth Widom, Department of
Geology, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio and a Turkish team including Dr. Osman
Parlak, Department of Geology, Cukuruva University, Adana, Turkey and Dr. Hakan
Coban, Department of Geology, Suleyman Demirel University, Isparta, Turkey. They
plan to conduct a Preliminary Study of Mantle Processes during African-Anatolian
Convergence. As thermal and compositional probes of Earth's interior, magmatic
rocks offer "windows" for studying interactions between the convecting upper
mantle and lithospheric plates. The project involves fieldwork, research-
planning visits, and preliminary data acquisition in preparation for a long-term
program of geochemical, isotopic, and 40Ar/39age-dating studies in southern
Turkey. The research is expected to provide a record of the thermal and
contamination history of asthenospheric magma sources based on various samples.
The ophiolites represent products of pre-collision subduction nucleation and
back-arc opening events. In contrast, ultrapotassic magmas appear to reflect
asthenospheric perturbations related to post-collision tearing and breakoff of
previously subducting 'slabs'. Preliminary data for geochemically- characterized
samples will greatly enhance our future sampling and analytical strategies. The
completed database pre- and post-collision mantle melting products will allow
the testing of actualistic models developed at currently active convergent plate
boundaries. The project will benefit from and contribute to the 'TETHYS' GIS
database, a project funded to Drs. Martin Flower (UIC), Eric Sandvol (University
of Missouri), Shuhab Khan (University of Houston), and Mohamed Sultan (SUNY-
Buffalo), building a permanent 'GEON' http://www.geongrid.org/about.html node at
the University of Illinois Supercomputing Center. Initiated with support from
UNESCO and IUGS, this project is integrating geochemical, geophysical, and
geochronologic data for the Tethyan tectonic belt with remote sensed imagery and
digital geologic information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impact:
Undergraduate and graduate students that are working in the collaborating
laboratories in the U.S. and Turkey can be involved in this research, gaining
experience in analytical work, with the opportunity to contribute to results
that are presented at national and international meetings. The PIs will
encourage high-caliber Turkish and US graduate student participation in our
proposed research and will report preliminary results at the "International
Symposium on Geodynamics and Active Tectonics of the Eastern Mediterranean
region" (to be held in May 2005 at the Kadir Has University, Istanbul) and other
major meetings. Drs. Coban and Parlak are submitting a parallel proposal to
TUBITAK to support international travel for Turkish co-PIs, and field and
research costs in Turkey. This project is being funded jointly by OISE and the
Division of Earth Sciences.