* 0429004
* EID: Collaborative Research - Linking Marine Pathogens to Molluscan Shellfish; The Ecological Role of Marine Aggregates
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* J. Evan Ward, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2008
* USD 611,503.00

Pathogens cause many diseases of marine plants and animals, including those of
molluscan shellfish (e.g., clams, oysters, scallops). Some of these diseases
have resulted in catastrophic declines in shellfish populations leading to the
erosion of ecological function and damage to fishery-based economies. Despite
these impacts, little is known about the ecology of many marine pathogens,
including the natural factors that facilitate their spread. Marine aggregates
(also known as marine snow or flocs) are ubiquitous in the marine environment
and range in size from microscopic to a few inches. Aggregates form by natural
processes, are enriched with many types of microorganisms and tend to sink
rapidly to the bottom. Consequently, bottom-dwelling shellfish are exposed to a
steady supply of marine aggregates and the various microorganisms contained
within. In this research, marine scientists from three institutions will combine
field sampling, molecular biology, and transmission experiments to construct a
model of the ecological role of aggregates in harboring and spreading shellfish
pathogens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molluscan shellfish are both ecologically and
economically important, and play key roles in ecosystem processes. This research
will shed light on how pathogens encounter and invade shellfish by describing
and modeling a potentially important and largely unknown path by which water-
born pathogens could be transmitted. This work will lead to a better
understanding of how marine diseases spread, and the potential impacts on
important populations. The collaborative effort will unite the expertise of
specialists in shellfish physiology and pathology, and ecological modeling to
carry-out novel research, public outreach and multidisciplinary training of
students in the identification and ecology of marine infectious
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;