* 0429700
* Communication Fabrics for the Globally Asynchronous Network-on-Chip Era
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Dennis Sylvester, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2009
* USD 225,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0429700&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Michigan Ann
Arbor&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Flynn, Michael&lt;br/&gt;TITLE:
Collaborative Research: Communication Fabrics for the
Globally&lt;br/&gt;Asynchronous Network-on-chip
Era&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses
the critical problems of design complexity, power consumption, and reliable,
efficient signaling that now impede progress in digital integrated systems.
Continuing progress in digital integration and performance is vital to the
continued development of information technology (IT). As the number of
transistors on an integrated circuit reaches the 1 billion mark, both the
current monolithic design style and the globally synchronous clocking and
signaling paradigm will fail. The exponential growth in complexity is causing
explosions in both design time and cost. In order to achieve the social and
economic IT goals of the NSF, dramatic improvements must be made in the
processing power, integration, and energy efficiency of digital integrated
circuits. Although transistor feature size is expected to continue to scale for
at least the next fifteen years, power consumption, global signaling, and
clocking have become critical problems that now prevent improvements in system
performance, efficiency, and integration. The globally asynchronous locally
synchronous (GALS) scheme within a network-on-chip paradigm is a good long-term
solution, but this communications-centric methodology can only succeed with a
fundamentally new approach to on-chip communication. The investigators are
exploring new schemes for global and local communication that take advantage of
the capabilities of nanometer CMOS. &lt;br/&gt;The communications-centric
network-on-chip approach places a far greater burden on on-chip communication.
Robust communication between asynchronous network components is difficult using
present techniques. Modern techniques will also be stretched to their limits to
provide adequate local communication. The investigators are developing a new
framework for communication across a modular IC, at both the global (full chip)
and local (intra-module) levels. Global communication between asynchronous
modules is achieved with robust and power efficient serial links instead of
traditional parallel buses. This research also concerns new circuit and
interconnect structures for local (intra-module) communications and clocking. At
a lower level, wires themselves are studied and optimized for both local and
global signaling. &lt;br/&gt;