* 0429411
* Defense from Cyber-Attack Using Deception
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Neil Rowe, Naval Postgraduate School
* Standard Grant
* Angelos Keromytis
* 09/30/2007
* USD 418,350.00

Proposal Number: CNS-0429411&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Defense from Cyber-
Attack Using Deception&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Neil C.
Rowe&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
building testable computational models of deception including the major sub-
phenomena of trust, expectation, suspicion, surprise, deception plans, and
manufactured patterns. Such models and an associated theory can be used to
explain both offensive deceptions (to gain some advantage) and defensive
deceptions (to foil someone else's plans). Using these models, the research will
develop deceptive software as a second line of defense for computer systems
systems under attack when access controls have been breached. Deception can
mislead attackers as to the state of an information system with false error
messages, deliberate delays in executing commands, lies about task completion,
fake displays, disinformation about computer resources, and coordinated fake
clues. Producing a convincing deception requires careful planning because people
can often recognize suspicious patterns. So this research will develop plans to
apply deception sparingly and thoughtfully based on a theory of trust and its
psychological consequences. This will include ideas such as counterplanning
against plans and a general theory of the effectiveness of excuses. Other issues
to be addressed include the penalty of deceiving nonmalicious users and the
ethical concerns raised by deliberate deception.