* 0429364
* COPLINK Center: Social Network Analysis and Identity Deception Detection for Law Enforcement and Homeland Security
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Homa Atabakhsh, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 599,982.00

To deter any future terrorist attacks, law enforcement and intelligence agencies
are making every effort to enhance national security. It becomes the top
priority to develop and implement advanced technologies for information
gathering, sharing, and analysis in all levels of law enforcement and
intelligence agencies. Criminal information is the central element in all types
of crime data. However, we find ourselves lacking techniques to both identifying
a criminal's identity effectively and to recognizing relationships among
criminals promptly. The motivation of this research is to address these criminal
identity management challenges by developing a comprehensive framework for
applying data mining, deception detection, and social network analysis to help
identify criminal identities and relationships among criminals. These
technologies will be evaluated with real users and law enforcement
organizations; related technology adoption and policy issues will also be
examined. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual merit of this research
is four-fold: (a) developing new data mining and knowledge discovery models and
techniques that are appropriate for law enforcement applications but can also be
applied in other domains demonstrating similar characteristics, (b) developing a
theoretic basis for the formation and the representation of criminal identity
deception, (c) developing a framework for automated criminal network generation
and analysis, and (d) studying the acceptance and adoption of the developed
technologies in real-world settings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this research include: reducing cognitive and information overload in law
enforcement applications; improving intelligence and law enforcement agencies'
abilities to detect, prevent, and respond to crimes and terrorism events; and
providing techniques that foster information sharing and collaboration among law
enforcement and intelligence agencies. Several partnerships with law enforcement
agencies will ensure impact.