* 0429154
* Programmable Architectures for Low Density Parity Check Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Shu Lin, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 156,000.00

Abstract

Programmable Architectures for Low Density Parity Check Codes Venkatesh Akella
Shu Lin University of California University of California

Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes are an important class of error control
codes that have superior performance and are gaining widespread use in a diverse
range of applications from satellite and space communication to magnetic
recording to high data rate optical networks based on optical CDMA. The wide
range of applications imply a broad range of requirements in terms of data
rates, bit and block error rates, performance, decoding speed and power
consumption. This necessitates a systematic methodology to design good LDPC
codes and hardware/software platforms to implement them efficiently.

Specifically we argue that we need codes and architectures that can
(dynamically) adapt to time-varying fluctuations in the physical channel (due to
fading, interference etc.) and to the resource constraints of the sender or
receiver. The latter is especially important in power critical applications like
satellite or space communications. Existing code construction methods and
hardware architectures for LDPC codes are typically tailored for one specific
code and hence are not capable of adaptation. The goal of this proposal is to
address this problem. We propose a systematic methodology for generating a large
family of related LDPC codes and a single programmable hardware architecture to
encode and decode them efficiently for a variety of resource and performance
constraints. We propose a joint framework for code construction, implementation
platform design and methods for optimizing the implementation of the codes on
the platform. We propose to investigate runtime selection of appropriate codes
and encoding/decoding algorithms based on the resource constraints. The main
resource we will be interested in is power consumption of the encoder and
decoder.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research is two fold. First, we propose
to study the trade-offs between the rate, decoding complexity both in terms of
energy and time and error performance. Second, we target programmable
architectures that are suitable for optical networking applications, which
require very low bit-error rate and decoding rates in tens of gigabits per
second. This will push the limit of programmable architectures and yield new
insights into high-speed on-chip programmable interconnection network design.

The broader impact of the proposed research would be in the area of
reconfigurable VLSI fabrics. As we move into process technologies below 65
nanometers, building ASICs (application-specific integrated circuits) is
increasingly less viable due to the problems of timing closure and the design
cost and design cycle time. There is an immediate need for a new kind of
computing fabric that can replace ASICs. The proposed research will be
addressing this problem indirectly. Given that efficient interconnect design is
the key challenge in high-speed LDPC decoding, if we can come up with an energy
efficient FPGA-like VLSI fabric that can support very high data rates for LDPC
decoding, then it is likely that, that fabric can be used for other high
performance applications that have demanding interconnect requirements.