* 0429947
* Collaborative Proposal:     Advances in Aspect-Oriented Languages, Methods, and Tools
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* William Griswold, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2006
* USD 73,169.00

Abstract: Aspect-oriented programming (AOP) promotes new mechanisms
and&lt;br/&gt;methods to improve separation of concerns in software design. AOP
is not&lt;br/&gt;well understood in theory, and remains controversial among
researchers and&lt;br/&gt;practitioners. One issue is that it relies on
implementation-dependent,&lt;br/&gt;implicit side effects, contradicting
traditional views on abstraction,&lt;br/&gt;information hiding, and
compositional reasoning. The PIs' goals are to&lt;br/&gt;explicate fundamental
mechanisms of AOP; assess and improve the impact of&lt;br/&gt;AOP on
decomposition and coupling; and improve our understanding of
the&lt;br/&gt;inherent complexity of, and potential for, compositional reasoning
involving&lt;br/&gt;AOP. The approach is to ground AOP in an underlying ontology
of implicit&lt;br/&gt;invocation and then to leverage knowledge in that domain
to advance our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of AOP. The intellectual significance of
the proposed work is&lt;br/&gt;in its potential to improve our understanding of
AOP, including effects on&lt;br/&gt;modularity and abstraction, and the
complexity of specification and&lt;br/&gt;verification. Broader impacts are
anticipated to flow from regularized and&lt;br/&gt;improved AOP mechanisms,
e.g., for event abstraction. The project will also&lt;br/&gt;support development
and delivery of a senior-level undergraduate and early&lt;br/&gt;graduate course
on AOP.&lt;br/&gt;