* 0429640
* A Catalytic Infrastructure for the Design, Development, and Deployment of Formal Modeling Tools
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Eric Van Wyk, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

0429640&lt;br/&gt;Mats Per Erik Heimdahl&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt; A Catalytic Infrastructure For the Design, Development, and
Deployment of Formal Modeling Tools&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling is crucial in
software development. Unfortunately, modeling languages and tools are currently
static and cannot accommodate evolving needs. This project will develop the
foundation for extensible and flexible&lt;br/&gt;modeling-language processing
tools that will allow: easy extension and modification of formal modeling
notations, easy construction of high-quality translations from modeling
notations to analysis tools, and controlled reuse of trustworthy tool fragments.
The research hypothesis is that extensible languages defined using attribute
grammars with forwarding hold the key to hyper-flexible, catalytic tools
infrastructures. The hypothesis will be tested by evaluating the tools and
techniques with multiple diverse modeling-languages on realistic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is innovative: it provides a radically
new way of thinking about modeling-language design, execution environments, and
translation as an extensible and flexible abstract syntax tree defined through
attribute grammars. The results are significant; they provide an extensible
infrastructure for the development, use, and evaluation of new languages and
analysis tools. The impact is broad; it provides technology commercial tool
vendors can use to design tools for flexibility, a common and open
tools&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure for various research groups, and tools for
teaching software engineering, formal methods, programming languages, and
compilers at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;