* 0429525
* PAESMEM Individual Nominee: Jeffrey S. Russell -  A Visionary Mentor with a Local and Global Reach
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2007
* Jeffrey Russell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David L. Temple Jr.
* 06/30/2007
* USD 10,000.00

HRD-0429525

Dr. Jeffrey Russell is a professor in the Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering and Chair of the Construction Engineering and Management Program at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison. His approach to creating opportunities for
women and minorities is local-global," incorporating participation in national
forums on diversity and mentoring. Russell has worked extensively with female
undergraduate and graduate students both locally and nationally to encourage and
support them in engineering, especially in construction engineering and
management, an area in which women have been historically egregiously
underrepresented. He sponsors their involvement in extracurricular activities
through which they gain additional valuable experience (e.g., planning and
carrying out a national convention with a three-quarters of a million dollar
budget). His mentoring activities span more than fifteen years.

The submitted nomination package is in support of a Presidential Award for
Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Mentoring (PAESMEM) to
recognize outstanding mentoring efforts or programs that enhance the
participation of historically underrepresented groups in science, mathematics,
and engineering.

