* 0429102
* Collaborative Research:   Language Processing Technology for Electronic Rulemaking
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Jamie Callan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 550,936.00

Collaborative Research: Language Processing Technology for Electronic Rulemaking
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many people today, including news analysts, opinion
pollsters, advertisers, and government regulation writers need to interpret,
structure, and rapidly master large quantities of opinion-based text. New
research is needed to develop text-processing tools that can perform advanced
analysis of large text collections. This research will build on current text
processing technologies, such as text clustering, text searching using
information retrieval, and extractive summaries, to build and test tools
tailored to the specific needs of government personnel working in an electronic
rulemaking environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's focus is the
federal government's several-thousand regulation writers, employed in some 200
agencies, who formulate, in a tightly scripted procedure, the rules and
regulations that define the details of our laws. This project will attempt to
solve several novel problems central to language processing research. In turn,
it will deploy and evaluate a Rule-Writer's Workbench; a set of language tools
that enables regulation writers, singly or jointly, to obtain a detailed and
multidimensional overview of the material. &lt;br/&gt;. &lt;br/&gt;This research
has the potential to impact far beyond IT and social science academia. It will
explore such novel issues as author typing, opinion/affect determination, and
near-duplicate detection. If even just a handful of the new technologies are
effective, they eventually may help thousands of regulation writers more
effectively communicate with and understand the comments of millions of citizens
in our increasingly digitized society, and produce better regulatory rules for
all of us. &lt;br/&gt;