* 0429922
* Checkpointed Processor Architectures
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Jose Martinez, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2007
* USD 189,996.00

Checkpointed Processor Architectures Abstract

The project proposes Checkpointed Processor Architectures (CPA), a hybrid mode
of execution based on a combination of traditional in-order commit support and
selective state checkpointing. CPA decouples resource recycling from instruction
commit permitting more aggressive reclamation and higher utilization. It also
performs speculative commit of some long-latency memory operations, allowing
subsequent instructions to complete and commit. To recover from corrupted states
due to aggressive speculation, CPA processors rely on their checkpointed state.
The project will explore the integration of CPA in processors with support for
simultaneous multithreading, and with chip multiprocessors. The project will
also investigate the synergy between CPA and thread-level speculation, an
upcoming technology that bridges the gap between sequential and parallel
computing.

CPA's departure from traditional instruction processing will allow processors to
deliver higher performance growth without oversizing critical resources, which
affects the clock rate adversely. As a result, CPA will help overcome the
performance stagnation in evolutionary processor architectures. Furthermore, our
integrative approach with emerging parallel and speculatively parallel
architectures will ensure a broad and lasting impact. Finally, the insights
developed in the CPA mechanisms and interactions will help better understand the
co-design aspects of microprocessor and parallel architectures, in the lab and
in the classroom.

