* 0429297
* Process Technology for Achieving Government Online Dispute Resolution
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Ethan Katsh, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 10/31/2007
* USD 710,458.00

Dispute resolution is a fundamental and pervasive activity of government,
requring efficiency, effectiveness and fairness. This project proposes applying
process technology to develop and evaluate dispute resolution processes through
online delivery. The intention is to improve dispute resolution, and deepen
understanding of how to be more successful in developing and evaluating
processes with the stringent requirements of public governance. The project
focus is on the dispute resolution processes and approaches used by the National
Mediation Board (NMB). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project's
intellectual focus is on the applicability of process technology to processes
having particularly stringent efficiency, effectiveness and fairness
requirements. These, in turn, rest upon the need for strong management of
communications and information flow, and strong assurances about security,
privacy, and accuracy. The establishment of transparently fair, validated,
processes designed by multi-stakeholder collaboration can meet these
requirements, and lead to increased trust in government. The research will
include evaluation of the success of innovative process definition, analysis,
and collaboration technologies in meeting these stringent requirements and in
increasing trust. These technologies have succeeded in such domains as software
development, medicine, and scientific data processing.; they will now be
evaluated in the complex domain of online dispute resolution, with its
particularly challenging goal of trust enhancement in an environment where the
parties are in dispute. The research is interdisciplinary in nature, involving
researchers from computer science, management, and legal studies. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Most federal agencies must respond to grievances
from citizens and groups, and resolve disputes between the agency and
individuals and organizations. The Federal government has recently mandated that
its agencies use alternative dispute resolution (ADR) methods to resolve
disputes. As a result of both Congressional and Presidential action during the
1990s, federal administrative agencies must use non-adversarial dispute
resolution whenever possible. Over eighty Federal agencies have such mediation
programs. The NMB's clients and sibling organizations will be prepared to adopt
these technologies in applying Online Dispute Resolution to their own needs.
Results will be distributed through traditional publication venues and also by
the UMass Center for Information Technology and Dispute Resolution, the UMass
Electronic Enterprise Institute, and the NMB's participation in the US
Government Interagency Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Working Group of
over 25 agencies. &lt;br/&gt;