* 0429060
* Upgrade and Integration fo RPI NEES In-flight Robot and 2D Earthquake Shaker
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Stephen Derby, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2006
* USD 143,002.00

This award provides funding to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) to upgrade
the experimental capabilities of the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES) geotechnical centrifuge facility at RPI that will
be operated by NEES Consortium, Inc., as a national shared use facility during
FY 2005 - FY 2014. The major equipment at the RPI NEES site includes the 150
g-ton geotechnical centrifuge, 2D shaker, 2D laminar box, 4D in-flight robot,
web-based data acquisition system, advanced instrumentation, and telepresence
and teleparticipation capabilities. Under this award, RPI will upgrade and
integrate the in-flight robot and 2D shaker, so that they can both be used in
the same earthquake simulation centrifuge experiment. This capability was not
provided under the original cooperative agreement CMS-0086555 to establish the
NEES RPI equipment site. The proposed integration of the in-flight robot and 2D
shaker constitutes a substantial capability improvement of the RPI NEES facility
and the services that RPI will be able to provide to the earthquake engineering
research community and practicing engineers. It will permit the use of the in-
flight robot to perform complex operations on larger soil models while they are
on the centrifuge under high centrifugal acceleration up to 100g, before shaking
or between shaking events using the 2D shaker, without the need to stop the
centrifuge to place and/or remove either the shaker or robot. In order to
accommodate the 2D shaker and the in-flight robot together on the centrifuge due
to the limited vertical space, RPI will also develop special robotic tools that
are telescopic or retractable. The proposed integration will allow sophisticated
in-flight operations such as: (1) applying static and dynamic loads in various
directions, (2) pile driving, (3) excavation of soil to simulate construction
activities, (4) in situ testing of soil properties using calibrated probes, (5)
soil remediation, and (6) in-flight fluid injection and sampling for passive
site remediation. This equipment will be available to the earthquake engineering
research community through the NEES Consortium, Inc., RPI NEES facility. This
award is funded by the NSF NEES Major Research Equipment and Facilities
Construction (MREFC) project and is a component of the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).