* 0429114
* Dissertation Reserach: Building Agro-Biotechnology Capabilities in Small Countries
* SBE,SBE
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Susan Cozzens, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Julia I. Lane
* 01/31/2008
* USD 11,900.00

This Research on Science and Technology Dissertation Improvement Grant is aimed
at analyzing the role of the surrounding institutional environment on the
building of technological capabilities at the firm and sectoral level in
agricultural biotechnology in small countries. It argues that the
characteristics of the institutional environment related to agricultural
biotechnology, including policies, institutions (rules of the game) and the web
of related organizations (players of the game), strongly determine the type of
technological capabilities built by firms. This study's focus on small countries
with an important agricultural sector and on agricultural biotechnology attempts
to provide an interesting combination by including a highly knowledge-intensive
sector, but closely connected to the primary production of agriculture.The
analysis is framed by the concept of the 'sectoral system of innovation and
production' (Malerba 2002). To examine the impact of institutions on the
building of technological capabilities, the study will draw on case studies of
three small countries, Costa Rica, New Zealand, and Uruguay. First, it will map
the main characteristics of the agricultural biotechnology system in the three
countries, including its core and boundaries, its constitutive actors and their
relationships, and the performance and evolution of the sector in the 1980s and
1990s. This first stage will be drawn on secondary data. The second phase will
attempt to establish the causal mechanisms between the institutional environment
and the building of technological capabilities. It will rely mainly on in-depth
interviews with the actors of the sectoral system, as well as on secondary data
about the institutions and their evolution over time. For these purposes, the
researcher plans to stay one month in each country. The broader impacts of this
research are the followings: (i) it will contribute with suggesting directions
for public policy in innovation-related factors, such as funding, training,
education, as well as regarding the articulation of the different actors of the
system; (ii) it will also be an important guide for the allocation of resources
and priority-setting, based on the analysis of strengths and weaknesses of the
system; (iii) it will represent a learning tool as it will illustrate the
experiences of other small countries; and (iv) finally a better understanding of
the process of building technological capabilities will impact the prospects for
economic growth of these small countries.