* 0429049
* Dissertation Research:  The Duality of Innovation: The Understudied Aspect of Innovation Theory
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Susan Cozzens, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* stephen zehr
* 01/31/2007
* USD 6,230.00

There is increasing international concern about the tremendous disparities in
the living conditions between developed and developing nations. Economic
development is regarded as a necessary condition for closing wealth gaps and
subsequently easing attendant social tensions. In the science and technology
policy community, technological innovation is seen as an engine for economic
growth and therefore a contributor to closing economic gaps. National Innovation
Systems theories identify institutional configurations that promote
technological innovation in societies. The theories and configurations have
evolved largely in the industrialized world context. As attention turns to the
condition of the developing world, the applicability of the National Innovation
Systems framework must be critically assessed. There is a specific need for
further examination of the social aspects of National Innovation Theory.
Economic development strategists, social scientists and historians, from across
the spectrum of wealth, emphasize the role of science and technology as being
instrumental in closing the gap between nations. Scientific and technological
innovation are seen as essential engines in mobilizing the ability of societies
to make better use of their natural resources. The role and potential benefit of
science and technology, however, cannot be considered without social
sensitivity; for the craft of science and the evolution of technology are at
their root social artifacts. As a result, the hope for science and technology to
be instrumental in closing the wealth gap between nations must be anchored to
social realities. This Research on Science and Technology Dissertation
Improvement Grant is a component of the effort to promote scientific and
technological innovation as an effective tool in economic development. This
research attempts to examine the applicability of the National Innovation
Systems framework in the developing country context by introducing the concept
of innovation as a tool for liberation. Particularly in developing nations that
have endured both slavery and colonization, innovation is more than a tool for
economic development. It is also a tool for liberation. The project will explore
the experiences of the sugar industry in Barbados and Guyana as case studies.
Innovation will be treated as a concept with dual functions: 1) as a tool for
economic development and 2) as a tool for liberation. An analysis that considers
innovation in the sugar industry in these two dimensions allows for the
influence of the specific histories of countries whose pasts include being
enslaved and colonized. Examination of the sugar industry is justified both by
the impending decisions of the World trade Organization with regards to
preferential trading in sugar as well as the five hundred year history of sugar
in the Caribbean. Caribbean critical literature has surfaced the cultural
meaning of innovation as liberation. Innovation theory has prescribed
institutional structures and relationships that foster innovation. This research
will focus on the fusion of those two bodies of thought in an attempt to apply
innovation theory more effectively in the developing world.

