* 0429477
* Computational Topology for Surface Approximation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Kinetsu Abe, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2008
* USD 266,999.00

This research examines broad issues of guaranteeing that the essential shape of
an object is preserved during algorithms used in engineering design, animation
and molecular modeling. While geometric characteristics such as surface area and
volume can be objectively measured and compared for two objects, other shape
characterizations, such as the distinction between a garden hose and the same
hose tied into a knot, are more subtle and require the methods of this research.
Surprisingly, these distinctions are not easy for present day algorithms and
difficulties in detecting these differences has been estimated to cost billions
of dollars annually in lost productivity in the aeronautical and automotive
industries. This research is an interdisciplinary investigation between computer
scientists and mathematicians with a corresponding educational emphasis upon
introducing the next generation of scientists to a holistic perspective that
combines theory with novel engineering and life science applications. The
applications to molecular modeling are expected to be attractive to the many
women in the biological sciences and thereby increase the participation of women
in the computational and mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research integrates new
topological constraints and numerical error bounds into geometric approximation
algorithms, defining when a surface approximation is in the same topological
equivalence class as the original surface. While surface approximation is a
classical mathematical topic, the issue of topological equivalence has typically
been left to human inspection. The novel approach of this research is the
development of the theory and practice to create computationally tractable
algorithms that ensure topological equivalence for a rich class of surface
approximation techniques. The creation of appropriate applied mathematics to
eliminate any direct algorithmic dependence upon computation of the medial axis
significantly enriches the class of robust approximation algorithms delivering
verifiable topology. Another major innovation is the comprehensive consideration
of geometric models composed from bounded surface patches. This perspective
eliminates a prevailing, but unrealistic theoretical hypothesis that geometric
models have only a single bounding surface. The additional subtleties rely upon
new numerical approximations along the boundaries of each constituent
patch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;