* 0429149
* Collaborative Research:    Program Analysis Techniques to Support Dependable RTSJ Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Matthew Dwyer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2008
* USD 207,519.00

As part of the joint NSF/NASA High-Dependability Computing and
&lt;br/&gt;Communication&lt;br/&gt;Systems Research effort, this project is
developing, adapting and &lt;br/&gt;integrating a variety of program analysis
techniques for the Real-time&lt;br/&gt;Specification for Java (RTSJ). RTSJ is an
emerging language extension&lt;br/&gt;for Java that is designed for implementing
concurrent time-critical&lt;br/&gt;embedded software, for example, the control
software on NASA's&lt;br/&gt;robotic Mars rovers. This type of software is
notoriously difficult to&lt;br/&gt;test and debug, and the model-checking,
light-weight static and dynamic&lt;br/&gt;analysis techniques being developed as
part of this project promise to&lt;br/&gt;identify bugs before software is
deployed to the field and to produce&lt;br/&gt;systems that function more
reliably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cornerstone of this project is the use of
controlled experimentation &lt;br/&gt;to judge the effectiveness of new analysis
techniques. As part of this &lt;br/&gt;effort, RTSJ programs and experimental
frameworks will be developed that support&lt;br/&gt;repeatable experimentation
for determining analysis performance and the &lt;br/&gt;precision of analysis
results. Experiment findings will drive the refinement of&lt;br/&gt;analysis
techniques. Case studies using NASA testbed software will serve&lt;br/&gt;to
evaluate the scalability and applicability to NASA-relevant
software&lt;br/&gt;challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project
promises to provide developers of next &lt;br/&gt;generation real-time embedded
software, both at NASA and throughout the embedded&lt;br/&gt;systems domain,
with a suite of powerful quality-assurance tools that &lt;br/&gt;will allow them
to more cost-effectively produce higher-quality systems.&lt;br/&gt;Given the
pace at which software is being embedded in our society's&lt;br/&gt;infra-
structure, this could have broad impacts on the degree to which &lt;br/&gt;we
can rely on such systems.&lt;br/&gt;