* 0429572
* Supporting Higher-Order Approaches to Symbolic Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Gopalan Nadathur, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 238,199.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: CPA 0429572&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Supporting Higher-Order Approaches
to Symbolic Computation&lt;br/&gt;PI: Gopalan
Nadathur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;Emerging trends in software
authentication and use indicate a growing importance for the explicit treatment
of objects such as specifications, programs and proofs in programming contexts.
Elegant methods have been developed that employ lambda calculi for representing
and manipulating such structures in logically certifiable ways. This research
concerns the flexible and efficient utilization within computational settings of
the resulting higher-order approach to dealing with symbolic structures. One
focus is that of understanding and reaping the efficiency benefits of using a
controlled but versatile operation for decomposing the lambda terms that are
central to the approach. New algorithms for deploying this operation, methods
for exploiting explicit treatments of substitution within them and appropriate
compilation techniques will be developed. In another direction, choices in the
machine representation of lambda terms will be evaluated and machinery for
realizing optimized reduction strategies over them will be designed. The
research results&lt;br/&gt;will be applied to a system that is currently being
exploited in several verification and program manipulation projects. This system
will be used in a hands-on exposure of formal methods in the classroom setting.
The training of graduate and undergraduate students in the broad area of formal
techniques in software development is also
envisaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;