* 0429639
* Monitoring and Checking of Distributed Systems with respect to Formal Specifications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mahesh Viswanathan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2008
* USD 270,000.00

Proposal Number: 0429639&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Monitoring and Checking of
Distributed Systems with Respect to&lt;br/&gt; Formal
Specifications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mahesh
Viswanathan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our increasing reliance on computer and digital
systems, necessitates the critical need for the reliability of the underlying
software. However, the task of developing correct software is particularly
difficult since modern software systems need to address complicated problems.
Hence there is an increasing need for automated techniques to analyze software
continually. Traditional methods for analyzing the correctness of programs,
namely, formal verification and testing are inadequate in several respects. In
particular,&lt;br/&gt;verification is performed on the formal design of a system
and not its implementation, while testing is often ad hoc and fails to provide
formal guarantees. Monitoring and checking systems at run-time attempts to
address these concerns. Although great strides have been made in developing
monitoring tools, there is one fundamental challenge that limits their
widespread applicability. Most of the monitoring systems only analyze uni-
processor systems or systems that have a synchronized global clock. In this
project, the PI plans to&lt;br/&gt;develop tools and algorithms to automatically
monitor distributed systems with respect to formal specifications. In order to
overcome the state space explosion problem encountered in
distributed&lt;br/&gt;debugging, the PI plans to partial-order techniques in
centralized monitoring and game-theoretic ideas to construct local decentralized
monitors from global specifications.&lt;br/&gt;