* 0429268
* Role of Acylation in Membrane Binding and Biological Function of Plant Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Estelle Hrabak, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 02/29/2008
* USD 246,259.00

Covalent attachment of fatty acids to proteins, a process known as acylation, is
an important mechanism for targeting proteins to subcellular membranes or for
enabling protein-protein interactions. In addition, acylation is critical for
the correct functioning of many proteins. Acylation consists of two separate
processes: myristoylation, the addition of a 14-carbon unsaturated fatty acid to
a glycine residue at the amino terminus of the protein, and palmitoylation, the
addition of a 16-carbon unsaturated fatty acid to a cysteine residue often near
the amino terminus. This project will focus on myristoylation, which is
catalyzed by N-myristoyltransferase (NMT). In animals and yeast, NMTs have been
well characterized, and their protein sequences can be analyzed on-line to
predict whether a particular protein will be a substrate for NMT. However,
preliminary data using a direct assay for myristoylation showed that these
databases often produced incorrect predictions for plant proteins. Therefore,
plant NMTs probably have somewhat different substrate preferences than NMTs from
yeast or animals. The long-term goal of this research is to understand the
mechanism(s) of targeting myristoylated proteins to specific cellular locations
and the impact of acylation on protein function. In order to accomplish this
goal, it is important to accurately predict the plant proteins that are
myristoylated. Preliminary data indicated that the Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-
eared cress) calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) family would be a good set
of test proteins because most of them are membrane-associated but do not contain
transmembrane domains, an indication that acylation is the mechanism that they
use for membrane binding. In addition, several CDPKs do not have predicted
myristoylation sites (based on the yeast and animal models) although the CDPKs
are myristoylated by direct assay. The two main objectives of this project are
to determine the myristoylation status of selected CDPKs from Arabidopsis in
order to clarify the substrate specificity of the plant NMT and to determine the
importance of myristoylation for membrane binding. Myristoylation of CDPKs will
be assessed in two ways. In the first method, in vitro myristoylation in a cell-
free wheat germ extract will be measured. Second, for a subset of CDPKs,
myristoylation will be confirmed by isolating affinity-tagged CDPK from plant
extracts and subjecting the protein to mass spectrometry. In addition to
detecting myristate groups, this method may also identify palmitate
substitutions. To determine the importance of myristoylation in membrane
binding, the glycine residue will be mutagenized at the site of myristate
attachment, and the CDPK will be tagged with green fluorescent protein and used
to generate transgenic Arabidopsis. Plants will be analyzed both by confocal
laser scanning microscopy and by cell fractionation to determine how protein
targeting is affected by blocking myristoylation. Undergraduate molecular
biology students at the University of New Hampshire will be involved in
preparing some of the site-directed mutants for use in this research. These
studies will improve the ability to predict myristoylation of plant proteins and
help to define the role of myristoylation in protein targeting to specific
cellular membranes.