* 0429330
* Expanding the Field Capabilities of the NEES@UTexas Equipment Site
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Ellen Rathje, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2006
* USD 128,118.00

This award provides funding to the University of Texas - Austin (UTA), to
upgrade the experimental capabilities of the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Large-Scale Mobile Shakers and
associated instrumentation for the Dynamic Field Studies of Geotechnical and
Structural Systems site that will be operated by NEES Consortium, Inc., as a
national shared use facility during FY 2005 - FY 2014. The major equipment at
the UTA NEES site includes: (1) three mobile shakers that have diverse force and
frequency capabilities and a tractor-trailer rig to move the two largest shakers
to and from field sites, (2) an instrumentation van that houses state-of-the-art
data acquisition systems and a satellite link-up, and (3) a large collection of
field instrumentation that includes wired and wireless sensors that measure
vibrational motion and pore water pressure. &lt;br/&gt;Under this award, the
following equipment will be purchased for this site: two moveable Cone
Penetration Test (CPT) cylinders; CPT computer control unit; and three CPT cone
tips, GPS, 30 Tri-axial MEMS accelerometers, 10 pore pressure transducers and
related cables and connectors. The moveable cylinders will allow positioning the
truck closest to the site and allow the freedom of movement of the truck in both
horizontal directions to facilitate the insertion and extraction of liquefaction
sensors. Instrumented cone penetration test equipment allows cost -effective
site exploration in studying soil liquefaction. Liquefaction sensors including a
three cone tips, and a computer control unit will enable this function. The
field GPS will allow field personnel to pinpoint the location of equipment and
sensors. This functionality enables the user to tag the recorded points with
additional information through GPS. MEMS accelerometers along with the
transducers enable in-situ liquefaction tests at frequencies less than 10Hz.
This upgraded equipment will significantly expand and improve the field- testing
capabilities at this NEES site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This equipment will be
available to the earthquake engineering research community through the NEES
Consortium, Inc., UTA NEES facility. This award is funded by the NSF NEES Major
Research Equipment and Facilities Construction (MREFC) project and is a
component of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
(NEHRP).&lt;br/&gt;