* 0429743
* Spectral Built-In Self-Testing for Mixed-Signal Systems-in-a-Package (SIP)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Michael Bushnell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2008
* USD 307,152.00

PROPOSAL ID: 0429743&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mike Bushnell (Rutgers U), Vishwani Agrawal
(Auburn U)&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Spectral Built-In Self-Testing for Mixed-Signal
Systems-in-a-Package &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;In this
research the PIs propose a new application of the theory of signals and systems
to testing digital systems-in-a-package (SIPs). Digital input signals are
considered as a set of time-varying waveforms, characterized by a correlation
matrix. The elements of this matrix are the auto-correlation and cross-
correlation coefficients, determined from inputs that have known fault and error
detection properties. The auto-correlation indicates how a signal resembles its
own past, and the cross-correlation indicates how a signal resembles other
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose a completely integrated built-in
self-testing (BIST) system for huge digital hardware systems. Rather than
inserting a full-scan chain and using combinational BIST, digital circuit
spectral analysis techniques is used to determine which flip-flops (memory
elements) to scan to simplify the testing. Subsequent topologically analysis of
the digital part of the system is made to determine its necessary spectral
testing frequencies in partial-scan mode at each primary input. Finally, one
inserts low-overhead spectral BIST hardware to generate these frequencies and
uses a novel response compacter for BIST, which calculates the cross-correlation
between various primary outputs as a signature. Spectral BIST uses less hardware
than the conventional BIST system, covers 8.4% more of the faults in sequential
mode, but requires less than 10% of the patterns.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
benefits of these concepts would be drastically shorter test pattern sequences,
compared with present-day BIST, but high fault coverage. This leads to economic
benefits of a large power reduction in test mode, and shorter test time. Other
benefits are simplified testing hardware and lower hardware overhead. We will
create a spectral analysis method to insert the testing hardware into the
sequential circuit to raise its fault coverage. The PIs plan to topologically
analyze sequential circuits to determine the predominant spectra of their input
responses. This is expected to accelerate spectral analysis, since one can avoid
analyzing parts of the spectrum that the circuit could never generate.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;