* 0429037
* Image and Video Inpainting
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Guillermo Sapiro, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2009
* USD 225,000.00

This project addresses the area of image and video inpainting, the technique of
modifying an image in an undetectable form. The goals and applications of
inpainting, which is as ancient as art itself, are numerous, from the
restoration of damaged paintings and photographs to the removal of selected
objects in a scene and the discovery of data behind occlusions. Image inpainting
is also important for less-conventional applications such as wireless
transmission and compression and image integration from camera arrays. The goal
of this project is to develop a working solution to image, video, three
dimensional, and multiple views inpainting and to address applications such as
image and film restoration and alteration, image recovery from camera arrays,
and filling-in of holes in 3D range data. Biological aspects of inpainting,
through its fascinating possible connections with camouflage and the filling-in
of the human blind spot, are investigated as well. The theory and applications
of this project cover very diverse areas such as image processing, partial
differential equations and fluid dynamics, numerical analysis, art, computer
graphics, entertainment, and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inpainting
problem is addressed as the computation of a smooth continuation of the
available spatial and&lt;br/&gt;temporal information surrounding the region to
be filled-in. This is achieved via partial differential equations, which
incorporate principles ranging from fluid dynamics to Gestalt's smooth boundary
continuation. The combination of these techniques with more classical texture
synthesis algorithms is also addressed and exploited in this project. The
research addresses the problem in its generality, assuming diverse and large
regions to be inpainted, and derives both fundamental theoretical aspects and
practical&lt;br/&gt;working systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;