* 0429448
* Spatiotemporal Analysis of 9-1-1 Call Stream Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Tony Fountain, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 600,000.00

This award will support a partnership among the University of California San
Diego, the State of California Governor's Office of Emergency Services (OES),
and the Public Safety Network (PSN) company. The goal is to perform
spatiotemporal analysis of 9-1-1 call stream data and correlate these data to
external events, in order to provide more effective and efficient response
during emergencies. A wide variety of existing and emerging data sources are of
potential value in helping the OES determine the location and magnitude of
incipient disasters, and timely access to these data is critical for OES to
manage State-level resources and to assist local governments in providing aid to
disaster victims. PSN has been contracted by California to collect 9-1-1 call
stream data across the State. PSN collects data from several hundred distinct
Public Safety Answering Points (PSAP's) for about 60-80,000 emergency calls per
day. Researchers from UC San Diego's San Diego Supercomputer Center and Scripps
Institution of Oceanography will work with PSN and OES to provide expertise in
advanced data management, data analysis, data mining, and statistical
techniques, with the objective of performing spatiotemporal analysis of 9-1-1
emergency call stream data across the State of California and correlating these
data with external information, such as earthquakes and
fires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PSN will provide an archival dataset of 9-1-1 call
stream data for the 4-year period preceding the start of the project. The
analysis will include correlation of this information with external event
information, such as earthquakes and wildfires, to determine spatiotemporal
signature of such events. This information will then be used to establish alarm
thresholds to provide advance warning to first responders and other emergency
service personnel, concerning the spatial extent and temporal evolution of an
emergency event. The long-term&lt;br/&gt;goal is also to enable the use of this
information for real-time detection of emergency events in order to provide
rapid response at the local level and facilitate decision support for resource
allocation and planning at the State level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit - Analysis of 9-1-1 call stream data will provide a better understanding
of the spatiotemporal patterns of emergency calls and their correlation to
external events. Predictive models built with this data can lead to real-time
decision support and better overall planning to enable more efficient and
effective response to emergencies. While 9-1-1 data is currently being collected
across the nation, it is being used primarily for administrative purposes, not
for real-time assessment and prediction of emergency response situations. This
project will provide that linkage between the data and the spatiotemporal
analysis techniques required to mine the data and develop predictive models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact - The project will involve first responders and
emergency services personnel from State and&lt;br/&gt;local agencies, as well as
representative personnel from border law enforcement information
agencies,&lt;br/&gt;e.g. the Automated Regional Justice Information Systems
(ARJIS), San Diego. Although the focus of this&lt;br/&gt;project is on
California, PSN also has access to 9-1-1 call stream data across much of the
U.S. Indeed, the&lt;br/&gt;methodologies developed in this research will be
applicable immediately to other states and regions.