* 0429189
* Research Starter Grant: Role of Sex Steroids in Reproductive Timing in Rufous-Collared Sparrows
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Ignacio Moore, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dianna K. Padilla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

One of the main goals in environmental endocrinology during the last two decades
has been to understand the interactions between aggression and sex steroids
within males, as modeled by the Challenge Hypothesis. This hypothesis proposes
that male-male territorial aggression results in an increase in testosterone
levels, which then feeds back to support the aggressive behavior. However, less
attention has been focused on the role of sex steroids in male-female social
interactions. One area where sex steroids could have a profound effect on male-
female interactions is in fine-tuning the timing of breeding within socially
monogamous pairs. In tropical birds, breeding seasons are generally long and
there is significant variation within the population as to when breeding occurs.
This presents an ideal opportunity to elucidate the importance of male-female
interactions in the timing of breeding. Previous findings in tropical male
rufous-collared sparrows, Zonotrichia capensis, have suggested that male-male
interactions do not affect testosterone levels, implying that testosterone is
not functioning within the Challenge Hypothesis model. In addition, preliminary
data indicate that within monogamous pairs, gonadal state is similar, and
independent of the rest of the population. This presents the possibility that
male-female interactions may be more important than male-male interactions in
determining gonadal activity and testosterone levels. The proposed research will
investigate the role of hormonally mediated social cues between males and
females in timing of breeding. The following specific questions will be
addressed: 1) Within monogamous pairs, is there a correlation between male and
female gonadal stage and plasma sex steroid levels? 2) Are hormonally mediated
social cues used to fine tune and coordinate reproductive timing within breeding
pairs? The results of these studies will clarify the differences documented
between high latitude and tropical birds in terms of hormone-behavior
interactions. This is important as two-thirds of the world's vertebrates are
tropical and thus the typical high-latitude mechanistic relationships may not be
adequate to describe them.