* 0429088
* GSE/RES- Improving Mathematics Competency Through Instruction on Cognitive Strategies and Computational Fluency
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Martha Carr, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2008
* USD 497,434.00

The University of Georgia teaming with the University of Massachusetts Amherst
is examining the prediction that a computer program designed to enhance strategy
use and computational fluency will improve mathematics performance. The research
also tests the prediction that working with the program will reduce or eliminate
previously found gender differences in strategy use and computational
fluency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the proposed research is
to improve the mathematical competency of young children and to reduce or
eliminate factors that contribute to gender differences in mathematics
performance in early elementary school age children. Earlier research has shown
a correlation between cognitive strategy use, computational fluency and
mathematics performance and found gender differences in these characteristics.
There is evidence that early developing gender differences result in later
gender differences in math test performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will involve an experiment where students located in Georgia and
Massachusetts will be randomly assigned to one of four experimental conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is its contribution
to our knowledge of two factors that are believed to affect mathematics
achievement and to affect gender differences in mathematics achievement. The
study will determine whether instruction focused on these variables improves
mathematics achievement, particularly for girls who tend to have lower test
scores, lower fluency and less cognitive strategy use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the proposed project will be to provide evidence that early
intervention can ameliorate early emerging gender differences in math learning.
These changes in instruction may have long-term consequences. They might improve
the ability of students to perform at higher levels of mathematics in early
adulthood and increase their interest in advanced study of science and
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;