* 0429020
* GSE/RES  Removing Barriers to Success: Reducing Gender Differences in 3-D Spatial Skills
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Sheryl Sorby, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2009
* USD 564,845.00

Michigan Technological University is testing a 3-D spatial skills curriculum for
its effectiveness with non-engineering students in other science and mathematics
fields, and with pre-college students at the middle school and high school
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial visualization is considered to be one of
seven human intelligences and is an active topic in educational research. Based
on previous research, two distinct themes emerge: 1) well-developed 3-D spatial
skills are critical to success in STEM fields, and 2) the 3-D spatial skills of
women typically lag significantly behind their male
counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the need for training for some
individuals, particularly women, Michigan Tech implemented a spatial skills
course in 1993. The course has had a significant impact on the retention of
female engineering students over the past ten years. In 1998, the team developed
multimedia software and a workbook for self-paced learning. These user-friendly,
gender-neutral materials have been proven to develop the 3-D spatial skills of
first-year engineering students. The current project will test the materials
with other audiences, including undergraduates in STEM fields outside of
engineering and pre-college students in middle and high school. Particular
attention will be paid to gender differences and preferred learning styles to
determine if these materials are suitable for the other
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed project
is two-fold: a proven tool will be tested with three other audiences, and, the
research will build on findings related to the study of gender-based preferred
learning styles for spatial skills development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the project will be enhanced participation of women and all
students in STEM fields by removing one of the barriers to success in learning,
and improved collective understanding of issues regarding spatial skills
learning.&lt;br/&gt;