* 0429365
* Collaborative Research:    Connecting to Congress:    The Adoption and Use of Web Technologies Among Congressional Offices
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,11/30/2010
* David Lazer, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 11/30/2010
* USD 942,634.00

The Internet has the potential to transform our democracy.a potential that has
begun to receive substantial &lt;br/&gt;scholarly attention. This attention has
focused on the potential transformational effects of the technology on civil
society, and, in the political realm, how the Internet might transform political
discourse. Researchers have devoted little attention, however, to how the
Internet might transform existing institutions for connecting citizens to
elected officials. This relationship is the fundamental building block of a
epresentative &lt;br/&gt;democracy, and it has come under increasing strain as
our country has grown since the time of the founders, as the number of matters
the state is involved in has multiplied; and as policy problems have grown more
complex. The Internet offers a set of tools that might help to arrest this
trend, and to fundamentally alter the level of participation of citizens in the
consultative process with their representatives. Strikingly, this potential for
change has largely been unrealized and unstudied. While there has been a
considerable amount of scholarship on the impact of the Internet on government,
governance, and society, there has been little systematic research on how
Members of Congress use or should use the Internet to provide information to and
interact with their constituents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has both a
qualitative and a quantitative component, where each of these components
complement and inform the other. In the statistical component, longitudinal data
to will be collected to explain the diffusion patterns of web-based technologies
among the congressional offices. All congressional websites will be assessed
along such dimensions as their informational value, accessibility, usability,
and interactivity. Data will be collected on factors that might plausibly affect
adoption ecisions.e.g., regarding the characteristics of districts, Members, the
mechanisms for information spread in Congress, and so on.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The qualitative component will entail fieldwork in
approximately 12 offices, stratified by the degree of web &lt;br/&gt;technology
adoption, as well as by political party and tenure. This in-depth field will
allow study of the dynamic micro-processes that underlie and ultimately explain
the aggregate patterns of technology diffusion, and will allow exploration of
the internal practices and the relative efficiency of how congressional offices
manage digitally-mediated information and feedback from constituents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important partner in the work will be the Congressional
Management Foundation, which will provide unique access to data and
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project has
several dimensions. The research combines rigorous quantitative and qualitative
research to address novel questions regarding the practice of digital government
in legislative settings. The research will contribute directly to the political
science research on congressional behavior and institutions, and in particular
to an emerging literature on entrepreneurial behavior among legislators in the
U.S. House of Representatives. The research also will contribute to political
scientists' and sociologists' research on the processes for the diffusion of
innovations, and would be the first study of the role social networks play
within the U.S. Congress in the timing of adoption of new forms of governance
and new institutions for legislative representation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The
research team includes political science and information technology research
faculty at four major research universities, who are linked through the National
Center for Digital Governance (NCDG) &lt;br/&gt;at Harvard University. The
research will produce a series of conference papers, academic journal articles,
&lt;br/&gt;and an academic press book on democracy in the digital age. In
addition, the Congressional Management Foundation and the U.S. Congress itself
will help to ensure that the knowledge that emerges through this research will
help to transform the adoption and use of digital technology in Congress through
a series of best practice reports, debriefing sessions, and annual conferences.