* 0429884
* Voice Communications over Tandem Heterogeneous Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jerry Gibson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2008
* USD 246,000.00

Voice is the method of choice for real time communications. Voice is so
important to human communications that we have constructed entire networks
centered around voice, namely, the public switched telephone network (PSTN) and
the analog/digital cellular networks. With the emergence of voice over the
Internet Protocol (VoIP) and voice over wireless local area networks (Wi-Fi), a
future voice call might consist of a digital cellular user communicating through
a VoIP backbone network with a voice over Wi-Fi user, resulting in the
connection of a digital cellular network through a VoIP network into a Wi-Fi
link. Although the digital cellular networks utilize relatively sophisticated
error detection and correction, unequal error protection, and error concealment,
the error control, packet loss mechanisms, and packet loss concealment methods
for VoIP and voice over Wi-Fi are relatively primitive. Furthermore, since each
of these networks has different channel behaviors and may use different voice
codecs and different network protocols, acceptable, bandwidth efficient voice
service may not be achievable over such a connection. This research involves
voice communications over tandem heterogeneous networks and voice over Wi-Fi
links. We examine (1) improved voice codec tandem performance, by developing
speech-mode-adaptive postfilters and perceptual distortion measures, by removing
the postfilter and inserting additional filtering within the analysis-by-
synthesis loop, and by shaping the excitation within the analysis-by-synthesis
loop; and (2) improved packet loss concealment and reduced latency, by jointly
designing packet loss concealment methods and protocols for wireless LANs and by
developing packet loss smoothing algorithms to use "late" packets to improve
later reconstruction. The evaluation of the end-to-end network performance for
voice communications uses the NS2 network simulator and voice quality metrics.