* 0429156
* GSE/RES Development of Gender-Based Science Performance Models
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Ronald Stevens, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2007
* USD 475,148.00

A project team led by University of California Los Angeles is developing models
documenting how males and females from middle school to the university develop
and stabilize strategies during scientific problem solving. They are modeling:
1) The gender-related development of learning strategies in multiple sub-domains
of chemistry, 2) How knowledge of solving problems in chemistry is
differentially retained over time, and how learning re-occurs when needed, and,
3) How online collaborative activities / environments can be organized to
maximize the strengths of the different problem-solving characteristics of
female and male students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;While the literature provides evidence for behavioral/cognitive
gender differences in various STEM activities, there is less information on how
these differences contribute to strategy development and use in scientific
problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use artificial neural
network and Hidden Markov Modeling of student performance and progress on
complex science problem solving tasks to develop the gender models. There are
commitments from two school districts and two universities to involve thousands
of students across grade levels spanning middle school through university and in
quasi-experimental groups with all female, all male and mixed gender groupings.
Supporting data will include pre/post tests of content knowledge, science
attitudes and teacher and student technology use, as well as overall academic
performance including state standardized test data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team includes researchers, educators and students in California (UCLA,
Placentia-Yorba Linda Unified School District), South Carolina (Clemson),
Kentucky, and Italy (IRST), a psycho-metrician with experience in gender
research and expertise in item response theory (ETS), and advisory members from
the gender research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings will be
disseminated to teachers, the gender research community, basic science
educators, and members of the intelligent tutoring and collaborative learning
communities. The problem solving tasks will be available online to other
teachers and researchers world wide along with the resulting neural network and
Markov progress and performance models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to use this information to help
institutional systems better understand how gender differences are likely to
influence performance and participation of males and females in complex STEM
learning/testing environments and to provide teacher guidelines on how to
maximize learning for all students. The features of the models that are
developed will potentially inform instructional practices from grades 6-16.
While the study focuses on chemistry content, the modeling approach is
applicable to other science domains.&lt;br/&gt;