* 0429176
* Built-in Reliability through Environmental Stress Screening: Model Validation for Nano Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Way Kuo, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 05/31/2007
* USD 393,917.00

Yield and reliability are key factors in determining success in the
microelectronics and nano production industry. This proposal addresses a built-
in-reliability approach that controls and predicts both reliability and yield in
complex nano products. The purpose of this work is to find effective ways to
screen the early failures that are so numerous and costly that the nano products
industry has treated yield as privileged information. The proposed modeling
techniques will be validated by analyzing the physical and electrical properties
of the newly fabricated sub 5 nm high k dielectric devices for reliability
testing. The objective of this project is to make it possible to more fully
utilize nano systems by capitalizing on as yet underdeveloped potential for high
reliability and affordable cost. The end results of the work will pave the way
for reliability enhancement in nano products, and will define a paradigm for
controlling yield and reliability as well. At the end, a new protocol for
testing and testing standards will be devised. The 3-year multidisciplinary
project is led by a microelectronics reliability specialist and a nano device
engineer from different academic disciplines. The project will build a
theoretical foundation for modeling nano reliability in cases where
incompatibility dominates system performance. The publications and intellectual
inventions that emerge from this project are expected to impact the nano
industry as well as influence the material that is being taught in institutions
of higher learning.