* 0429979
* Design of High-Speed DSPTransceivers for Ethernet over Copper
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Keshab Parhi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 250,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0429979&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Parhi, Keshab&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Design
of High-Speed DSPTransceivers for Ethernet over
Copper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The server speed should always
be an order of magnitude higher than the desktop speed. Growing use of gigabit
ethernet on desktops and laptops requires availability of 10-gigabit over copper
in data centers. These must exploit use of existing or new copper cables, and
must be cheaper than their fiber based competitors. This project will address
architectural design aspects and VLSI implementation aspects of the digital
signal processing components of a 10-gigabit per second ethernet transceiver
over copper. The challenges in design of these systems are many. At the system
level, to achieve the required speed, what should be the baud rate and
modulation scheme? Should one use precoding at the transmitter or equalization
at the receiver? Should one use low-density parity check codes? How can one
implement a 7000-tap based receiver, necessary for cancelling near end cross
talk and echo for the cables, with lower power consumption? What receiver
architectures are more suitable for meeting the speed requirements? What are the
best solutions for implementing low-density parity check codes at 10 gigabits
per second? Answers to these questions will be sought. Novel modulation schemes
will be studied by hardware codesign techniques and the best architecture of a
system with least area and power consumption will be sought. Availability of
10-gigabit per second data at data centers and desktops will significantly
reduce the cost of deployment and increase the speed of internet
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;