* 0429091
* ISBA 2004 - Bayesian Analyses and Applications; Vina del Mar, Chile
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Alicia Carriquiry, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 12/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

ISBA 2004, a world meeting of the International Society for Bayesian Analysis,
will be held in Vina del Mar, Chile, from May 23 to May 28, 2004. The conference
provides a venue for all scientists interested in Bayesian analysis to present
their work and interact with colleagues from all over the world. ISBA world
meeting organizers place a very high premium on attracting graduate students and
junior researchers, and strongly encourage them to present their work and
interact with international colleagues. Funding from NSF was requested to
provide travel grants to graduate students from the United States and from some
Latin American countries (except Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Mexico and
Venezuela).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last fifteen years or so there has been
an explosion in the development and application of Bayesian ideas. Research in
Bayesian statistics and Bayesian analysis is very active worldwide, and a large
proportion of young researchers are now active members of the Bayesian
community. International meetings such as the ISBA world meetings and the
Valencia International meetings that focus on Bayesian ideas, have also
increased in size, quality and importance over this period. Encouraging the
participation of graduate students and researchers in this community has been an
important goal of these conferences. For the first time, ISBA world meeting
organizers have set aside a significant number of sessions at the conference for
students. Graduate students worldwide were asked to submit complete proposals
for sessions for the consideration of the program committee. A set of eighteen
graduate student-organized sessions (selected from over forty proposals
received) is now a part of the program. Funding from the National Science
Foundation was solicited to provide travel grants to graduate students who
organized sessions or who will be presenting their work at the conference, and
to young researchers who also present their work.&lt;br/&gt;