* 0429724
* Unquantized and Uncoded Channel State Information Feedback in Multiple Antenna Multiuser Wireless Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Narayan Mandayam, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2008
* USD 200,000.00

The potential and promise of multiple antenna techniques has now resulted in
widespread considerations for the use of these in a variety of contexts: for
wide area wideband wireless transmission in next generation cellular systems;
for local area hot-spot data service overlays in cellular systems; for emerging
short-range wireless LAN networks; for promoting efficient spectrum sharing in
the unlicensed bands; and a variety of collaborative techniques in wireless
adhoc networks. A key attribute required of any multiple antenna technique to be
successful, in any of the above contexts, is the need for reliable and efficient
channel state information (CSI). Delay requirements imposed by wireless
applications and the time variations in the channel, require not only
reliability in CSI information, but also that the feedback of such information
be fast and frequent. This project studies the fundamental limits of CSI
feedback schemes that can be used in multiple antenna multiuser wireless
communication systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental issue studied is if
it is necessary for reliable CSI feedback to be optimally quantized and encoded
in a Shannon theoretic sense? Specifically, unquantized and uncoded (UQ-UC) CSI
feedback schemes are studied, that have the attractive feature of avoiding the
delays due to quantization and coding, while still being optimal in certain
situations relating to the uplink and downlink of wireless channels. In cases
where such "zero-delay" schemes are sub-optimal, enhancements that can
substantially improve performance are studied via (a) performance bounds for UQ-
UC CSI feedback in FDD and TDD systems, (b) CSI feedback receivers, (c)
information capacity of transmitter optimization in multiple antenna multiuser
systems, and (d) comparative evaluation of UQ-UC CSI feedback with practical
coded transmission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;