* 0429210
* Urban True Orthophoto Generation and Its Standard Initiative - Phase II
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2008
* Guoqing Zhou, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 09/30/2008
* USD 136,320.00

Early procedures and algorithms for digital orthophoto generation in the
National Digital Orthophoto Program (NDOP) were based on historic US Geological
Survey mapping operations, such as field control,aerotriangulation, the quarter-
quadrangle-centering, 1:40,000 aerial photographs, and 2.5D
digital&lt;br/&gt;elevation models, some of which have not been updated in
decades. Additionally, the Standard for Digital Orthophoto formulated by the
NDOP has not considered the requirements of large-scale urban orthophoto
generation. This collaborative project with USGS is intended to provide the
technical base (algorithms, procedures, etc.) and experience needed for urban
large-scale digital orthophoto creation for the near future national large-scale
urban digital orthophoto deployment and the revision of the Standards for
National Large-scale City Digital Orthophoto in the National Digital Orthophoto
Program (NDOP). The project will build on an earlier small NSF grant which
explored true orthophoto generation using existing algorithms and procedures. In
that effort, the problems of the existing algorithms, and investigated potential
techniques for solving them were identified. Phase II, (this project) will
conduct a systematic, end-to-end scientific investigation,
including:&lt;br/&gt;o How to plan urban photogrammetric flying missions to
minimize the impact of occlusion,&lt;br/&gt;o How to effectively represent
buildings (i.e., digital building model-DBM) for the detection of
the&lt;br/&gt;occluded and shadow areas when generating urban
orthophotos,&lt;br/&gt;o How to automatically (NOT manually) compensate for the
occluded and shadowed areas from&lt;br/&gt;conjugate areas in adjacent .slave.
orthophotos,&lt;br/&gt;o How to automatically (NOT manually) choose the .best.
imagery and optimal seam lines when&lt;br/&gt;refilling the occluded
areas,&lt;br/&gt;o How to automatically compensate for the missed wall
information/data in true orthophoto, and&lt;br/&gt;o How to best deploy these
technical improvements within the National Digital Orthophoto
Standard&lt;br/&gt;initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad impacts from this
project are expected to include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Develoopment of
revised National Standards for Digital Orthophoto specifications to ensure that
large-scale urban orthophoto products under the National Mapping Program (NMP)
reflect current mapping and data policies and are accurate and consistent in
style and content.&lt;br/&gt;(2) All levels of government who will be users of
large-scale urban digital true orthophotos. Recent advances in GIS technology
have facilitated the integration of digital orthophotos, with an increasing
variety of other geospatial data, into myriad applications. Traditional users of
USGS orthophotos, like federal land and resource management agencies, will be
principal users. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Advances in true orthophoto generation that will
be transferred to American industry to contribute to the competitiveness of
these companies in the global GIS marketplace. ESRI Inc. joins this Phase II as
a collaboratork and will be in a position to make direct use of project
results.&lt;br/&gt;(4) The developed procedures and algorithms, and the
firsthand research results will be directly and immediately fed into
photogrammetry and GIS courses at Old Dominion University and other academic
institutions. The created experimental data sets,including original images,
orthorectified images, DEM, urban spatial data, 3D urban model, etc., will be
directly used in laboratory classes of photogrammetry and GIS.