* 0429109
* GSE/RES  Girls' Science Practices in Urban High Poverty Communities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Angela Calabrese Barton, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2006
* USD 499,334.00

Teachers College, Columbia University, proposes to study girls' science
practices in urban high poverty communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Missing from
the discourse in urban science education and gender education is a framework for
how urban girls appropriate, organize, and activate scientific literacy in
pursuit of their own lives, as individuals and as members of larger communities.
Scientific literacy refers to an individual's understanding of and abilities to
access and utilize key scientific concepts, principles, process skills,
discourses, and habits of mind. One way to better understand how urban girls
appropriate, organize, and activate scientific literacy is to document and
analyze their "science practices."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing from research on
"literacy practices" (Moje, 2000), the team defines science practices as the
means by which one engages in science and the reasons and motivations for doing
so. Thus, the investigation focuses on the content areas of urban ecology and
forces and motion as a means to obtain insight into how and why urban girls
engage in science meaningfully. "Engagement in science" is viewed as having
three parts similar to Moje's purposes for literacy practices: developing
conceptual understandings of scientific concepts (meaning-making); developing
and using the habits of mind that reflect a propensity towards scientific
thinking (expression of scientific identity); and participating in or doing
science in authentic ways (participation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year
study has the following objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To document,
describe and analyze high-poverty urban girls' science practices in both form
and function in the context of two specific middle school content
areas;&lt;br/&gt;2. To document and describe those reform-based pedagogical
strategies enacted by teachers that help girls to successfully leverage their
science practices in their efforts to engage meaningfully in
science;&lt;br/&gt;3. To explore the relationship between girls' science
practices and science learning;&lt;br/&gt;4. To disseminate effectively research
findings to the broader research and practice
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a mixed-methods approach (broad scale
survey, case study, and design experiments), the team will conduct the study in
four middle schools that serve diverse ethnic and racial and high-poverty
populations in the Harlem and South Bronx regions of New York
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is that it
should yield a set of working conjectures about girls' science practices and the
pedagogical strategies that support those practices. If we can better
understand, document, and analytically describe girls' science practices in
reform-based science education settings and their impact on girls' engagement
with science, then we will be better able to work with teachers and curriculum
developers to tailor program design and instructional practice to best support
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this study is that it will
contribute to increasing the achievement and motivation for engaging in science
among high-poverty, urban, middle school girls. The findings will have direct
import for specific demographics that have not been represented well in the
sciences and science related fields. &lt;br/&gt;