* 0429125
* GSE/RES: Promoting Competence in Mathematics Through Collaboration, Reflection, and Role Models
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Carole Beal, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2007
* USD 481,090.00

University of Southern California is studying new tools for enabling math
learning in high school students. The tools are particular features built into
an intelligent tutor: chat for collaboration, capturing text for reflection on
problem solving, and mathematics mentoring through virtual role models based on
real scientists representing a range of gender, ethnic, cultural, and language
backgrounds. The features are introduced to address learning preferences of
female students and to appeal to ethnic minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A certain level of mathematical competence is
required for participation in many STEM fields of study, and high-stakes test
such as the GRE-Math and SAT-Math serve as "critical filters" for access to such
programs. Unfortunately, many students, including young women as well as
students from ethnic groups traditionally under represented in science and
engineering, are at a disadvantage due to poor performance on
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;achievement tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research
points to differences in the strategies that males and females adopt in
mathematics problem solving. Strategies that are used more often by males
predict higher scores on achievement tests. On the other hand, other research
suggests that there are significant learning benefits to collaborative learning,
inquiry and discovery-oriented activities, and interaction with mentors and role
models: strategies that female students more often adopt and prefer. Therefore,
the central research question addressed in the proposed project is to evaluate
the benefits of female-preferred learning strategies for mathematical competence
in high school girls through innovative software tools integrated into Wayang
Outpost, an intelligent tutoring system providing individualized instruction in
mathematics problem solving. In addition, the project will evaluate the benefits
of the enhanced software for students (males as well as females) who find
potential failure in mathematics to be threatening, particularly those from
ethnic groups that have been traditionally under-represented in STEM
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three specific objectives focus on the
creation, implementation and evaluation of innovative new software tools for
promoting collaboration, reflection, and mathematics mentoring through virtual
role models. Evaluation studies will focus on the effects of different versions
of the tutoring software on student learning outcomes in mathematics and on
attitudes towards STEM careers. Participants in the evaluation studies will be
students attending high schools in Pasadena CA, representing the great diversity
of urban California - nearly 50% Hispanic, 30% African American, 33% with
limited English proficiency, and 66% receiving subsidized lunches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project will have broad societal impact
by enhancing the ability of students from traditionally under represented groups
to participate in STEM fields of study through freely-accessible web-based
tutoring. The intellectual merit of the research will be the careful empirical
evaluation of the benefits of instruction that supports learning styles and
strategies preferred by females and students vulnerable to stereotype threat in
mathematics learning, and the evaluation of the potential benefits of virtual
role model characters representing real STEM professionals for student learning
outcomes in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;