* 0429647
* GSE/RES:  Pedagogical agents as social models: Challenging gender-related stereotypes of engineering
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Amy Baylor, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2009
* USD 557,499.00

Florida State University will study the effectiveness of pedagogical agents as
social models to influence girls' beliefs and stereotypes about engineering, the
potential for using pedagogical agents to change
beliefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many females have negative and unconstructive
beliefs regarding engineering. As stated by Muller (2002), these misperceptions
are prompted by a social fabric that pervades our society and results in
stereotypic perceptions of engineering and scientific fields as "geeky" and
particularly inappropriate for girls and women. Consequently, young women need
more exposure to productive beliefs about engineering, ideally through some form
of a social model (e.g., Bandura, 1986). While human models can help to bridge
the gap, the logistics of arranging such opportunities are difficult to
coordinate, and available mentors may not necessarily best match a particular
young women's needs. By implementing computer-based social models, factors can
be controlled that cannot be in human mentors, with a greater potential for
outreach through avenues such as the Internet. Pedagogical agents, which are
three-dimensional, animated computer-based characters, are particularly
advantageous for serving as such models given that there is strong evidence that
students, particularly females, easily develop social relationships with them.
However, there is limited evidence to guide the design of such agents for the
purpose of influencing beliefs about engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of this interdisciplinary project are as follows: 1) to systematically
investigate&lt;br/&gt;the effectiveness of pedagogical agents as social models
to influence girls' beliefs and stereotypes about engineering; and, in parallel,
2) to use pedagogical agents as a vehicle to systematically examine the nature
of the belief-changing process. Two populations, representing two age groups
(middle school girls, and freshman female undergraduates from both a traditional
and a historically-Black institution), will be sampled for the research. Three
types of research designs (Choice, Construction, and System-Controlled Studies
(experimental and adaptive)) will be implemented to provide a more integrative
understanding. Specifically, the first year will focus on investigating agent
appearance; the second year on agent message/delivery; and, the third year on
agent persona (combined factors). Dependent variables include student beliefs
about and motivation toward engineering, intentions to pursue engineering, and
perceptions of the agent. Dependent variables will be assessed by a combination
of self-report (e.g., Likert-scale items), performance, and behaviorally-
indicated measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Given that little
is known as to the affordances and learner preferences for pedagogical agents as
social models, this project is critical for advancing several interdisciplinary
fields (e.g., instructional systems, social psychology, human-computer
interaction, education/training, ecommerce and marketing, and game designers).
By integrating multiple research approaches, the project is creative and
original and draws on the two PIs' experience conducting pedagogical agent and
social psychology research. Importantly, it will provide insight for influencing
females' beliefs and stereotypes regarding engineering. Results will also
complement ongoing development of pedagogical agents and other technology-
mediated learning, such as intelligent tutoring systems. Along this line, the
research will also help better illuminate the social impact of agents as an
information technology, which is important given that society is becoming
increasingly more information-driven.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. It is
expected that the project will build a strong empirical research base in this
area with guidelines for designing agents to support engineering (or other types
of) belief adoption. These findings will have the potential to broadly influence
computer interface design, agent implementations in learning environments, and
have marketing-related implications for other projects that involve "selling"
engineering to females. Based on the findings, the next step would be to develop
and implement a highly competent (e.g., artificially intelligent) and persuasive
agent that would positively impact young women's beliefs about
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;