* 0429274
* Modeling Online Participation in Local Governance
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Manuel Perez-Quinones, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 02/29/2008
* USD 601,982.00

In localities with established community computer networks, interested citizens
have been using a variety of online tools to interact with government. Citizens
download local government information and use the Internet to stay informed on
local issues. Town and county government officials and staff regularly update
their web sites, post meeting agendas, budgets and minutes, background
documentation, and exchange email on a one-to-one basis with residents. A new
pattern of Internet use is emerging in which small groups of interested citizens
- typically from established local formal and informal associations - distribute
information on issues of interest among themselves and use online tools to
deliberate on public policy. &lt;br/&gt;Increased citizen-to-citizen discussion
and deliberation is an important outcome of digital government initiatives. It
is occurring predominantly through discussion lists, multiple recipient email
exchanges, listserv forwarding, and most recently, even blogs. But citizen
deliberation across the community has a limited linkage back to government
decision-making. What strategies and tools might help local government better
integrate this citizen deliberation into the local governing process? By
examining government and citizen interactions and the deployment of innovative
tools in a stable, mature community network research can extend beyond primary
effects (government posting information online and answering email) to secondary
effects, specifically, the impact of online government on deliberative
democracy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use a mature community
computer network environment, the Blacksburg Electronic &lt;br/&gt;Village in
Blacksburg, Virginia, as a comprehensive test bed and case study. Of particular
interest are the&lt;br/&gt;differences between activists and underrepresented
citizen on factors such as motivation for online use, role of weak social ties
across diverse groups, collective efficacy and civic participation. Primary
research objectives are: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- To model community use of
network technology for deliberation with special focus on use by local
organizations and by people with lower socioeconomic or ethnic minority
status.&lt;br/&gt;- To model local government use of network technology and the
integration of citizen feedback into decision-making processes.&lt;br/&gt;- To
deploy and evaluate a suite of modified innovative tools for incorporating
citizen deliberation into local government decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is based on re-focusing the
digital government discussion around elements that make for an effective
democracy rather than for effective government and in the participatory design
and testing of innovative tools for lay citizens. The broader impacts are both
conceptual and practical as well as policy related. A model of democratic
deliberation that includes concrete tools could substantially modify future
efforts to deploy this technology effectively by local government, particularly
in small towns and rural areas where technical expertise is scarce and
infrastructure is sub-optimal.