* 0429077
* Investigating Vibrio fischeri Chemotaxis: Characterization of Attractants and Receptors
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Cindy DeLoney-Marino, University of Southern Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 06/30/2005
* USD 20,000.00

The marine bioluminescent bacterium V. fischeri inhabits a specialized organ in
the Hawaiian Bobtail squid Euprymna scolopes called the light organ. A short
time after hatching, juvenile E. scolopes squid are rapidly and specifically
colonized by the bacterium, establishing a symbiotic relationship that persists
throughout the lifetime of the squid. As seawater is vented through the mantle
cavity of the squid, cells of V. fischeri present in the water become embedded
in mucus secreted from the light organ. The cells then enter into the pores of
the light organ where they ultimately navigate to and colonize deep crypts and
produce light via bioluminescence. Although it is known that bacterial cells
unable to swim cannot colonize juvenile squid, the question of whether or not
the ability of the bacterium to sense and move toward an attractant (chemotaxis)
is required is unknown. Previously the PI has shown that V. fischeri migrates
toward N-acetylneuraminic acid (NANA), a glycan sugar component of the squid
light organ mucus. The inability to migrate toward NANA by other marine
bacterial Vibrio species suggests that the attraction toward NANA may be
specific to V. fischeri. It has also been shown that V. fischeri migrates toward
various sugars and components of DNA (nucleosides). Bacteria sense attractants
in their environment through the binding of the attractant to receptors in the
bacterium's membrane (known as methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins or MCPs).
Upon binding an attractant, the MCPs relay signals to the bacterium's flagella,
directing the bacterium to move toward higher concentrations of attractant. E.
coli has five such proteins that have been well characterized for structure as
well as recognized attractants. Based on the recently-sequenced genome of V.
fischeri, there appears to be at least 34 proteins in the bacterium which have
strong similarities to sequences common to all MCP proteins (and are therefore
putative MCPs). However, only two of these proteins show significant resemblance
to specific E. coli MCPs, suggesting that the remaining proteins may recognize
attractants distinct from those recognized by E. coli. This study will begin to
examine which of the putative V. fischeri MCPs are receptors for known
attractants. To accomplish this, molecular biology techniques will be employed
to clone the putative MCPs and construct non-functional versions of the proteins
(resulting in V. fischeri MCP mutants). These mutants will then be tested for
the ability to swim toward various known attractants to identify which MCPs bind
specific attractants. In a separate study, the MCP mutants will be tested for
the ability to colonize juvenile squid. These studies will aid in understanding
how the symbiotic relationship between bacterium and squid is established.
Various aspects of this project will also be incorporated into teaching labs in
a microbiology course taught by the PI at the University of Southern Indiana.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;