* 0429184
* Upgrade of NEES Real-time Multidirectional Earthquake Simulation System to Enhance 3-D Testing Capabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Yunfeng Zhang, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2005
* USD 68,487.00

This award provides funding for Lehigh University to purchase advanced
instrumentation and to perform associated work for the George E. Brown, Jr.
Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) - Real-time
Multidirectional (RTMD) Earthquake Simulation System facility that will be
operated by NEES Consortium, Inc., as a national shared use facility during FY
2005 - FY 2014. This funding is provided for requested equipment that will
upgrade the RTMD earthquake simulation facility in several ways: (1) more
complex 3-D tests can be performed which require 6 dynamic degrees of freedom;
(2) the maximum velocity of an actuator will be twice that of the current
actuators (i.e., increasing from 1000 mm/sec to 2420 mm/sec); (3) accurate
dynamic measurements can be obtained using sensors with dynamic measuring
capabilities; (4) the data acquisition will be easier to use, by enabling
programmable calibration; (5) development of new testing algorithms and servo-
hydraulic control laws can be more accurately verified before hydraulic power is
turned on; (6) training of shared users will be enhanced by the use of hydraulic
off mode software, enabling the features of the control system architecture to
be illustrated through simulation; and (7) Metadata will be more conveniently
and accurately obtained and documented. The requested equipment, includes:
dynamic actuator; servo valve; hydraulic service manifold; control system
modifications to the existing controller to enable a 6th degree of freedom;
hydraulic actuator hoses; instrumentation and instrumentation cabling and rack
system; actuator hydraulics off mode software; DAS programmable calibration
reference and maintenance software; and digitalizing equipment to collect and
catalog Metadata for experiments to be performed in the RTMD facility.