* 0429171
* Meeting for the International Rosaceae Genome Mapping Consortium at Clemson University in May 2004
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2005
* Albert Abbott, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 03/31/2005
* USD 14,236.00

The second meeting of the International Rosaceae Genome Mapping Consortium will
be held at Clemson University in South Carolina in May 2004. In cooperation with
many groups worldwide, US researchers have launched a major research effort to
genetically and physically map the peach genome and to place on these maps as
many ESTs as possible. These genomic resources serve as the substrate for
identification and characterization of genes important to all Rosaceae breeding
programs. With the appropriate coordination of research laboratories, data can
be annotated and archived in a single format, facilitating creation of a central
worldwide repository. To expedite the construction of a central database, it is
essential to discuss and implement a data system that all can use. This workshop
will bring together young and experienced researchers in this field and foster
greater cooperation in this worldwide effort to develop peach as the model for
fruit tree genomics.

The objectives are: 1. To update the community on the worldwide status of
Rosaceae genomics efforts including, mapping of important traits in the
different species, physical map and EST development, status of the Prunus
genetic map database, and introduction of the Genome Database for Rosaceae
(GDR). 2. To discuss the cooperative integration of Rosaceae genomics data into
the growing database housed at Clemson University. 3. To coordinate future
projects utilizing the data for gene discovery and characterization of peach as
the model genome for the family.

The conference will consist of three plenary presentations and oral
presentations from consortium groups to summarize the state of Rosaceae genomics
research, education and outreach. The results will be disseminated via an
abstract booklet created in advance for the meeting, which will also be
available online from the GDR website.