* 0429930
* Integrated Framework for Reliability- and Process-Variation Aware Design Methodology for VLSI Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Kaushik Roy, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0429930&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: Purdue
University&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Alam, Muhammad and Roy,
Kaushik&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Integrated Framework for Reliability- and Process-
Variation Aware Design Methodology for VLSI
Circuits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Modern integrated
circuits (IC) contain tens of millions of transistors. Traditional design of
these integrated circuits has relied on the fact that these transistors have
almost identical characteristics when they are initially made, and that the
characteristics change little during their subsequent usage. Therefore, IC
designers have worried about other things like the size of the IC, its speed,
battery life, ease of debugging for errors, etc. And this traditional design
approach has worked fine for last 25 years. But now-a-days the transistors are
becoming so tiny that it is getting impossible to ensure that they have same
geometrical and physical characteristics. Equally important, the characteristics
of the small transistors can change rapidly when the consumer uses the product.
ThePIs hope to answer the question as to how one can design an integrated
circuit if one can no longer rely on the uniformity of the transistors, but must
account for the fact that each transistor is slightly different and that its
property changes with time. One can always assume the very worst case and design
for the slowest transistor, but clearly that would be very wasteful. The project
are proposes that a much better approach would be to first accurately understand
why and how the transistor parameter change (of fluctuate) and to account for
this variation explicitly from the very beginning of the IC design process. The
design technique is no longer deterministic as it once were, but it now involves
statistical design methodologies like making the slower transistors a little
wider (transistor sizing) to compensate for their lack of speed or making sure
that the architecture distributes the usage burden among a number of transistors
so no one transistor becomes so slow that the IC fails. This new approach may
allow one to make faster or less power-consuming ICs with a given set of
transistors, because designers can now be more aggressive in their design. This
in turn, may also allow more time to find alternatives to CMOS, and ease the
eventual transition to post-CMOS devices and systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;