* 0429072
* RUI:    Provable Safety for Performance-Improving Free Theorems-Based Program Transformations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Patricia Johann, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2008
* USD 123,780.00

Proposal Number 0429072&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Provable Safety for Performance-
Improving Free Theorems-Based Program
Transformations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patricia Johann&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers
University New Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on
techniques for formally proving the safety of certain transformations which
improve the performance of programs written in pure functional languages. The
transformations under consideration are based on so-called "inequational free
theorems". Such transformations can significantly reduce the tension between
expressivity and efficiency in functional languages by automatically removing
data constructors and other data-manipulating operators from programs which
process data uniformly; formal proofs of safety ensure that transformations
which do so do not alter in unexpected ways the observable behavior of the
programs to which they are applied. Inequational free theorems-based program
transformations for purely strict functional languages, strict functional
languages with explicit laziness annotations, and nonstrict languages with
polymorphic strictness primitives are considered, and operational, as well as
denotational, semantics-based approaches to their provable safety are
investigated. In addition, qualified type systems are used to conduct a fine-
grained analysis of the ways in which the standard equational free theorems for
nonstrict languages are weakened for functional languages which are not purely
nonstrict.&lt;br/&gt;