* 0429232
* Collaborative Research: Surface Boundary Layer Characterization in Urban Areas
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Steven Hanna, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 03/31/2008
* USD 210,000.00

The properties of the atmospheric boundary layer (the layer closest to the
surface) are much more difficult to describe in urban areas than in most rural
areas because the buildings present obstacles that are variable, hard to
characterize statistically, and large enough to extend a significant distance
into the boundary layer. Prediction of how a release of a hazardous material
will disperse in an urban setting, for example, relies on accurate
characterization of turbulent fluctuations in the air motions, and such
characterization is particularly difficult within cities. Several recent
comprehensive experiments have collected measurements with which to characterize
the urban boundary layer, but those measurements have not been analyzed
comprehensively or as an ensemble. This project will use a set of models and
those existing data sets to develop generalized characteristics of turbulence in
the urban boundary layer, and it will examine how those characteristics relate
to those of the boundary layer in unobstructed rural areas. The results will be
used to develop ways of representing or parameterizing the effects of the urban
surface on the urban boundary layer, and those parameterizations will be
incorporated into dispersion models. The improved and tested models will then be
able to provide tested predictions of dispersion in urban areas. The expected
result is improved ability to predict how hazardous releases or other sources of
urban pollution will affect the populations of cities.