* 0429523
* Optimal recoding of binary numbers for cryptographic operations
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Rajendra Katti, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 07/31/2007
* USD 156,000.00

0429523 &lt;br/&gt;Rajendra S. Katti&lt;br/&gt;North Dakota State University
Fargo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms to recode a binary number into a signed
binary number (such numbers have &lt;br/&gt;digits {0,1,-1}) will be developed
by the proposed work. The main advantage of the &lt;br/&gt;algorithms developed
is that they examine the binary numbers from left-to-right. The
&lt;br/&gt;algorithms must result in minimal joint weight to reduce the number
of operations in the &lt;br/&gt;multi-exponentiation operation used in
cryptography. Developing such algorithms for &lt;br/&gt;more than one integer
has never been done before. In fact this was considered as a hard
&lt;br/&gt;problem in the literature. The PI developed a left-to-right recoding
algorithm for two &lt;br/&gt;integers that resulted in minimal joint weight.
This resulted in a solution to a problem that &lt;br/&gt;had been an open
problem since 2001. Extending this to the general case of N integers
&lt;br/&gt;will be considered. This extension is no trivial task because the
only known solution to &lt;br/&gt;minimal joint weight recoding of N integers
examines the integers from right-to-left. &lt;br/&gt;Examining the integers from
left-to-right makes the algorithm compatible with Shamir.s &lt;br/&gt;left-to-
right multi-exponentiation method. This leads to less memory requirement for
&lt;br/&gt;multi-exponentiation, which is very important in memory-constrained
systems like smart &lt;br/&gt;cards. Other extensions like recoding for sliding
window methods of multi-&lt;br/&gt;exponentiation will also be considered. In
this case the algorithms developed, other than &lt;br/&gt;being left-to-right
will also maximize the length of zeros between windows. This again
&lt;br/&gt;results in decreasing memory requirement while increasing the speed
of multi-&lt;br/&gt;exponentiation. Recoding with other digit sets like
{0,1,-1,3,-3} will also be considered. &lt;br/&gt;Recodings developed by the
proposed project are useful in cases where group inversion is &lt;br/&gt;very
fast. Such groups include the elliptic curve group, groups of rational divisor
classes &lt;br/&gt;of hyperelliptic curves, trace zero varieties and XTR
subgroups. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;