* 0429032
* Charge Transport and Storage in Nanoscaled Nonvolatile Semiconductor Memory (NVSM) SONOS Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Marvin White, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2007
* USD 252,000.00

We propose to study charge transport and storage in ultra-thin, oxide-nitride-
oxide (ONO) heteroinsulator nanostructures, which find application in high
density, low-power, low voltage, nonvolatile semiconductor memories (NVSMs). In
particular, we will examine a new type of SONOS device called a NROMTM
structure, which is programmed with hot electron injection and is able to store
2 bits of information spatially isolated over source and drain regions of the
device. In addition, each of these bits has the possibility of multi-level
storage opening the possibility for ultra-high density NVSMs. The study of
device physics, the technology and potential applications of ultra-thin oxides
are also relevant to the thrust into low-power CMOS circuits so our study will
encompass experimental nanoscaled SONOS devices fabricated with fully-depleted
silicon on insulator (FDSOI) CMOS technology. Characterization of traps at the
semiconductor-insulator- gate interfaces and in the bulk insulator is an
essential factor in predicting the performance and reliability of nanoscaled
semiconductor devices, such as SONOS NVSMs. Our research program will
investigate the fundamental limitations in nanoscaled SONOS NVSMs. The
intellectual merit of this proposal resides in a vision where future
advancements in nonvolatile semiconductor memory storage will play a central
role in nanoscaled science and engineering. Our program integrates research and
education to explore high-density NVSMs with unique heteroinsulator structures.
The experimental and theoretical study of novel devices will entail the use of
physics, chemistry, materials science and device electronics at the nanoscale
with considerable opportunity to explore new frontiers through the generation of
new knowledge. The broader aspects in our program will advance diversity in the
nanoelectronics workforce and provide intellectual technology transfer,
integration of research and education, and promotion of partnerships. We have
excellent educational and outreach programs to increase diversity with
opportunities in nanoelectronics, especially semiconductor devices . an
important area to maintain US leadership in a global economy. This research
program provides an excellent vehicle for student research and education,
minority student outreach and partnerships with industry.