* 0429358
* Emergency Medicine, Disease Surveillance, and Informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Peter Rogerson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

Emergency Medical Systems (EMS) agencies, as first responders in medical
emergency scenarios, are uniquely positioned to provide valuable data for
surveillance and early warning systems. In most states, all patients who enter
the EMS are tracked through their pre-hospital care to the emergency room using
the Pre-Hospital Care Report. The PCR is used to gather vital patient
information that is used by health care administrators as a resource to identify
trends through macro analysis. Currently, the PCR data exists mostly on paper
forms and the process of keying this data into a database that can be processed
and mined for information can take up to several years as there is no automated
means to extract this data from hospitals and transmit them to a central
location for collating and analysis. The goal of this research is to attach this
deficiency by using document image understanding and handwriting
analysis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The research team
work toward solutions to extraction and recognition of handwritten text data
from medical forms with loosely constrained layout structure, large medical
vocabulary, and abundance of abbreviations and non-standard writing styles. If
successful, this work will advance the state-of-the-art in handwriting
recognition limited to applications with small 'pristine' vocabularies of less
than a thousand words. The proposed task of machine recognition of PCR data from
scanned forms requires recognition with vocabularies of tens of thousands of
words which must also allow for non-standard abbreviations and medical jargon.
&lt;br/&gt;The research challenge in this case will be to use cues from fields
on the form that can be recognized &lt;br/&gt;accurately and efficiently, such
as check box data, to constrain the size of the vocabulary of the words in the
narrative fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;Despite the
publicity surrounding the issue of preparedness to guard against possible
bioterrorist attacks, there have not been many short to middle-term practical
technological solutions proposed to address the problem. The proposed project
will greatly improve the speed of collecting PCR data to populate a national EMS
database, thereby providing emergency medical service providers and health care
administrators a wealth of data that can be used in trend analysis for the early
detection of outbreak of diseases as well as allocation of public resources for
emergency services. &lt;br/&gt;