* 0429444
* Real-Time Control and Simulation Network and Five Degree-of-Freedom Table Upgrade
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Patrick Laplace, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2005
* USD 41,614.00

This award provides funding to the University of Nevada - Reno (UNR), to upgrade
the experimental capabilities of the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake
Engineering Simulation (NEES) Bi-axial Multiple Shake Table Research facility at
UNR that will be operated by NEES Consortium, Inc., as a national shared use
facility during FY 2005 - FY 2014. The requested equipment provides real-time
control and simulation (RTCS) network capability for the UNR NEES site, and was
selected based on input from earthquake engineering researchers interested in
using this equipment site, and includes: real-time control and simulation (RTCS)
equipment that will enhance the existing NEES equipment by allowing access, and
operation of the combined system in real-time within the laboratory LAN (local
area network), and potentially over a high performance Internet network (e.g.
upgraded I2 and successors). These added features will allow NEES researchers to
conduct Real-Time Fast-Hybrid Tests (FHT), which will combine physical testing
with model-based simulation. This added capability will allow experiments to
study performance of large structural systems that exceed the capacity of the
existing tables using sub-structuring techniques and numerical simulation,

This equipment will be available to the earthquake engineering research
community through the NEES Consortium, Inc., UNR NEES facility. This award is
funded by the NSF NEES Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction
(MREFC) project and is a component of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program (NEHRP).