* 0429481
* Efficient Computational Methods for Robust Multispectral Multiframe Superresolution
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Nirmal Bose, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lenore M. Mullin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 212,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research considers computational
models for multisensor, multiframe superresolution.&lt;br/&gt;The underlying
mathematical model is a Fredholm integral equation of the first kind. For
the&lt;br/&gt;superresolution problem, not only is the input data contaminated
by noise, but the parameters &lt;br/&gt;defining the linear operator are
uncertain because of uncertainty in sensor alignment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
noisy input makes the problem a candidate for Tikhanov regularized least
squares. The uncertainty in &lt;br/&gt;the operator make it a candidate for
regularized total least squares. Moreover, the uncertainty in &lt;br/&gt;the
linear operator is structured, thus structured total least squares models are
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;This project considers these least squares and total
least squares models and appropriate methods for&lt;br/&gt;regularizing them.
The merits of this activity according to NSF criteria are given
below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The
deployment of space variant regularization to the recently proposed least
squares &lt;br/&gt;and total least squares models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The
application of total least squares algorithms and space variant regularization
to the solution&lt;br/&gt;of blind deconvolution problems using images acquired
by multisensor arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The extension of structured total
least squares algorithms to red--green--blue (RGB) color
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. The application of wavelet superresolution
algorithms to multisensor array acquired low resolution&lt;br/&gt;degraded
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
The superresolution problem has impact upon military, commercial, and health
care&lt;br/&gt;applications in diverse disciplines such as
bioengineering,satellite imaging, and electrical &lt;br/&gt;and computer
engineering. Other intriguing possibilities include substituting expensive high
resolution &lt;br/&gt;instruments such asscanning electron microscopes by their
cruder, cheaper counterparts and then applying &lt;br/&gt;technical methods for
increasing the resolution to that derivable with much more costly
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Survey articles will be prepared to provided
tutorial information on our computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;This is in addition
to publishing the project's results in appropriate refereed journals and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The PI and co-PI intend to recruit 4 REUs
per year from Penn State's University Scholars program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4.
Penn State graduate students will be collaborators with the expectation of
producing&lt;br/&gt; Ph.D. theses related to the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;