* 0429048
* MS PHD'S in Earth System Science Professional Development Program: PHASE I Implementation
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Ashanti Johnson, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 02/29/2008
* USD 265,347.00

The Minorities Striving and Pursuing Higher Degrees of Success (MS PHDS) in
Earth System Science Initiative was developed for and by underrepresented
minorities (African American, Hispanic and Native Americans, hereafter referred
to as minorities) to address critical gaps in preparation, representation, and
full participation of minorities in Earth system science. Utilizing insight
gained while conducting the 2003 Ocean Sciences Program (a pilot project) the MS
PHDS in Earth System Science Initiative Professional Development Program is
designed to provide minority undergraduate and graduate students with valuable
long-term mentoring opportunities, as well as multiple exposures to, interaction
with, and increased participation in the Earth system science
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Professional Development Program represents
a unique opportunity for the professional community to partner with MS PHDS for
the purpose of increasing minority participation in Earth system sciences. In
recognition of the potential value of the MS PHDS in Earth System Science
Initiative's Professional Development Program activities, the PI's college
(University of South Florida College of Marine Science), NASA Headquarters and 5
professional societies have pledged human, physical and financial resources in
support of the programmatic activities. The MS PHDS in Earth System Science
Initiatives Professional Development Program was crafted utilizing community
input, evaluation findings, and insight gained from a relatively small-scale
discipline-specific pilot project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Professional
Development Program engages MS PHDS participants in a series of actual and
virtual activities designed to promote students' long-term participation in the
Earth system sciences. Participants are provided with both broad and in-depth
science exposure, mentoring opportunities and professional development
activities that equip them in making informed post-baccalaureate, academic and
professional career decisions. Students will be 1) exposed to leading-edge Earth
system science research, 2) given opportunities to interact with scientists
responsible for recent research advancements, 3) engage in mentor-mentee
partnership activities and 4) receive information regarding current and future
Earth system science-related opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activities address many aspects of NSF's Criterion II, including the advancement
of discovery and understanding in the course of promoting training and learning,
broadening the participation of underrepresented minorities, enhancing research
and education, and the broad dissemination of lessons learned. Outcomes of the
Professional Development Program will be disseminated throughout the Earth
system science and education community via annual evaluation reports (available
on-line), manuscript publications and presentations at professional society
meetings.