* 0429469
* SGER:  Extending Working Memory Functions by Presenting Bookmark and Result Sets as Temporal Visual Compositions
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Andruid Kerne, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2005
* USD 84,295.00

Working memory is a human cognitive mechanism that is involved in solving
problems and making decisions, which is known to have a limited capacity of 7
+/- 2 units, where the complexity of each unit can vary from a single binary
digit to a chunk that corresponds to a mental model. It has further been shown
that people form better mental models in response to labeled images than they do
in response to textual elements without accompanying images. The information age
is the age of collecting. People collect web page bookmarks, articles, email,
audio, and video. Digital libraries collect texts and multimedia. Search engines
create collections dynamically. Collections are comprised of sets of records,
and are typically presented in the form of lists of hyperlinks, in most cases
lists of textual elements. Information dependent tasks, such as buying a car or
writing a research paper require users to make conceptual connections between
elements. We need to discover how to represent collections of information
elements to account for the limitations of working memory, promote the formation
of mental models, and support user tasks. Composition is a visual technique for
forming chunks of conceptually related elements. In a navigational hypermedia
composition, each visual information element functions as a navigational link to
an information resource. The PIs' hypothesis is that presenting bookmark and
result sets as compositions of labeled image elements will mitigate the demands
placed upon the user's working memory. The PIs' long-term goal is to develop an
understanding of the cognitive mechanisms of information seeking, so that they
will be able to build tools that enable users to develop collections in forms
that support the cognitive structures and processes involved in knowledge
building. In this project, the PIs will gather preliminary data to establish
that working memory function is extended by presenting bookmark and result set
collections as visual compositions. Specifically, they will: evaluate bookmark
and result set representations with divergent as well as convergent thinking
tasks; support the formation of mental models by presenting collections with
labeled images; and extend working memory capacity by presenting collections as
compositions of visually blended labeled images. To these ends, they will take
advantage of findings from cognitive science, and techniques from information
retrieval, computer graphics, visual art, and
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Current approaches to presenting
bookmark and result sets as textual lists do not optimize our ability to form
mental models, and maintain them in working memory. Information workers and
students throughout academia, government, and industry often need to connect
multiple idea sources, in the course of knowledge building activities such as
problem solving, discovery, and writing. Because information workers spend so
much time dealing with bookmark and result sets, the result is a waste of
intellectual capacity across the knowledge economy. By presenting collections in
forms that optimize use of mental model and working memory capabilities, the PIs
expect to improve productivity and spur innovation for a broad population of
internet users.