* 0429765
* Physically Aware Computer Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* John Lach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2007
* USD 161,942.00

Physically Aware Computer
Architecture&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology scaling and low-
level physical effects are straining the clean interfaces between abstraction
levels necessary to make the design process manageable. This tension will
increase as new physical phenomena are manifested in nanotechnology-based
circuits. At the same time, microarchitecture is becoming increasingly important
in managing the way physical phenomena impact key figures of merit such as
performance, energy efficiency, cost, and expected lifetime. This proposal
considers the interaction between the computer architecture domain and physical
domain aspects such as thermal effects, aging processes, floorplanning,
interconnect, process variations, and power-supply variation. We propose to
model these phenomena using "compact" models. We will develop models for key
physical phenomena and explore architecture techniques for managing their
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unless microarchitecture can account for low-level
physical phenomena like process, voltage, and temperature variability,
increasing design margins will impose high and possibly prohibitive costs that
drastically limit design possibilities. The discovery of similarities in the
modeling and design approaches for such phenomena offers a solution. In terms of
broader impact, the project will develop a flexible modeling infrastructure that
will enable the architecture and computer systems design community to perform
physically-aware design and analysis and compensate for these technology trends.
Further impact will arise from educating a generation of students to consider
low-level physical phenomena in higher-level abstract design domains.&lt;br/&gt;