* 0429005
* GSE/RES  Assessing Media Influences:  Effects of Media Literacy Training on Middle School-Aged Children's Perceptions of Women in Science, Engineering, and Technology
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Jocelyn Steinke, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2006
* USD 291,010.00

Western Michigan University is studying the effects of a media literacy training
exposure on middle school students' perception of women in science, engineering,
and technology (SET).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early adolescence in American society
represents an ill-timed convergence of events for girls during a critical stage
of identity formation: Girls begin to make plans for the future, including
career plans, at a time marked by waning self-confidence and a heightened
awareness of cultural norms of femininity. Media portrayals of women contribute
to the socialization of girls and boys at this time by reinforcing cultural
representations of gender that can lead to the formation of stereotypes about
the role of women in society and can limit the perceptions of self in girls and
stereotypes about gender roles in both boys and girls. The stereotypes
contribute to the gender gaps in interest and participation in SET education and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study examines the efficacy of a media
literacy program designed to create critical thinking about stereotyped
portrayals of women in the media. This study has three primary objectives: to
assess the influence of training on 1) middle school-aged children's ability to
recognize stereotyped media portrayals, 2) on their perceptions of women in SET,
and 3) their attitudes toward SET and SET careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-
year study uses a randomized post-test only control group design. Participants
will be 320, 13- to 14-year-old children from three middle schools in the
Midwest. They will be randomly assigned to one of three experimental conditions:
control, training that includes interactive discussion, and training and
discussion plus instruction in critical viewing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
findings from this study will advance our understanding of the role of cultural
representations of gender in contributing to the gender gap in SET. The
intellectual merits of the research include: 1) the focus on the influence of
the media in shaping children's perceptions of women in SET and their attitudes
toward SET and SET careers and 2) the assessment of the efficacy of media
literacy training in teaching children to recognize and resist gender
stereotypes that can lead to inaccurate perceptions of women in SET. The broader
impacts are the potential finding that children can be taught to resist gender
stereotypes in the media and thus decrease stereotyping in their own thinking,
and, that K-12 science teachers and directors of educational program can
incorporate the findings in their training and instructional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;