* 0429561
* Cooperative Hardware/Software Designs for Virtual Instruction Set Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Vikram Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 08/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cooperative Hardware/Software Designs for virtual
Instruction Set Computers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vikram S. Adve&lt;br/&gt;U. of
Illinois, Urbana&lt;br/&gt;0429561&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work proposes a
class of cooperative compiler/microarchitecture techniques that can improve
performance and reduce the complexity and power-consumption of general-purpose
processors. The key feature of these proposed techniques is that they exploit a
wide, implementation-specific instruction set interface between the compiler and
the processor, enabled by the use of Virtual Instruction Set Computer (VISC)
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A VISC architecture is characterized by
having two instructions sets - one which is exposed to software (the virtual ISA
or V-ISA) and another which is actually implemented by hardware (the
implementation ISA or I-ISA)-and a translator that is used to transparently
emulate the first with the second. Because the I-ISA is never exposed to
software (other than an implementation-specific translator that is logically
part of the processor design) it can freely expose implementation specific
microarchitectural details and interfaces without concerns for binary
compatibility across implementations. It is this opportunity to architect an
implementation-specific ISA and use it for cooperative
compiler/microarchitecture techniques that is the central focus of this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two aspects of the proposed work differentiate it
from previous work on software-exposed architectures. First, we are translating
from a rich V-ISA layer that retains much of the high-level information present
in the program's source code. We hypothesize that the availability of this
information is fundamental in the translator's ability to transform the code to
exploit the proposed mechanisms, and we will evaluate this hypothesis for the
proposed techniques. Second, the proposed techniques are truly cooperative, in
that the compiler can have full knowledge of implementation-specific details of
the microarchitecture, and the microarchitecture can rely on information from
and code generation constraints on the complier. This gives our designs full
freedom to exploit the distinct and complimentary strengths of compilers and
hardware; neither system is the other's subordinate. Whereas hardware can
efficiently observe and respond to dynamic events and can cheaply speculate and
validate that speculation, the compiler can perform global analysis to reduce
and simplify the decisions the hardware has to make and to eliminate unnecessary
speculation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, we proposed to develop
cooperative compiler technology and microarchitectures that address critical
challenges in modern general-purpose processors. For each of these challenges,
we will explore one or two techniques (described in the proposal) that rely
extensively on software interaction, and which would be impractical without the
VISC approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;