* 0429968
* Engineering of Plant One-carbon Metabolism for Folate and Methionine Accumulation
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2005,05/31/2010
* Sanja Roje, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/2010
* USD 691,716.00

&lt;br/&gt; The aim of this project is to develop strategies for metabolic
engineering of plants enriched in folates and soluble methionine by manipulating
the network of tetrahydrofolate-bound one-carbon (C1) units in plastids. Plants
will be engineered to consist of simultaneous expression of methionine synthase
and 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate enzymes in plastids. Two methods for over-
expression will be tested: chloroplast-targeted expression from strong
constitutive nuclear gene promoters, and ectopic expression from the genes
incorporated into the plastid genome. Metabolic engineering will be carried out
in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), a species in which plastid transformation can be
routinely obtained. Isozymes of serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) will also
be studied, as this enzyme may be a rate-limiting step of folate biosynthesis.
Understanding the biochemical properties and subcellular localization of SHMT is
essential for planning and interpretation of the proposed metabolic engineering
experiments, a study that will be carried out in Arabidopsis thaliana, a model
species in plant biology, in which genomic resources are available. &lt;br/&gt;
The research can lead to the generation of plants enriched in folates and
methionine. Folate deficiency in humans has been linked to anemia, birth defects
and vascular diseases. Engineered plants with increased folate content will
represent a dietary source of natural folates, and could potentially solve the
problem of poor folate uptake, and the associated health disorders, for human
populations. Methionine is an essential amino acid for humans and nonruminant
animals. Crops used for animal feed do not have optimal methionine content, so
they must be fortified with supplemental methionine. The high cost of this
supplementation has prompted recent interest in metabolic engineering of plants
with increased methionine content. The research program, in collaboration with
Dr. Pal Maliga at Rutgers University, will train students and post-doctorals in
all aspects of metabolic engineering. &lt;br/&gt;