* 0429894
* Collaborative Research:    Formal Methods for Behavioral Subclassing and Callbacks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,05/31/2008
* David Naumann, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2008
* USD 161,995.00

Proposals 0429894/Naumann 0429567/Leavens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research:&lt;br/&gt;Formal Methods for Behavioral Subclassing and
Callbacks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;David A. Naumann and Gary T.
Leavens&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For evolvability, scalability, and productivity,
software systems must be composed of extensible components. Features of object-
oriented programming languages such as inheritance and dynamic dispatch,
and&lt;br/&gt;techniques like callbacks and downcalls, are crucial but they
invert the usual layering of abstractions. Aliasing among objects is crucial for
efficiency but can breach encapsulation boundaries. Yet
abstraction&lt;br/&gt;and encapsulation are necessary to separately validate
individual components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the theory
of specification, development, and verification for object-oriented software,
focusing on behavioral subclassing, alias confinement, and callbacks. Core
features of the&lt;br/&gt;Java Modeling Language (JML) for behavioral interface
specification will be studied, using a confinement discipline to control
aliasing and model programs to specify callbacks. The ideas will be
presented&lt;br/&gt;in a cogent, simple, and robust theory, to facilitate
applications by tools, comparison between alternative proposals for
specification notations and proof rules, and teaching. The theory will be
encoded&lt;br/&gt;in a theorem prover and key results machine-
checked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide theoretical guidance for
the designers of programming and specification languages. The results will also
help clarify and improve techniques used in practice.&lt;br/&gt;Direct
application is expected in projects based on JML and in work by our Brazilian
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;