* 0429131
* SGER: Nanoparticle and Nanoparticle Self-Assembly on a Stepped Surface
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Jee-Ching Wang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 12/31/2005
* USD 49,990.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0429131&lt;br/&gt;J.- C. Wang, University of Missouri-
Rolla&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an exploratory research with the objectives
to (1) understand the behavior of surfactant-capped nanoparticles and
nanoparticle chain arrays on a stepped solid surface and (2) study the
feasibility of using stepped surfaces as templates to induce controlled growth
of nanoparticle chain arrays. Nanometer-sized particles possess extraordinary
properties that cannot be found in either isolated molecules or bulk materials.
To fully realize their technological potential, nanoparticles must be fabricated
into predesigned structures or multidimensional ordered arrays. Surfactant-
capped nanoparticles have the capability of self-assembling into ordered
structures on solid surfaces. However, current fabrication avenues of
surfactant-capped nanoparticles have only produced partially satisfactory
results. We propose that it is feasible to develop an improved nanofabrication
avenue based on the use of nanoparticle chain arrays as building units. We will
perform molecular dynamics simulations with atomic-scale models for
nanocrystals, surfactants, solvent, and solid surfaces to assess the
feasibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Existing evidences suggest
that the information about the equilibrium&lt;br/&gt;superlattices and self-
assembling of nanoparticles is encoded in the molecular components of the
system. However, only a very limited number of simulation studies have focused
on surfactant-capped nanoparticles. This exploratory research performs molecular
dynamics simulations to provide fundamental insights that are still lacking but
important to the development of improved nanofabrication
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broader impacts are two-fold.
Technologically, many aspects of the behavior of nanoparticles and nanoparticle
self-assembly are still unknown. This research will enhance our understanding by
exploring some aspects of important relevance. It will also be able to assist
the development of new nanoparticle fabrication avenues for producing
predesigned nanoparticle structures and higher-dimensional superlattices that
meet technological needs. Educationally, one PhD student and one undergraduate
student will be directly involved in this research and get an education in this
emerging field. The thesis and results of this research will also be
incorporated in the PI's courses. The proposed research will thus impact these
students on their opportunities in nanoscience and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;