* 0429400
* Research Starter Grant:  The Evolutionary Genetics of a Vector-borne Zoonotic Pathogen in Natural Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Patrick Abbot, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 48,220.00

Understanding how pathogens function in the natural populations from which they
arise is a crucial step in the fight against emerging diseases. This research
will focus on mammalian bacterial pathogens in the genus Bartonella. Bartonella
are found in many species of mammals in the US, and are transmitted by blood-
feeding insects, primarily fleas, ticks, and lice. In humans, they cause
opportunistic infections (when a person is bitten by an infected insect), and
are the causative agents of Carrion's disease, trench fever, and cat scratch
fever. Although there is an expanding database of genomic information on
Bartonella, very little is known about its ecology and evolution in the wild.
Dr. Abbot will use genetic markers to study the spatial structure of Bartonella
in the coastal plain and barrier islands of Georgia. Previous surveys have shown
that these islands differ in the distribution of small mammals and insect
vectors. Abbot will capitalize on these "natural experiments" to study how
differing associations between vectors and mammalian hosts shape the
phylogeographic structure and adaptation of Bartonella in natural populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a pressing need for primary, discovery-driven
inquiries into the evolution and ecology of zoonotic pathogens in natural
populations like Bartonella. Dr. Abbot's study will constitute one of the first
explorations of microevolution in this emerging pathogen. Importantly, these
data will be the first steps towards a larger integrative study on the
evolutionary genetics of Bartonella in natural communities. Abbot anticipates
that graduate students will be recruited to work on Bartonella. The proposed
research promises to open doors to collaborations across disciplines, and thus
to synthetic studies of Bartonella that bring together scientists with diverse
perspectives on pathogen biology. &lt;br/&gt;