* 0430208
* Collaborative Research:    A Statistical Learning Tool for the Analysis and Characterization of Mars Topography
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Tomasz Stepinski, Universities Space Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2008
* USD 225,000.00

The goal of this project is to design and develop a statistical-learning tool
(STL) for classification and characterization of topographical features on Mars.
Major tools for studying the Martian surface are geomorphic mapping and geologic
mapping. The standard approach to perform these mappings is through a manual
interpretation of images. This laborious approach severely limits the number of
Martian sites amenable to study. The STL automates geomorphic mapping and
expedites geologic mapping. Thus, it enables fast and quantitative
characterization of large sections of the Martian surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SLT uses digital topography instead of images to
characterize Martian sites. Different topographical variables are fused into a
multi-layer data structure. Each pixel in a site carries an array of local and
regional topographic information. The automatic recognition and classification
of topographic features is performed at the pixel level. This enables the
quantitative characterization and comparison of different topographic formations
based on statistics of their constituent pixels. The results can be conveniently
visualized by means of thematic maps of topography. The capacity of the SLT can
be extended by adding other data types (multispectral images) and by applying it
to other planetary surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This methodology has a
potential to become a powerful investigative tool with a wide range of
applications. To facilitate its adoption by the research community the code that
implements the SLT and its documentation will be put in the public domain. The
results of this work will be disseminated through new courses, seminar talks,
and collaborations with other institutes.&lt;br/&gt;