* 0430252
* Collaborative Research: Trustworthy and Resilient Location Discovery in Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Wenliang Du, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 06/30/2008
* USD 150,000.00

Collaborative Research: Trustworthy and Resilient Location Discovery in Wireless
Sensor Networks&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Peng Ning, North Carolina State
University&lt;br/&gt;Wenliang Kevin Du, Syracuse University&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Award
0430223&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensor networks are
ideal candidates for a wide range of applications such as health monitoring and
military operations. Sensors' locations play a critical role in numerous sensor
network applications. There have been substantial advances in location discovery
for sensor networks in the past. However, location discovery in hostile
environments has been mostly overlooked. Due to the lack of solutions to
prevent, detect, or survive malicious attacks, all of the existing location
discovery protocols become vulnerable in hostile
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a
comprehensive suite of techniques to prevent, detect, or survive malicious
attacks against location discovery in sensor networks. The investigators are
studying key management schemes suitable for authenticating beacon messages,
exploring techniques to make existing location discovery schemes more resilient,
seeking beaconless location discovery that uses deployment knowledge instead of
beacon nodes, and finally investigating methods to integrate the proposed
techniques so that they can be combined cost-effectively for sensor network
applications. This project will have significant impact on the sensor network
research by providing specific technical solutions that can be integrated with
the sensor network techniques currently being developed, so that sensor network
applications are developed with inherent, built-in
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;