* 0430276
* Collaboration: A Survivable Information Infrastructure for National Civilian BioDefense
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Cristina Nita-Rotaru, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 404,000.00

Proposal Number: CNS-0430276&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: A Survivable
Information Infrastructure for National Civilian
BioDefense&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Cristina Nita-Rotaru
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the theoretical foundation and the
protocols that facilitate a survivable information infrastructure that meets the
critical requirements of a national emergency response system. Specifically, the
project will address the following challenges:&lt;br/&gt;(1) expand the existing
theoretical framework to analyze the behavior of malicious and colluding
participants; (2) design and construct a scalable survivable messaging system
that operates correctly under a strong adversarial model that includes insider
threat and denial of service attacks; (3) design and construct information
access protocols that protect against compromised database servers providing
incorrect data or servers that deny access to legitimate users; and (4) prevent
malicious users from learning unauthorized information. The domain of
application for this work is the Clinicians' Biodefense Network (CBN), a
nationwide Internet-based information exchange system designed to provide
clinicians with critical information in the aftermath of a bioterrorist attack.
The CBN is designed to mitigate benign Internet faults and to resist a physical
attack on one location. However, it is not able to correctly operate under a
stronger threat model that includes insider attacks. Solutions for this stronger
threat model are not currently available and present a major research challenge.
This project will construct a prototype survivable system based on the CBN, and
from it draw general principles. It will develop a solid theoretical foundation
and novel system tools to facilitate building national emergency networks that
are resilient against cyber-attacks in crisis situations, when those networks
are most urgently needed.&lt;br/&gt;