* 0430709
* Design and Analysis of Algorithms for Multicast Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Panos Pardalos, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Eun K. Park
* 08/31/2008
* USD 290,858.00

Abtract Multicast networks have been proposed in the last years as a new
technique for information routing and sharing. This new technology has an
increasing number of applications in diverse fields, ranging from financial data
distribution to video-conferencing, automatic software updates and groupware. In
multicast networks, the objective is to send information from a source to
multiple users with a single send operation. This approach allows one to save
bandwidth, since data can be shared across network links. Multicast network
applications often require the solution of diffcult combinatorial optimization
problems. Most of these problems are NP-hard, which makes them very unlikely to
be solved exactly in polynomial time. Therefore, specialized algorithms must be
developed that give reasonable good solutions for the instances found in
practice. The intrinsic complexity of these problems has been a technological
barrier for the wide deployment of multicast services. We propose to design and
study algorithms for some of the most important combinatorial problems occurring
in the area of multicast networks. One of the problems in this area asks for the
determination of an optimum route to be followed by packages in a multicast
group. This is known as the multicast routing problem (MRP). A large number of
heuristic algorithms have being proposed in the last years to solve the MRP,
which is of great interest for network engineers. However, most of these
heuristics do not give any guarantee of optimality and frequently are not able
to find the global optimum for the problem. A second problem of great practical
importance is that of finding the minimum number of cache nodes required to send
multicast data when capacities are considered in the network links. This is also
called the streaming cache placement problem (SCPP). The SCPP has been only
recently studied, and it presents many opportunities for economy in the
development of new multicast systems. The objective of this project is to study
these and related problems occurring in multicast routing. Our goal is to find
practical methods that can be used to implement efficiently the technologies
involved with multicast applications. The development of fast algorithms for
solving these problems represents an important step in allowing full scale
implementations of multicast systems. Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Activities. Multicast problems are among the most difficult in the area of
networks from the theoretical point of view. This happens since such problems
encompass the construction of solutions involving a large number of nodes,
interacting in a very complicated way. New concepts appearing in this area are,
for example, the interplay of diverse source and destination nodes to achieve a
common objective in a network structure. Our knowledge in multicast networks
will have applications in other areas of network algorithmic research. The
techniques proposed to solve the problems discussed above will involve
mathematical programming, approximation algorithms, metaheuristics for
combinatorial optimization, large scale computing, and parallel and distributed
computing. These techniques are among the specialities of the PI and his
research group. Broader Impact. The techniques developed in the context of this
project will have broad impact in industrial practices for multicast network
systems. A deep understanding of the algorithmic issues related to such
applications will foster the development of better protocols, new routing
implementations and improved end-user software. Beyond this, theoretical
advances in this area will have natural applications in other network problems,
such as routing and transportation systems. 1