* 0430026
* Better Science Through Benchmarking:    Theory Validation and Application to Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Susan Sim, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Proposal Number: 0430026&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Better Science Through Benchmarking:
Theory Validation and &lt;br/&gt;Application to Software
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;PI: Susan Elliott Sim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
seeks to refine a preliminary theory of benchmarking and use the theory to guide
development of benchmarks for research results in software engineering.
Benchmarks have been used in elsewhere in &lt;br/&gt;computer science to compare
the performance of computer systems, information retrieval algorithms,
databases, and many other technologies. The creation and widespread use of a
benchmark within a &lt;br/&gt;research area is frequently accompanied by rapid
technical progress and community building. According to the theory of
benchmarking, these effects appear because a benchmark is closely tied to the
discipline's &lt;br/&gt;scientific paradigm (as described by Thomas Kuhn.) Both
benchmarks and paradigms emerge through a consensus on technical results and
cultural expectations for conduct. Based on a successful preliminary study
&lt;br/&gt;applying this theory to reverse engineering, this research develops
additional benchmarks in software engineering and collect data to validate the
theory. This work will have benefits for the field through &lt;br/&gt;the
specific benchmarks being developed, empirical evaluation of research results,
and an improved understanding of how research is conducted. In terms of broader
impact, the benchmarks enable &lt;br/&gt;geographically under-represented groups
to participate in top tier research, because they can be downloaded from a web
site and completed in reasonable time.&lt;br/&gt;