* 0430366
* Outlier Identification and Handling in Computational Geometry Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Robert Serfling, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 07/31/2006
* USD 99,972.00

OUTLIER IDENTIFICATION AND HANDLING IN COMPUTATIONAL
GEOMETRY&lt;br/&gt;PROBLEMS&lt;br/&gt;Computational geometry problems arise in
all areas of science and engineering, in contexts&lt;br/&gt;such as computer
vision, machine learning, data mining, classification, data
compression,&lt;br/&gt;geographic information systems, clustering, and facility
location. Advances in computational&lt;br/&gt;geometry can yield advances in
robotics, genomics, and proteomics, to mention three areas&lt;br/&gt;of pressing
interest.&lt;br/&gt;Increasing concern in computational geometry problems is
being devoted to outliers,&lt;br/&gt;points in the input data whose removal can
yield significant improvements in attainable&lt;br/&gt;optimal values of
objective functions. Recent treatments giving attention to outliers
involve&lt;br/&gt;quite appealing methods with good results, but these have been
ad hoc solutions, specific to&lt;br/&gt;particular problem contexts and
entailing restrictive assumptions. It would be desirable to&lt;br/&gt;derive
such approaches in a systematic manner from general principles and guidelines,
and&lt;br/&gt;to evaluate and compare outlier procedures on such a basis. To
date, however, no systematic&lt;br/&gt;approach for handling outliers in
computational geometry problems has been set forth, nor&lt;br/&gt;has there been
advanced a set of specific criteria to be satisfied by outlier
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;Through interdisciplinary collaboration between a computer
scientist and a statistical&lt;br/&gt;scientist, this project will develop an
outlier identification and handling approach as a new&lt;br/&gt;and versatile
tool in computational geometry. Structures of a general nature for
effective&lt;br/&gt;outlier identifiers will be formulated. Criteria to be
satisfied and desirable qualitative features&lt;br/&gt;will be formulated.
Issues such as robustness of outlier identifiers will be addressed.
Efficient&lt;br/&gt;computing algorithms will be developed. Significant
restrictions on current approaches will&lt;br/&gt;be relaxed.&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on outlier handling in shape fitting and dimension reduction
prob-&lt;br/&gt;lems. A leading tool will be depth functions, an emerging
methodology in nonparametric&lt;br/&gt;multivariate data analysis that is useful
for description of distributions and data sets and in-&lt;br/&gt;herently
supports characterization of outlyingness for points in a data input. As a
byproduct,&lt;br/&gt;the project will obtain advances in depth function methods
as well.&lt;br/&gt;One proposer has been developing efficient algorithms in
computational geometry, the&lt;br/&gt;other developing depth and outlier methods
in multivariate data analysis. One proposer co-&lt;br/&gt;organized, and both
proposers participated in, the recent NSF-sponsored Workshop on
Data&lt;br/&gt;Depth: Robust Multivariate Analysis, Computational Geometry and
Applications (DIMACS,&lt;br/&gt;2003), which fostered the collaboration for this
research project.&lt;br/&gt;The leading intellectual merit of this project is to
advance the foundations of computer&lt;br/&gt;science by providing a general and
fundamental method that replaces ad hoc approaches to&lt;br/&gt;outlier
handling. Also, the findings will advance the field of statistical science in
the area of&lt;br/&gt;nonparametric multivariate data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project include strengthening of the
interface between computer&lt;br/&gt;science and statistical science and
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students&lt;br/&gt;within a team
approach as part of their academic experience. Through its wide
applica-&lt;br/&gt;bility the findings of this project will have immediate and
central relevance to many areas&lt;br/&gt;of science, engineering and
government. The PIs will maintain a web site on which project&lt;br/&gt;results
are made known and available to the public at large.