* 0430146
* EID: Effects of Deforestation on the Prevalence of Blood-Borne Pathogens in African Rainforest Birds.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Ravinder Nath Sehgal, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,136,924.00

Researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles, San Francisco State
University, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory/NASA, the University of California,
Davis, and the Institute of Ecology at Vilnius University, Lithuania, will
conduct a study of the effects of deforestation on the spread of infectious
diseases in African rainforest birds. During the past 13 years, researchers have
collected more than 4,000 individual blood samples from over 200 rainforest bird
species in a variety of habitats across Cameroon, the Ivory Coast, and Uganda.
Significantly, the samples were collected from sites both before and after
habitat degradation, permitting a unique examination of the direct effects of
human-induced habitat alterations. Using complementary techniques of blood smear
analysis and molecular biology, samples will be assayed for the pathogens that
cause malaria, trypanosomiasis, filiariasis, and tuberculosis. These diseases in
birds have very similar pathologies to their human counterparts, making the
study of birds an excellent model system. We will use satellite imagery data to
predict how changes in forest composition may affect the spread of diseases in
the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effects of deforestation on health are
diverse and are becoming increasingly apparent with the highly publicized recent
outbreaks of several diseases spread to humans by animals. This research project
is significant because it will develop models to predict how deforestation will
influence future disease outbreaks and facilitate development of reforestation
strategies. In addition, the research will involve the training of students and
researchers at U.S. institutions serving minorities, and abroad, in Lithuania
and Africa.&lt;br/&gt;