* 0430759
* Travel Grant for Second International Workshop on Physico Chemical Phenomena in Materials and Bio Processes; July 14-17, 2004; Brussels. Belgium
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Ranga Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 04/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal is to request financial support for approximately 20 US
researchers to travel to the Second International Workshop and Conference on
thermal, fluid and interfacial phenomena in physico-chemical, materials and bio-
processes in Brussels, July 14-17, 2004. These scientists represent a broad base
of research funded by NSF, through its Chemical and Transport Systems Division.
The participants will receive partial travel support, with the expectation that
the remainder will be provided either from the participant's own funds or the
participant's institution. NSF supported the first such conference in 2001.
However, the disruption of travel in the fall of 2001 prevented many US
participants from attending, and a second meeting was held involving US
scientists during March of 2002. The proceedings of the two conferences have
been published in a volume published by Springer-Verlag. The Broad Impacts of
this proposal include wide dissemination through a formal publication of the
proceedings, the opportunity for a wide spectrum of scientists from the US to
establish cooperative activities in the future, and the re-establishment of this
conference venue after the disruption caused by the September, 2001 attacks.

This award has been funded jointly by three programs in the Chemical and
Transport Systems Division: the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing
Program, the Interfacial, Transport and Thermodynamics Program, and the Fluid
Dynamics and Hydraulics Program.