* 0430448
* SEI(BIO): Computing Support for Acquisition, Collaborative Curation, and Dissemination in Biodiversity Research
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Hector Garcia-Molina, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2009
* USD 1,600,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;NSF-0430448&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Garcia-Molina,
Hector&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computing Support for Acquisition, Collaborative
Curation, and Dissemination in Biodiversity Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mapping and tracking of biodiversity is an important subfield of Biology. The
goal is to understand the salient characteristics of ecosystems and their
interactions with the diversity of species and genetics of .flora and fauna.
Three components in the workflow of biodiversity scientists: information
acquisition, collaborative collection curation, and effective dissemination of
biodiversity research results will be studied. Interconnected prototypes will be
constructed for each of these activity thrusts. The acquisition work will focus
on data collection in the field, and on enabling data-related collaboration
among small groups of researchers during expeditions. The grant recipients will
design novel interfaces for small devices such that power is conserved, data
navigation effort is minimized, and screen space is expanded by virtually
placing shared information piles in space. Collaborative curation efforts will
create ColCura, an infrastructure for federating biodiversity collections. The
novel feature of this system will be that researchers everywhere can contribute
artifacts, but also metadata about existing collection items. This work will
particularly exploit the geo-referencing of information to connect otherwise
disjoint data items. Dissemination-related activities will develop novel methods
for semi-directed browsing of biodiversity information. The research team will
combine a mixture of constraint satisfaction methods and dynamic linkage of
information items into a novel browser that is specialized to biodiversity data.
One of this browser's main goals will be to encourage serendipitous discovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biodiversity research by its nature greatly impacts all
nations and their inhabitants. The localized, long-term studies at Jasper Ridge
provide invaluable detailed insight into the effects of development on plant and
animal life. At Stanford the work will offer unique opportunities for Biology
students to interact with their peers in Computer Science. The California
Academy directly helps 3rd World nations understand economic tradeoffs that
involve their natural resources. Global trade and travel speed the spread of
biological change across the globe. Accelerating our efforts to understand these
changes is therefore of increasing urgency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;