* 0430338
* Collaborative Research: Using Generative Models to Evaluate and Strengthen Biometrically Enhanced Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Fabian Monrose, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 11/30/2008
* USD 311,515.00

Proposal Number: 0430338

Title: Collaborative Research: Using Generative Models to Evaluate and
Strengthen Biometrically Enhanced Systems

PI: Fabian Monrose

Abstract:

This research investigates a new form of attack which poses a potential threat
to biometrically-enhanced security mechanisms. Such attacks are "generative" in
nature: the attacker works from a model for mimicking an aspect of human
behavior and, through direct or indirect knowledge of the targeted user's
biometrics, adapts the model to generate attempted reproductions of the user's
input. In this context, two types of security mechanisms are studied: biometric
authentication, where the user's biometric features are measured by a
nonbypassable reference monitor and compared to a stored template; and password
hardening, where the user's password and biometric features measured during the
entry of the password are combined into a secret key (the "hardened" password)
that should be irreproducible even to an attacker with full access to the device
and software which create the key. Generative models for handwriting serve as an
enabling input to evaluate schemes for performing handwritten password
verification and for creating hardened passwords from handwriting. The size of
the attacker's search space is quantified assuming that various categories of
information have been gleaned (or captured) from the targeted user, as well as
employing demographic statistics. Speech synthesis for targeting a specific
user's voice is also studied in these same contexts. To the extent possible,
techniques are identified for improving password hardening to withstand such
attacks.