* 0430654
* A Diversity-Embedding Approach for High-Rate Reliable Multimedia Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Aria Nosratinia, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2008
* USD 249,953.00

There is a fundamental tradeoff between rate and reliability
(diversity)&lt;br/&gt;in multiple-antenna wireless communications. This research
views diversity&lt;br/&gt;as a systems resource and explores allocation of this
resource to achieve a&lt;br/&gt;desirable rate-diversity tradeoff in multimedia
wireless communications.&lt;br/&gt;Multimedia data is often complex and consists
of various components with&lt;br/&gt;different rate/reliability requirements.
For example, a real-time data&lt;br/&gt;stream is a candidate to receive more
diversity (protection) than&lt;br/&gt;non-real-time data. Other examples include
complex data streams such as&lt;br/&gt;compressed video, whose various
components require different levels of&lt;br/&gt;error protection. Over-
provisioning of diversity to one data component&lt;br/&gt;will mean the loss of
rate to that and other data components, a waste of&lt;br/&gt;system
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is on the
creation of a flexible pool&lt;br/&gt;of space-time resources rather than the
design of fixed&lt;br/&gt;maximum-diversity schemes. The investigators design
high-rate &lt;br/&gt;space-time codes that have a high-diversity code embedded
within them. &lt;br/&gt;This allows a form of wireless communications where the
high-rate code&lt;br/&gt;opportunistically takes advantage of good channel
realizations&lt;br/&gt;while the embedded high-diversity code ensures that at
least part&lt;br/&gt;of the information is decoded reliably. The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;diversity-embedding codes do not require channel knowledge at
the&lt;br/&gt;transmitter and outperform time-sharing schemes. Using the
proposed coding scheme, each traffic&lt;br/&gt;type constitutes a transmission
layer that operates at a suitable&lt;br/&gt;rate-diversity tradeoff point. The
investigators explore this point of view with&lt;br/&gt;designissues, specific
code constructions, and application to multimedia&lt;br/&gt;communications.&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;