* 0430853
* Efficient Representation and Manipulation of Large-Scale Biological Sequence Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Srinivas Aluru, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 440,494.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Storage of biomolecular sequences, and accessing
them to determine sequence homologies is central to the current revolution in
bioinformatics and computational biology. Besides search tools, the large size
of biological data used by some important applications underscores the need for
developing efficient out-of-core algorithms. The goal of the project is to
design storage structures, algorithmic techniques, and software for disk-
resident sequence data, and apply it to important applications in computational
biology. To achieve this&lt;br/&gt;goal, a three-pronged strategy is used:
Firstly, application requirements identified in collaboration with domain
experts are being used to design fundamental storage structures for sequence
data. This research spans the development of efficient out-of-core algorithms
for well-known in-core data structures and also the design of new data
structures suitable for targeted applications. Secondly, efficient algorithms
for queries on disk-resident sequence data are being developed. Finally, the
out-of-core techniques developed are integrated with application software in
computational genomics such as EST clustering and fragment assembly. The goal is
to develop faster algorithms, reduce the exorbitant main-memory requirements, or
enable solution of larger problem instances, as
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the research will be made
accessible to computer scientists&lt;br/&gt;in the form of software libraries
and molecular biologists in the form of application software. Efforts are being
made to integrate the results of this research into popular tools used by
molecular biologists. The interdisciplinary nature of the project is providing
unique training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;