* 0430504
* Nonlinear Optimization: Algorithms, Software, Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2009
* Stephen Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 11/30/2009
* USD 250,000.00

Nonlinear programming (the minimization of a smooth nonlinear function subject
to smooth&lt;br/&gt;(possibly) nonlinear constraints) is a touchstone problem in
optimization. The problem continues&lt;br/&gt;to excite strong interest among
optimization researchers for many reasons, among them new&lt;br/&gt;developments
in algorithms and software (especially of the interior-point variety), the study
of&lt;br/&gt;mathematical programs with equilibrium constraints (MPEC), and the
discovery of new application&lt;br/&gt;areas.&lt;br/&gt;The broad scope of the
nonlinear programming paradigm admits a great many pathologies in&lt;br/&gt;the
geometric nature of the problem and in its algebraic speci.cation. It is
impossible to design&lt;br/&gt;algorithms that converge reliably in all
circumstances. Local convergence theory for most algorithms&lt;br/&gt;depends on
regularity and strict complementarity assumptions, and problems for
which&lt;br/&gt;these assumptions are not satis.ed (degenerate problems) are the
cause of undesirable and awkward&lt;br/&gt;behavior in most algorithms and
codes.&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate some approaches to nonlinear
programming, related to approaches&lt;br/&gt;currently in use, that have the
potential for improved performance on degenerate and large-
scale&lt;br/&gt;problems. These techniques will be theoretically rigorous and
practical, in that the marginal&lt;br/&gt;computational cost of handling
degeneracy will not be too great and in that they will behave
well&lt;br/&gt;even when implemented in .oating-point arithmetic. Particular
attention will be given to MPECs,&lt;br/&gt;which exhibit degeneracy of a
speci.c type. Extensions to degenerate complementary problems&lt;br/&gt;and
variational inequalities will also be investigated. Special attention will be
paid to the numerical&lt;br/&gt;aspects of implementing these algorithms, an
important issue because of the ill conditioning that&lt;br/&gt;may be present in
the subproblems at each iteration. All this research will be carried out in
a&lt;br/&gt;coordinated manner, coupling theoretical advances with computational
experiments using both&lt;br/&gt;prototype software and modi.cations to
production software.&lt;br/&gt;Work on applications of nonlinear programming,
performed in collaboration with domain scientists&lt;br/&gt;and engineers, will
be the second key contribution of the proposal. Interdisciplinary research
of&lt;br/&gt;this type plays a key role in any research program in algorithmic
optimization. The PI has ongoing&lt;br/&gt;collaborations in such areas as
engineering control, statistics, and cancer treatment planning.&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in improvements to our
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear programs and of the algorithms that solve
these problems, in the construction of better&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and software
that are robust in the face of degeneracy, and in the impact of
these&lt;br/&gt;advances on many application areas including those described in
the proposal.&lt;br/&gt;The work will have a wider impact on users of
optimization technology, ultimately bene.ting&lt;br/&gt;many of those who use
optimization software packages to solve problems in an extremely
wide&lt;br/&gt;range of applications. Domain scientists and engineers in the
areas highlighted in the proposal will&lt;br/&gt;bene.t especially.