* 0430672
* Shrinkwrapping Linear Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* James Renegar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 07/31/2008
* USD 180,513.00

It is proposed that a new family of algorithms for linear programming
(more&lt;br/&gt;generally, for hyperbolic programming) be further developed,
both computationally&lt;br/&gt;and theoretically. Envisioned is a full
mathematical development of the new&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic framework, isolation
of those ideas that appear likely to be pertinent&lt;br/&gt;for constructing
truly practical algorithms, and the free availability of
implementations&lt;br/&gt;(partly to encourage other researchers to participate
and improve on the&lt;br/&gt;efforts).&lt;br/&gt;Unlike existing algorithms for
linear programming, the new framework layers&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial structure.
The algorithms work through the layers sequentially,&lt;br/&gt;beginning with
the least complex one, and continuing until an optimal solu-tion&lt;br/&gt;is
attained, which generally occurs long before reaching the final layer,
i.e.,&lt;br/&gt;long before explicitly calculating with the full combinatorial
structure. The new&lt;br/&gt;idea of layering is made computationally tractable
via the elementary symmetric&lt;br/&gt;polynomials, their hyperbolicity cones,
and the discrete Fast Fourier Transform&lt;br/&gt;(dFFT).&lt;br/&gt;Linear
programming as a modeling tool is pervasive in daily applications,
being&lt;br/&gt;relied upon in all kinds of transportation scheduling, in an
array of integrative&lt;br/&gt;financial management activities, and more
generally, anywhere that limited resources&lt;br/&gt;need to be deployed most
efficiently. A primary bottleneck to even more&lt;br/&gt;extensive use of linear
programs, especially in settings where data change often&lt;br/&gt;is the
computational time required to solve linear programs.
Consequently,&lt;br/&gt;development of a novel framework such as the one
presented here has the poten-tial&lt;br/&gt;of broader impact on society through
the creation of algorithms capable&lt;br/&gt;of attaining linear program
solutions faster than before, thereby extending the&lt;br/&gt;usefulness of
linear programming as a modeling tool.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit for the
proposal comes from the new framework's po-tential&lt;br/&gt;to invigorate
algorithmic investigations into linear programming (and
its&lt;br/&gt;extensions) by infusing inspiring new concepts into the research
area, an area that&lt;br/&gt;has largely become staid in the 20 years since
interior-point methods created stir.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit also comes
from the cohesion brought by the framework, a&lt;br/&gt;framework that stretches
from engineering (e.g., linear programming, dFFT) to&lt;br/&gt;classical
mathematics (e.g., symmetric functions, Riemannian geometry).