* 0430990
* Oriented Matroids and Rigidity Theory in Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Ileana Streinu, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2008
* USD 203,000.00

This is a continuation of the NSF grant 0105507 (2001-2004), for the exploration
of how the underlying oriented matroid structure of points and lines affects
properties of a variety of partially embedded combinatorial structures arising
from motion planning and visibility problems in Computational Geometry. The
ultimate goal is the design of efficient algorithmic solutions for a rich
collection of geometric problems, some of which do not display an a priori
discrete nature and could otherwise be attacked only using techniques from
continuous geometry (real algebraic geometry). The focus of this research
continues to be on fundamental mathematical properties and algorithms. These
problems transcend application domains, but may lead to developing models and
techniques for solving problems that arise in areas of science and engineering
such as graphics (visibility computations with moving objects), robotics
(collision detection and motion planning among obstacles) and molecular biology
(protein folding). Female undergraduate students will be engaged in all aspects
of the research, as well as graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;The combinatorial
structures being studied include pseudo triangulations, visibility graphs,
floodlight illumination structures and other types of embedded graphs, with or
without edge length, slope or other algebraic or semi-algebraic constraints. The
pointed pseudo triangulations, which I introduced in work supported by a
previous grant, led to very efficient solutions for certain motion planning
questions in Computational Geometry. Significant advances have been made in the
last few years on understanding their properties and applying them to other
algorithmic questions. Two of the most challenging remaining questions are to
extend them to three dimensions and higher, and to define them for non-generic
point configurations in a way that would preserve desired rigidity theoretical
properties. Equally important is to develop an understanding of their kinematic
properties in ways that may lead to solutions to other folding and unfolding
problems in computational geometry. New problems that emerged meanwhile address
fundamental properties of points in motion subject to certain controlled motion
laws, and of graphs drawn on such point sets. The emphasis is on the prediction
of collisions and crossings. The plan is to employ some newly discovered
properties of pseudo triangulations in the parallel redrawing model of rigidity
which stand a good chance for 3d and higher dimensional generalizations.
Potential applications include the design of test cases for kinetic structures
and shape morphing. &lt;br/&gt;