* 0430866
* Collaborative Research: II: Integrating Digital Libraries and Earth Science Data Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Peter Cornillon, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2008
* USD 274,201.00

The OPen Network Data Access Protocol (OPeNDAP) is the leading network protocol
for content-based access to online Earth science datasets. The Alexandria
Digital Library (ADL) is the world's leading digital library for geospatial and
georeferenced information. The functionalities of OPeNDAP and ADL are almost
perfectly complementary and their combination will yield a unified set of
network interfaces for query-based discovery, evaluation, verification, and
retrieval of Earth science information across a distributed network of
independent information providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates
ADL and OPeNDAP by: (1) implementing a federated discovery system in ADL over an
existing network of OPeNDAP servers; (2) adding Thematic Realtime Environmental
Distributed Data Services (THREDDS) cataloging metadata (both in-line and third-
party) to the OPeNDAP protocol; (3) developing a generic user interface,
analogous to a desktop "open file" dialog, for ADL/OPeNDAP datasets; and (4)
adding OPeNDAP functionality (content selection and projection operations) to
ADL queries, so that the same query can apply to subsets of OPeNDAP datasets and
to other library holdings (text, GIS layers, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project forms an integrative bridge between digital libraries with their focus
on query-based retrieval of heterogeneous content and Earth science data systems
with their focus on functional access to (relatively) homogeneous content. The
resulting coupling of query-based access to science data content with content-
specific access to library holdings will enable a broad community of scientists
and students to use the same query to compare the peer-reviewed knowledge in a
library against the latest research results direct from the responsible
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;