* 0430021
* Collaborative Research:  Architectural Support for Security and Privacy Protection on Uni- and Multi- Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Jun Yang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 10/31/2006
* USD 54,001.00

Software programs executing on a broad range of internet systems are constantly
subject to malicious&lt;br/&gt;attacks in various forms. Program execution
behavior might be altered as a result causing substantial damage, data may
become corrupted and privacy can be greatly
compromised.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to develop a secure processor
model which secure applications can easily be built on. The proposed designs can
protect the privacy of the processor owner through diversifying the
representation of its identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;To achieve our goals, we will augment the existing
microprocessor architecture to incorporate new features. The proposed
architectural components address a broad range of attacks on uniprocessor and
multiprocessor architectures. In particular, we will develop novel techniques as
follows.&lt;br/&gt; Architecture Support for Enhancing Uniprocessor Security.
The confidentiality and integrity of such a microarchitecture are maintained
through encryption and decryption of the code and data transferred across the
chip.&lt;br/&gt;While the efficiency of encryption has been solved successfully
by PIs and others, the computation intensive nature of crypto operations has led
the verification of inbound traffic being delayed. Such delay imposes
vulnerability as one can peek critical data on-chip during this time. This
project designs a strong verification engine with which information leakage of
on-chip data is prevented,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Accomplishing the proposed research objectives can
significantly impact the research community, processor industry, and academic
education. The secure processor model in this proposal is a reliable computing
base on which higher levels of secure systems may be built. Since applications
are encrypted differently, OS security and user application security are
separated. Compromising the OS does not necessarily weaken the user program or
data. Higher levels security protocols can thus take advantage of the secure
architectural components. Techniques proposed in this proposal are also very
practical. Many of them are ready to be synthesized and integrated into real
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component in this proposal seeks
to better prepare the students for the coming challenges in computer system
design. The research projects included in this proposal offer the students great
opportunities in terms of class projects, Master or Doctoral theses, and other
valuable practical experience.&lt;br/&gt;