* 0430474
* Experiments in CyberSpace
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Roy Maxion, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* carl landwehr
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,350,000.00

Experiments in CyberSpace&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roy Maxion, Carnegie-Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0430474&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is important to be
able to place high confidence in a detection system of any kind, particularly
one intended for detecting attacks against the nation's critical information
infrastructure. One requirement for establishing such confidence is to have a
complete understanding of a detector's "sweet spots" and operational limits, so
as to calibrate the detector optimally for the conditions under which it
performs best. Due to a lack of standard test data sets and measurement
procedures, such calibrations have not previously been
done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address methods of
achieving high confidence in intrusion and malicious-insider detectors by
developing: (a) metrics for gauging the effectiveness of detection algorithms;
(b) gold-standard reference data sets, with calibrated ground truth, to be
shared among producers and consumers of detection technologies, particularly for
replication of scientific experiments that determine detection efficacy for new
algorithms across a range of data conditions; and (c) a data synthesizer for
producing reference and calibrated data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will put decision makers in a position to know the flaws, the strengths, and the
weaknesses of detectors before deployment. Knowing the operational limitations
of one detector provides the opportunity to design a companion detector whose
strengths compensate for the weaknesses of the other, enabling accurate and
efficient composition of detectors for the first
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments in
CyberSpace&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roy Maxion, Carnegie-Mellon
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0430474&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is important to be
able to place high confidence in a detection system of any kind, particularly
one intended for detecting attacks against the nation's critical information
infrastructure. One requirement for establishing such confidence is to have a
complete understanding of a detector's "sweet spots" and operational limits, so
as to calibrate the detector optimally for the conditions under which it
performs best. Due to a lack of standard test data sets and measurement
procedures, such calibrations have not previously been
done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will address methods of
achieving high confidence in intrusion and malicious-insider detectors by
developing: (a) metrics for gauging the effectiveness of detection algorithms;
(b) gold-standard reference data sets, with calibrated ground truth, to be
shared among producers and consumers of detection technologies, particularly for
replication of scientific experiments that determine detection efficacy for new
algorithms across a range of data conditions; and (c) a data synthesizer for
producing reference and calibrated data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will put decision makers in a position to know the flaws, the strengths, and the
weaknesses of detectors before deployment. Knowing the operational limitations
of one detector provides the opportunity to design a companion detector whose
strengths compensate for the weaknesses of the other, enabling accurate and
efficient composition of detectors for the first
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;