* 0430741
* RUI:  Resultant Techniques for Composed Polynomials
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Manfred Minimair, Seton Hall University
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 07/31/2007
* USD 143,580.00

The motivation for this research originates in the practical need in science and
engineering for the symbolic solution of large systems of composed polynomials.
The goal is to find efficient methods for applying resultant techniques to solve
systems of composed polynomials. The broader impacts are to increase the
complexity of information that can be processed by scientists, engineers and by
society as a whole and to thus increase productivity and cost savings. The
research fosters undergraduate research (including those from groups
underrepresented in the discipline) and strengthens research facilities at the
principal investigator's department. Therefore it aims at motivating more
students to aspire to research and engineering oriented careers. Further, it
aims at increasing the percentage of graduates enrolling in graduate school. The
intellectual merits for the field of symbolic computation are to advance study
and efficient utilization of composition structures and resultants, which are
core areas with far reaching impacts. The research approach is to apply
resultant techniques to systems of equations with prevalent structure,
efficiently, by utilizing the prevalent structure. The prevalent structure is
composition of polynomials. Resultant techniques are methods based on a
frequently utilized test for checking if systems of equations have common
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular resultant techniques being
studied are: approximating the common roots of composed polynomials by means of
u-resultants, eliminating variables from skewly composed polynomials (n
polynomials obtained by composing n polynomials with m polynomials where n and m
are different) by means of multi-variable resultants, eliminating variables from
composed ordinary differential polynomials by means of multi-variable
resultants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;