* 0430720
* Distributed Source Coding: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Zixiang Xiong, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2009
* USD 220,000.00

Abstract for the project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed source coding (DSC)
refers to the compression of the outputs&lt;br/&gt;of two or more physically
separated sources that do not communicate with&lt;br/&gt;each other. Driven by a
host of emerging applications (e.g., distributed&lt;br/&gt;sensor networks and
wireless video), DSC has assumed renewed interest in&lt;br/&gt;recent years.
Although the theoretical result given by the Slepian-Wolf&lt;br/&gt;theorem has
been known for more than 30 years, practical approaches to&lt;br/&gt;DSC did not
appear until 1999.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aiming to advance the field, this
research covers the theory, algorithms,&lt;br/&gt;and applications of DSC, with
focus on the hard problem of practical code&lt;br/&gt;design. The basic element
of a distributed source code is the binning&lt;br/&gt;scheme. For Wyner-Ziv code
design, the PI proposes a paradigm based on&lt;br/&gt;Slepian-Wolf coded
quantization (SWCQ). Preliminary analytical results&lt;br/&gt;show that the
performance limits of SWCQ mirror those in classic source&lt;br/&gt;coding.
Initial code design based on TCQ and LDPC codes gives results that&lt;br/&gt;are
significantly better than any previously reported. Inspired by
these&lt;br/&gt;results, the PI proposes to study successive refinement for the
Wyner-Ziv&lt;br/&gt;problem and apply SWCQ to layered video
coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will also tackle the more general
problem of multiterminal&lt;br/&gt;source coding under the same powerful
paradigm of SWCQ. While asymmetric&lt;br/&gt;Slepian-Wolf coding is used in SWCQ
for Wyner-Ziv coding, for&lt;br/&gt;multiterminal source coding with SWCQ, the
PI will explore symmetric&lt;br/&gt;Slepian-Wolf coding after quantization of
each source. Both direct&lt;br/&gt;multiterminal source coding and indirect
multiterminal source coding &lt;br/&gt;(e.g., the CEO problem that arises in
distributed sensor networks) will &lt;br/&gt;be
treated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the research is to view lossy DSC as
a source-channel coding&lt;br/&gt;problem and perform algebraic binning via the
combination of quantization&lt;br/&gt;and Slepian-Wolf coding based on channel
codes. The main novelty lies in&lt;br/&gt;using a single SWCQ framework as the
embodiment of algebraic binning to&lt;br/&gt;solve different code design
problems and address potential applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;