* 0430669
* SEI: TRUE Orthoimage Generation of High-Resolution UAV Video for Forest Fire Surveillance
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Guoqing Zhou, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2006
* USD 75,364.00

This project is developing techniques for high-resolution true video orthoimage
generation from Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) video data in forest areas. There
are many technical challenges in generating true video orthoimages. To address
these challenges, the project is establishing a rigorously photogrammetric self-
calibration model to: (a) remove the relief displacement caused by trees; (b)
compensate for the occluded objects, such as houses and roads, which are usually
important indicators of life existence during firefighting; and (c) increase the
accuracy of UAV sensor's exterior orientation parameters and lens distortion
determination, which are solved simultaneously. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the project are: (1) to provide highly accurate and reliable
forest fire surveillance data for forest fire experts, analysts, decision-makers
and firefighters in order to increase the efficiency of monitoring forest fires
to improve forest fire management and mitigate forest fire disasters; (2) to
increase and extend the applicability and usability of the UAV video images in
fast response to time-critical events and natural disasters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include: (1) the
proposed methods are significantly beneficial to the future U.S. UAV application
strategy in areas such as surveillance, real-time response to time-critical
events, environmental monitoring, etc; (2) the proposed technique can be
directly used by U.S. industry, thus the project significantly increases and
extends the usability of commercial UAVs. &lt;br/&gt;