* 0430836
* A Theory of Real Approximations, with Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Chee Yap, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

Exact Geometric Computation (EGC) is one of the most successful approaches to
nonrobust numerical computation. The basis of EGC is {\em guaranteed accuracy
computation}, a computational mode in which each numerical quantity can be
computed to any user-specified accuracy. In the last 10 years, major software
libraries and many robust algorithms and applications have been implemented
based on EGC principles. &lt;br/&gt;What is lacking is a model of computation to
capture this mode. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI introduces a {\em theory of real
approximation} which fills this gap. The approach postulates a suitable
countable set $\mathbb{F}$ $\mathbb{Z}\ib\mathbb{F}\ib\mathbb{R}$) of {\em
representable reals}, with the property that all numerical input and output come
from $\mathbb{F}$. Two current theories directly address the specific nature of
real computation: the TTE School of Weihrauch and others, and the Algebraic
School from Blum, Shub and Smale (BSS). The PI's approach is distinct from both
schools, but complements them. The PI further introduces a {\em Numerical
Computational Model}, seen as an intermediate model between the Turing model and
the BSS model. The development is informed by classical complexity theory, yet
directly motivated by current development of EGC
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research topics include:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;*
The computability and complexity of real approximation. Connections are made to
standard complexity theory via such topics as $NP$-completeness, and also to the
algebraic theory of Blum, Shub and Smale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Fundamental
questions motivated by the implementation of EGC software: dynamic constructive
zero bounds, geometric separation bounds, complexity of approximate evaluation,
and precision-sensitive complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of these questions
(e.g., zero bounds) involve a combination of experimental validation with
theoretical studies. Implementation is done using the Core Library, the PI's
ongoing open-source library project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL
MERIT.&lt;br/&gt;One addresses a topic of long-standing interest, namely,
providing a foundation for real computation and its complexity. The PI's
approach to real approximation is concise, provably distinct from current
approaches, unexpected, yet firmly grounded in computing practice. The new
theory is, by design, a theory for EGC. But it can also serve as a foundation
for numerical computation, something which Smale and others have called for.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT. &lt;br/&gt;Through the applications of EGC
to robustness issues, this work is expected impact many areas of omputational
science and engineering. The practical work in this research is distributed
freely as part of the Core Library software. This library, with its unique
interface model, is widely applicable because any C++program can invoke it to
achieve guaranteed accuracy. Guaranteed accuracy computation has applications
beyond nonrobustness, from verifying conjectures to testing software. The PI, as
in the past, is actively engaged in various outreach efforts to related fields,
and to the larger computing community.&lt;br/&gt;