* 0430788
* SEI(BIO):     Integration of Multimodal Experiments for Protein Structure
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Bruce Craig, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* James French
* 12/31/2004
* USD 405,104.00

Determination of three-dimensional structures of proteins provides insight into
their evolutionary origins, functions, and mechanisms. While determining atomic-
detail structures by traditional methods can be expensive, time consuming, or
even infeasible, coarser-grained structural characterization is often sufficient
to provide significant insight. The multimodal approach to rapid, approximate
protein structure integrates complementary experimental evidence from a number
of sources in order to verify and discriminate among computationally predicted
structures. Appropriate experiments, due to their speed, variety of information,
and disjoint experimental limitations, include cross-linking, giving rough
distance restraints; stability assays after mutagenesis, characterizing
structural roles of residues in particular environments; and solution x-ray
scattering, yielding global shape properties.

The multimodal approach is grounded in probabilistic models that evaluate
consistency of data with structural features (distances, accessibilities,
overall shapes). This approach takes advantage of the diversity and relative
independence of the available methods, rather than seeking to integrate separate
measurements into an overarching physical model. Inference algorithms then
reason about posterior distributions of structures and features, avoiding false
optimism in a single answer, measuring overall plausibility, assessing the
available information content, and quantitating uncertainty in individual
features. Associated experiment planning algorithms optimize multimodal
experiments (e.g. selecting cross-linker length and specificity, and identifying
optimal mutation sites) for a given analysis task, so as to efficiently utilize
experimental resources while maximizing information gain. The multimodal
integration mechanism is being developed, applied, and tested with published
data from individual methods, and is being used to plan and interpret
appropriate experiments for selected proteins of unknown structure. Active
participation of graduate students expands educational activities and tools will
be accessible.