* 0430695
* Communication Complexity and Circuit Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Anna Gal, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2008
* USD 150,000.00

A major challenge in complexity theory is to prove lower bounds on the number of
steps necessary to compute a given function in general computational models. It
would be important to have techniques that help to find out what is the most
efficient solution we can hope to achieve for specific problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are methods for proving strong lower bounds for
restricted versions of some important models of computation. However, there are
no known techniques powerful enough to prove strong lower bounds on the
intrinsic complexity of specific computational
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term objective of the proposed research
is finding new methods for proving complexity lower bounds and identifying
mathematical properties of Boolean functions that determine their computational
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific plan of research outlined in the
proposal involves the analysis of problems in various computational models, such
as the cell probe model, branching programs, span programs, and multiparty
communication protocols. All the models considered in the proposal are related
to some important computational resource. Thus proving strong lower bounds on
the complexity of specific Boolean functions in the unrestricted versions of any
of these models would represent significant progress towards better
understanding the inherent complexity of computational tasks. Because of the
connections of these models to the Boolean circuit model, several of the
problems and approaches considered may potentially provide new techniques to
attack fundamental open problems in complexity theory. The problems considered
in the proposal are also interesting on their own right from the point of view
of various applications, including cryptographic applications such as secret
sharing schemes, private multiparty computation, and data
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common theme of the problems considered in
the proposal is their connection to communication complexity. Several of the
known lower bound techniques in different models are based on techniques related
to communication complexity. The proposed research plans to explore these
connections further.&lt;br/&gt;