* 0430006
* SGER-Rapid Assessment of the Expression of Insect FXPRLamides in Copepods and White Shrimp Using Immunohistochemistry and Western Blot Analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Judith Williams, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Ione Hunt Von Herbing
* 02/28/2006
* USD 46,039.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Title: Investigation of Insect Neuropeptides in
Aquatic Copepods and White Shrimp using Immunohistochemistry and Western Blot
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;PI: Williams, J.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In aquatic ecosystems,
copepods are the most numerically dominant organisms, are ecologically
significant, and are a key link in predator/prey trophic system. The terrestrial
counterparts to copepods are insects and copepods have often been called the
'insects of the sea'. Extensive information exists on physiological pathways in
insects, but little is known about copepod physiology. The central hypothesis to
be tested in this proposal is that based on the knowledge that copepods and
insects share similar life history strategies; it is likely that the controlling
mechanism, that is the neurohormones and neuropeptides, also may be similar
among these two taxa. In this study immunoreactivity of the 'insect
neuropeptide' family, the FXPRLamides, will be tested in juvenile and adult
stages of a freshwater copepod (Cyclops sp.), an estuarine copepod (Acartia sp.)
and the commercial white shrimp (Litopenaeus setiferus). This neuropeptide
family is a well-characterized group, which is important to producing
neuropeptides controlling pheromone production, melanization, myotropic
activity, pupariation and diapause in insects and may expected to have multiple
effects in copepods as well. Preliminary data suggest that a pheromone
synthesizing hormone is expressed in insects, copepods, ants, honeybees and a
burrowing shrimp. It is important to determine if aquatic crustacea express the
same neuropeptides as insects because antagonists to PBAN (pheromone
biosynthesis activating neuropeptide), one of the neuropeptides of the
FXPRLamide family, are presently being developed to alter or inhibit the
development of insect pests. If insect neuropeptides have the potential of
effecting aquatic crustacean population, then the use of insect neuropeptides
for insect control has the potential of becoming a serious environmental
problem, as chemicals sprayed for insect pest controls can end up in aquatic
ecosystems. This project will provide an important first step in determining the
presence and level of activity of these important neuropeptides in various life
history stages of aquatic crustaceans and whether or not antagonists against
insect neuropeptides may affect their development and survival.&lt;br/&gt;