* 0430656
* Concrete Problems in Computational Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Nicholas Pippenger, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 10/31/2006
* USD 286,677.00

Concrete Problems in Computational Complexity
Theory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nicholas Pippenger&lt;br/&gt;Department of Computer
Science&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
computational complexity theory is to determine the &lt;br/&gt;computational
resources needed to carry out various computational tasks.&lt;br/&gt;The
resources measured may involve hardware (such as gates used to
&lt;br/&gt;construct a circuit, or area on a chip) or software (such as the time
or &lt;br/&gt;space used in the execution of a program on a machine), and the
tasks &lt;br/&gt;considered may range from a simple addition of two integers to
a large &lt;br/&gt;algebraic or geometric computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will deal primarily with "low level" complexity
&lt;br/&gt;theory, in which the resources required grow modestly (at most
quadratically) &lt;br/&gt;with the size of the task. Examples of such tasks are
furnished by the &lt;br/&gt;arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division&lt;br/&gt;and square-root extraction) performed by the
execution of single &lt;br/&gt;instructions in a computer. For these tasks,
hardware-oriented resource &lt;br/&gt;measures are most appropriate in most
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will also explore problems
involving fault-tolerant &lt;br/&gt;computing. There is a classical theory
concerning transient errors in &lt;br/&gt;circuits that delineates fairly
clearly the theoretical possibilities and &lt;br/&gt;limitations in this
situation. The proposed research will deal with two &lt;br/&gt;aspects of fault-
tolerant computing about which much less is known:&lt;br/&gt;permanent errors
occurring over time, and transient errors in quantum &lt;br/&gt;communication
and computation. For these questions, hardware-oriented &lt;br/&gt;resource
measures are again most appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of
the proposed research lie in the promotion of &lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary links
between theoretical computer science on one hand, &lt;br/&gt;and mathematics and
physics on the other. It has of course always been the &lt;br/&gt;case that
computer scientists have drawn heavily on techniques and results &lt;br/&gt;from
mathematics and physics, since mathematics and physics form the
&lt;br/&gt;foundations of computer science and engineering. What is proposed
here, &lt;br/&gt;however, is to return the favor by applying methods developed
within &lt;br/&gt;theoretical computer science to problems of interest to
mathematicians &lt;br/&gt;and physicists.&lt;br/&gt;