* 0430868
* Models and Methods for Robust and Conic Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Reha Tutuncu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 11/30/2007
* USD 249,999.00

Title: "Models and Methods for Robust and Conic
Optimization"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty is an
inevitable feature of many decision making &lt;br/&gt;environments. On a regular
basis, engineers, economists, investment&lt;br/&gt;professionals, and others
need to make decisions to optimize a system&lt;br/&gt;with incomplete
information and considerable uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;Understanding, quantifying,
and managing uncertainty is critical&lt;br/&gt;to the success and effectiveness
of their decisions. &lt;br/&gt;Robust optimization refers to the modeling of
optimization problems&lt;br/&gt;with data uncertainty with the objective of
&lt;br/&gt;obtaining a solution that is guaranteed to &lt;br/&gt;perform well
under all possible realizations of the uncertain
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce novel
approaches&lt;br/&gt;for the characterization of robustness in uncertain
systems&lt;br/&gt;and develop efficient and reliable optimization algorithms for
&lt;br/&gt;identification of robust solutions. &lt;br/&gt;In particular, the
project will focus on (i) developing methods to &lt;br/&gt;identify solutions
that are ``relative robust'', i.e., solutions that &lt;br/&gt;are good in each
scenario, where the quality of the&lt;br/&gt;solution is measured relative to
the best solution of &lt;br/&gt;each scenario; (ii) developing new models and
methods for&lt;br/&gt;``adjustable robust optimization'', i.e., for problems
with &lt;br/&gt;uncertainty where a subset of the decision variables can
be&lt;br/&gt;adjusted after some of the uncertain variables
are&lt;br/&gt;observed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many cases, robust optimization
formulations are expressed&lt;br/&gt;as the problem of optimizing a linear
function over a set defined &lt;br/&gt;by linear equalities and cone membership
constraints, a so-called&lt;br/&gt;conic optimization problem. Implementation
efforts will &lt;br/&gt;include the development of structure-exploiting
algorithms &lt;br/&gt;for the solution of large-scale conic optimization
problems. &lt;br/&gt;In particular, problems with fixed variables, cone
intersection &lt;br/&gt;constraints, and quadratic objectives will be studied.
&lt;br/&gt;The resulting algorithms will be carefully implemented and
&lt;br/&gt;the software will be freely distributed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust
and conic optimization formulations are used to model &lt;br/&gt;a wide array of
applications in many diverse fields. &lt;br/&gt;For example, robust optimization
problems arise when some &lt;br/&gt;of the input parameters of a given
optimization problem &lt;br/&gt;are unknown or uncertain, which is
&lt;br/&gt;common in finance, economics, and engineering models.
&lt;br/&gt;Conic optimization problems are encountered in truss design,
&lt;br/&gt;control and system theory, statistics, eigenvalue optimization,
&lt;br/&gt;antenna array weight design, and mathematical
finance.&lt;br/&gt;Given their wide applicability, the progress achieved through
this&lt;br/&gt;project in solving these problem classes more
efficiently&lt;br/&gt;and effectively, will benefit activities in many of
the&lt;br/&gt;disciplines listed above. In addition, the project
work&lt;br/&gt;will be integrated into the PI's ongoing teaching,
training,&lt;br/&gt;and outreach activities through &lt;br/&gt;(i) the CMU
Summer Institute, (ii) the teaching of a &lt;br/&gt;project-based course that
benefits local industries and organizations, &lt;br/&gt;(iii) "NEC: Give a Day,
Make a Difference" program.