* 0430165
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Privacy-Aware Information Release Control
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Xiaoyang Wang, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 09/30/2008
* USD 120,000.00

With rapid advancements in computer and network technology, it has become
possible for an organization to collect, store, and retrieve vast amounts of
data of all kinds quickly and efficiently. Data is of strategic and operational
importance to many organizations. At the same time, these large information
systems represent a potential threat to individual privacy since they contain a
great amount of detailed information about individuals. Privacy of individual
data handled poorly not only violates the fundamental rights of individuals and
relevant federal and state laws, it is also a liability to businesses in terms
of their trustworthiness and eventually their bottom line. Therefore, there is
an urgent need of technology that can be adopted by organizations and businesses
to protect the privacy of individuals without impeding the flow of information
that is necessary to achieve their strategic and operation goals. Although this
urgent need is reflected in the recent increase of research activities in the
privacy area, there are several problems, especially related to a privacy-aware
data release system, that are yet to be addressed. The essential questions
include: when a piece of data is released, to what extent privacy of individuals
is lost? If the loss is excessive, how do we modify the data to be released in a
way that permits maximum flow of information while preserving privacy at the
same time? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The starting point of this project is the
realization that privacy concerns take different forms for different data sets.
In order to preserve the privacy of individuals, the privacy concerns must be
formalized. When data is released, whether used in privacy-preserving data
mining or simply published to the third party or the general public, these
privacy rules need to be satisfied. This is termed privacy-aware information
release control. Two general approaches are adopted: query anonymization and
online data checking. Query anonymization means that all queries are to be
evaluated to see how much privacy is disclosed through the query. If the query
discloses too much, some changes will be made so that the privacy level will be
maintained. Here, the technical challenge is how to ensure that the system will
release the maximum information but without any privacy violation. Online data
checking means that when data is released, privacy rules will be checked on the
to-be-released data to find any privacy violation. The technical challenge of
online checking is its efficiency. These two methods are complementary to each
other and can sometimes be used together in a practical system. The above
techniques are based on knowing the privacy level that the data requester is
allowed to have. Once data is released, depending on the level of private data
contained in the output, some obligations may be attached. This project also
tackles the problems related to management of such obligations.&lt;br/&gt;