* 0430869
* Pre- and Post-Filtering for Block-Based Image and Video Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Trac Tran, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2006
* USD 50,000.00

This research involves the study and development of an integrated framework of
pre- and post-filtering along the data block boundaries in block-based
image/video communication systems. The novel framework can be thought of as a
generalization of and provides a significant improvement for the traditional
block DCT coding approach in JPEG and MPEG. The investigation is particularly
geared toward low-complexity image/video coding and communication algorithms or
systems in resource-constrained, speed-critical, and real-time applications for
wireless hand-held devices.

The research is expected to have a significant impact on practical signal
processing, coding and communication systems. Coding efficiency is greatly
improved by taking into account inter-block spatial correlation and by adapting
operators dynamically based on local signal contents. At the decoder, perceptual
reconstruction quality is enhanced. Blocking artifacts are mitigated with
aggressive post-filtering along the block boundaries whereas ringing artifacts
are greatly reduced by adaptively varying the operator size. Robustness and data
recovery capability in noisy channel environments are also improved by spreading
information spatially and by dynamically switching interpolative post-filters
based on the communicating environment and the neighboring data received.
Finally, on the practical aspect, small local operators lend themselves nicely
to parallel computing, and fast, VLSI-friendly, possibly multiplierless,
implementations. Existing block-based infrastructure can be kept intact since
pre-/post-processing operates outside in the spatial domain. The investigator
explores pre-/post-processing operators that can maintain compatibility with the
huge collection of JPEG and MPEG bit-streams currently available on the web and
in archiving digital libraries.

------------------- Level of Effort Statement:

At the recommended level of support, the PI will make every attempt to meet the
original scope and level of effort of the project.