* 0430760
* Proposal for a Planning Workshop:   Deformation Rates at 10 to 10 Million Years:  An Active Trust Belt in the Central Andes
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Richard Allmendinger, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,735.00

0430760 Allmendinger

One of the most profound questions in continental geodynamics is how to relate
deformation of the earth at time scales of 10-6 years during a coseismic slip
event to mountain building processes at the scale of millions to tens of
millions of years. How does the instantaneous deformation integrate over 6
orders of magnitude (or more) of temporal sampling windows to produce the
orogens we see today? As many geoscientists these days routinely extrapolate GPS
measured rates to mountain building time scales, it is becoming increasingly
important to understand well the pitfalls of such practices.

Great mountain belts are made by thrust systems which, to date, have not been
studied as intensively as strike-slip dominated systems or extensional regimes
such as the Basin and Range. Thanks to extensive previous work as well as a
relatively simple plate setting, the Precordillera of western Argentina is one
of the best places in the world to study true mountain building processes at a
range of temporal scales from decades to millions of years. This award provides
funds for a workshop to bring together experts on this region as well as experts
in techniques necessary to complete our understanding of deformation
partitioning at different temporal sampling windows. The objective of the
workshop is to identify clearly the types of studies in this region that will
further the understanding of the links between deformations at different time
scales. The attendees will include experts on InSar and GPS geodesy, earthquake
seismology, paleoseismology and tectonic geomorphology, and structural geology
and stratigraphy.

