* 0430349
* CAMLET:  A Combined Ab-initio Manifold Learning Toolbox for Nanostructure Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Hongyuan Zha, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 09/30/2008
* USD 215,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular Dynamics simulations are
powerful&lt;br/&gt;tools to study problems of materials science,
&lt;br/&gt;nanoscience, and biology. It naturally provides&lt;br/&gt;ample
opportunities for interdisciplinary research&lt;br/&gt;that requires knowledge
in mathematics, statistics, &lt;br/&gt;computer science, physics, materials and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is on developing learning-based
&lt;br/&gt;computational and statistical methods for potential &lt;br/&gt;energy
landscape modeling to accelerate ab-initio &lt;br/&gt;molecular dynamics
simulations. The set of tools &lt;br/&gt;developed will substantially expand the
limits of time &lt;br/&gt;and system size without compromising the precision
and&lt;br/&gt;quality of the ab-initio simulation
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hongyuan Zha, Qiang Du, Runze Li and Jorge Sofo
will&lt;br/&gt;investigate learning and&lt;br/&gt;computational methods 1) to
characterize both the local and global&lt;br/&gt;structures of the low-
dimensional manifold in which the simulation&lt;br/&gt;really occurs through
manifold learning from the trajectories of the&lt;br/&gt;ab-initio simulation;
2) to identify and extract suitable clusters in&lt;br/&gt;the reduced dimension
spaces corresponding to regions in the&lt;br/&gt;configuration space that
naturally emerge from the ab-initio&lt;br/&gt;simulation and are visited
frequently by the particles throughout the&lt;br/&gt;simulation; 3) to conduct
efficient energy and force interpolation&lt;br/&gt;using Gaussian Kriging models
with penalized likelihood. In this&lt;br/&gt;learning and
computational&lt;br/&gt;framework, the interpolated potential energy surface
will be&lt;br/&gt;evaluated and it will replace the costly ab-initio evaluation
when its&lt;br/&gt;precision is good enough. As the simulation evolves, the
interpolated&lt;br/&gt;potential energy surface will be retested to detect
the&lt;br/&gt;eventual need of a retraining in case the simulation is
exploring&lt;br/&gt;new regions of the configuration space.&lt;br/&gt;