* 0430780
* Collaborative Research:  A Modern Autofocus Methodology with Applications to Radar Imaging
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* David Munson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2008
* USD 274,673.00

Synthetic aperture radar (SAR), geophysical and seismic imaging, ultrasound
imaging, optical coherence tomography (OCT), and many forms of astronomical
imaging are examples of coherent imaging systems. In practice, the acquired
phase data are noisy due to imprecise knowledge of the motion of the sensor, or
due to the properties of the medium. As a consequence, the produced imagery is
improperly focused. Existing techniques for correcting the imagery, referred to
as autofocus, are ill-equipped to handle the challenges of modern high-
resolution systems. The availability of well-focused ultra-high-resolution SAR
imagery is crucial for antiterrorism efforts. Improved focusing may also lead to
breakthroughs in medical imaging, such as ultrasound imaging of the human
breast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators develop a new generation of
autofocus algorithms that will enable improved focusing in a variety of coherent
imaging modalities. Primarily, the SAR autofocus problem is considered because
of its national importance in all-weather surveillance, and also because the SAR
field is highly developed. The research will focus on the following approaches:
(i) optimization strategies that optimize image sharpness metrics, (ii)
multiresolution vector space methods that exploit the structure of the phase
error, and (iii) multichannel blind deconvolution techniques that exploit the
redundancy of the blurring operation on each row of the image. These approaches
motivate the development of a unified framework, in which all of the available
assumptions are used in a robust restoration procedure. The implementation of
the methodology in practical SAR systems will be emphasized. Finally, the
developed autofocus methodology will be extended and applied to ultrasound, OCT,
and passive radar imaging.&lt;br/&gt;