* 0430906
* II: Pathways
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Carl Lagoze, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,297,550.00

ABSTRACT

Scientific research is embracing highly collaborative, network-based, and data-
intensive standards of practice. As scientific research transforms itself, the
need for a natively digital, network-based scholarly communication system that
is able to capture the digital scholarly record, make it accessible, and
preserve it over time becomes evident. The ubiquity of the Internet provides the
foundation for a new publication paradigm that is inclusive, responsive, and
adaptive, one that resembles the scientific process that it intends to document.
The Pathways project will investigate and prototype new infrastructure to
address the following requirements. First, the unit of scholarly communication
(traditionally a publication.) must be redefined to resemble the reality of
science itself by integrating text, data simulations, images, audio, and other
rich media. Second, the process of science is as important as the product.
Networked infrastructure permits the decoupling and reimplementation of
functions that have been vertically-integrated in traditional publishing
systems. New information flows, or pathways, must be enabled to support a broad
spectrum of functions including data sharing, dissemination of results, peer-
review, and digital preservation. Third, information about the dynamics of
scholarship is currently lost. The scholarly communication infrastructure should
facilitate an archival view of scientific progress, whereby final results are
but one record in the documentation of process. A graph-based information model
will provide a layer of abstraction over heterogeneous resources (data, content,
and services). A service-oriented process model will enable the expression and
invocation of multi-stage compositional, computational, and transformational
information flows.

An interoperable, network-based system will assist in breaking the constraining
shackles of the traditional scholarly publishing paradigm, allowing for flexible
and efficient mechanisms to create, disseminate, certify, register, transform,
and archive scientific results. The models and protocols developed in this work
will facilitate the creation of new types of information entities and the
evolution of distributed workflows that better match underlying scientific
processes. Just as the Web created a tool for all,scholars, teachers, lay
citizens and school children, a better connected scholarly communication system
will enable the wide dissemination of scientific results as rich, multi-
dimensional, dynamic online resources.



