* 0430593
* ITR:    Privacy and Surveillance In Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Gregory Grudic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

This project conducts a dialectic study of location privacy in wireless networks
-- a ``good cop'' vs ``bad cop'' exploration of the technical limits and
abilities for surveillance in common wireless data networking. The work combines
the current state of knowledge in privacy with probabilistic regression. Current
location monitoring in wireless networks is integrally related to determining
location from radio frequency information; current techniques to enhance privacy
depend on the ability to fool observers by varying that RF information without
affecting the ability to use the underlying network. This RF information is
imprecise and subject to considerable environmental noise. Alternatively,
privacy-enhancing mechanisms vary aspects of the media access layer, such as
unique keys used to identify stations, in an effort to cloak an individual
station and enhance privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, there has been little
investigation in to the issue of unintended disclosure of private information in
wireless networks. For example, current monitoring techniques can identify the
unique brand of cellphones being used in a region by characteristics of the
electronic components used in different brands of cellphones. Normally, such
sophisticated analysis requires expensive equipment. As more bandwidth is
unregulated, the ability to monitor such bandwidths becomes an intrinsic aspect
of the underlying technology. Software defined radio systems have the need and
ability to use a number of frequency ranges and to exercise control over the MAC
and PHY layers of the wireless medium, and emerging hybrid reconfigurable
systems will accelerate the wide spread use of such devices. As such capable
handsets become more commonplace, their very programmability will allow a
broader range of increasingly sophisticated
surveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploiting a combination of machine
learning algorithms and embedded systems, the research funded by this proposal
seeks to verify or refute the privacy enhancing aspects of current research. Not
only will this help determine the technological limits to existing and proposed
privacy mechanisms, but it may help set guidance for policies in such domains.
Moreover, the contrapuntal study that attempts to violate location privacy
through advanced statistical machine learning may indicate that wireless privacy
can not be enforced by technology, and must be dictated by policy. This
surveillance technology may also be interesting in its own right, allowing more
accurate tracking of parties that have noisy location sensors. The study uses
probabilistic regression models to estimate trajectories from radio data
collected by a software radio. The algorithms are sought that are simple enough
to run on the hybrid reconfigurable logic embedded in the software radio,
allowing diverse and realistic experimentation and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;