* 0430477
* OS Support for Application Installation, Execution, and Management in an Untrustworthy World
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Henry Levy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 450,000.00

Proposal Number: 0430477&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TItle: OS Support for Application
Installation, Execution, and Management in&lt;br/&gt;an Untrustworthy
World&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Steven Gribble &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
computer users face many security threats and manageability obstacles. Today's
software is increasingly complex, buggy, and prone to vulnerability. In addition
to familiar threats such as worms and viruses, users must contend with new, more
subtle attacks, such as the spread of spyware. Unfortunately, operating systems
do little to help users address the security and vulnerability challenges of the
networked environment. For example, it is difficult to determine what programs
are running on a system, or what code is responsible for generating visible
activity (such as network traffic, file system activity, or windowing activity).
&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the construction of a new application and
operating system architecture based on lightweight virtual machines, with each
application being both installed and isolated in its own VM. Installing and
removing applications becomes simple, as a VM provides a clean container in
which all of the application dependencies and resources can be embedded.
Tracking an application and associating activity with its source becomes
possible, since activity is easily observable through and traceable to the
narrow VM interface. This architecture provides stronger security properties,
since malicious applications are isolated from benign programs and data, and a
vulnerability within an application no longer puts other applications at risk.
The impact of this work will be to provide users with trustworthy infrastructure
that they can depend on, and to mitigate damage to users in the case of
successful attacks.&lt;br/&gt;