* 0430258
* Cyber Trust - Restore the Trustworthiness of Digital Photographs: Blind Detection of Digital Photograph Tampering
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Shih-Fu Chang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 740,000.00

Trustworthy photographs play an important role in many applications such as news
reporting, intelligence information gathering, criminal investigation, security
surveillance, as well as health care. However, with the advent of digital age,
the trustworthiness of pictures could no longer be taken for granted. This
project will develop a completely blind and passive system for detecting digital
photograph tampering. No extra encryption, signature extraction, or information
embedding processes are needed. Content tampering operations are detected at the
point of checking by analyzing the natural signal/scene characteristics in the
image. We take an innovative approach integrating techniques from signal
processing and computer graphics. The signal processing method involves
effective use of higher-order signal statistics, signal acquisition device
modeling, image decomposition, and image structural analysis to identify
tampering artifacts at the signal level. The computer graphics approach includes
novel techniques of 3D geometry estimation, illumination field recovery, and
scene reconstruction to detect inconsistency at the scene level like shadows,
shading, and geometry. We aim at a successful system that makes any attacking
maneuver as difficult as possible. The system will also provide equal emphasis
on robustness and informativeness - suspicions will be explained with locations
and reasons. To achieve broader impacts, the proposed research will include
deployment of a public image forgery detection engine, release of a large
original data set, and definitions of evaluation benchmark.

