* 0430686
* Lean Combustion Technology II: Promise and Practice An International Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,07/31/2004
* Derek Dunn-Rankin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 07/31/2004
* USD 6,000.00

This award supports partially the participation of 6-12 young researchers in the
second international conference on lean combustion, organized by ECI (formerly
Engineering Foundation), in Tomar, Portugal, April 25-29, 2004. Lean combustion
is a ubiquitous technology, and the conference will engage leading researchers
from a range of countries and from industry as well as universities. In addition
to treating IC engines and turbines, the program will address a variety of new
topics, including alternative energy sources, combustion of hydrogen, and
digital simulation of turbulent flames. There will be a poster session, and
proceedings will be produced on a CD and possibly in the Combustion Treatise
Series. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discussions at this meeting, both formal and
informal, will provide a valuable enhancement for the younger researchers who
participate. Thus, this small investment can contribute to the healthy
development of the next generation of combustion researchers. The funding will
help to pay travel expenses for 6-12 participants by providing $500-$1000
each.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the activity arises from
the participation of combustion experts, their discourse, and the communication
among the group. The broader impact arises primarily from the involvement of
graduate students and younger faculty in the symposium to encourage their
participation and development in this field. Also, the symposium will promote
international networking among the participants.&lt;br/&gt;