* 0430954
* Mathematical Foundations of Algorithms for Data Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Eric Klassen, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 07/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Abtract&lt;br/&gt;Recent work has shown that a fundamental, abstract algorithm
underlies a broad collection of data-visualization techniques. This substitope
algorithm has been partially characterized but not yet implemented. The initial
characterization was of the number of cases that arise in colorings of polytopes
that tile a domain. Each color corresponds to a discrete state of the data, such
as being above or below a threshhold or being a particular element of a set
(e.g., bone, muscle, or lesion). The broad applicability of a universal
visualization algorithm offers a great deal of promise. This project will
further develop the substitope algorithm by applying group-theoretic results
from Polya theory (with improvements by de Bruijn), and by applying techniques
from topology, algebraic geometry, and combinatorics to determine the classes of
geometric substitutions can be employed by specializations of the substitope
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;This
inter-disciplinary project is the first concerted effort to develop the
mathematical underpinnings of data-visualization techniques. It combines the
expertise of a computer scientist (whose research is in graphics and
visualization) with that of a pure mathematician (whose research is in topology
and geometry).&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish the first theoretical
underpinning of the discipline of data visualization; this accomplishment will
accelerate further development of new visualization techniques. The taxonomy
that results from this new theory will indicate many new avenues to be explored
for feature detection in a wide variety of datasets.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in most fields of science, engineering, and
medicine must increasingly analyze two-dimensional, three-dimensional, and even
higher-dimensional datasets that arise from experimental data acquisition and
from numerical simulation. Examples include temperature, humidity, salinity, and
velocity in ocean/atmospheric data; density, velocity, electric and magnetic
vector fields in astrophysics and in biochemistry; and CT and MRI datasets in
medicine. Extending current visualization techniques to handle vector-valued,
multi-dimensional, multi-scale, and tensor-valued datasets that would otherwise
require individual efforts to devise the appropriate algorithms (based on the
occasional individual insight followed by laborious enumeration of possible
cases that arise) will instead have the enumeration task become automated. This
will benefit scientists, engineers, and clinicians by allowing them to enjoy the
development of custom visualization tools suited to their requirements much more
rapidly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;