* 0430693
* Collaborative Research:  SEI(BIO)--Automated Methods for Generating High-Resolution GIS Databases from Remotely Sensed Data for Biodiversity Predictions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* James Clark, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 317,291.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;NSF-0430693&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consequences of
global change for land cover, carbon cycles, and biodiversity loss involve
complex interactions at fine scales, such as resource availability in forest
understories, to regional land-cover, climate, and CO2. Global change research
requires models developed through careful study of local phenomena that can be
extended to landscape, regional, and global scales. Unfortunately, environmental
scientists have been limited in their ability to determine how factors that
operate at different scales impact landscapes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary
long-term goal of the research is to enhance the ability of biology and
geoscience research programs to acquire, analyze, and distribute high-resolution
GIS databases of important environmental attributes. In support of this goal the
computer science team will develop new techniques to extract forest attributes
in the form of GIS databases from remotely sensed data. The computer science
team will build an aerial remote sensing platform and a suite of analysis tools
for creating GIS databases of environmental attributes with sub-meter geo-
registration and elevation accuracies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The image
acquisition, analysis and GIS tools developed by UMass and MHC
&lt;br/&gt;provide the critical broad-scale, yet high-resolution, data needed to
parameterize and validate models used to study global change. The products of
these analyses will be integrated within a modeling framework at Duke University
that includes extensive field data, application of new statistical computation
methods, and development of a stand simulator. The combined effort will be used
to determine how diversity is maintained in forest stands based on a
comprehensive accounting of environmental impacts and uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;