* 0430406
* Exploring Risk Perception and Ultimate Trust in Online Environments:    Viewpoints of the Visually-Impaired
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Juline Mills, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2006
* USD 173,612.00

Building and keeping credibility in the eyes of consumers is a complex task
faced by online organizations. While research on the behavioral aspects of
online consumer behavior focusing on trust, satisfaction, and loyalty, with the
aim of creating a compelling online environment to satisfy consumer needs, is
increasing, the majority of these research efforts do not focus on the needs of
visually impaired people, and their perception, perceived risk, and trust in
Web-based environments. In this project, the PI will seek to identify the
antecedents of trust from the viewpoint of the visually impaired consumer (both
online users and non-users). The study will specifically seek to: identify the
salient factors important in developing visually impaired consumer trust in
online businesses; identify the interpersonal trust factors and the
corresponding levels of interpersonal trust critical to the adaptation or
continued use of the Internet by visually impaired consumers; explore variations
in trust antecedents based on the demographic characteristics (age, gender, and
ethnic and cultural background) of visually impaired consumers; develop a trust
typology model for visually impaired consumers; and develop educational programs
to aid non-users and users with increasing trust online. An understanding of
visually impaired consumer perspectives on trust will enhance knowledge of the
underlying principles of trust in e-commerce and move the discipline closer
towards developing a centralized control for trust. Detailed knowledge of the
hopes and concerns of visually impaired consumers broken down by age groups,
gender, and ethnic backgrounds is critical for policy makers in charting
effective Internet transaction-related policies. The findings from this study
should also be of importance for online organizations in the development of
proactive strategies for visually impaired customer recruitment and retention in
online transactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Trust and commitment
variables are critical for maintaining a long-term relationship between
(visually impaired) consumers and online businesses. The PI expects the results
from this study will add new dimensions to Internet policy debates sensitive to
developing general consumer trust, will assist business-to-consumer e-commerce
Websites to become more visually-impaired compliant, will increase the awareness
and knowledge of the wider society of issues facing visually impaired people,
and may lead to the discovery of innovative solutions to specific trust-related
problems affecting visually impaired consumers using the Internet.