* 0430837
* Motion Compensated Scalable Video Coding for Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* John Woods, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2006
* USD 90,000.00

This project has the goal of developing a new family of more powerful and fully
scalable video compression algorithms. It uses the interframe subband/wavelet
approach that is accomplished through the use of a motion compensated temporal
filter (MCTF). This method has emerged over the recent years as having great
potential for video compression closely matched with universal multimedia access
and the efficient transmission of video over heterogeneous and lossy networks.
There is an on-going standards investigation in this area. Our previous video
coder MC-EZBC used 2-tap Haar filters and hierarchical variable-size block
matching (HVSBM). The new improved coder uses longer temporal filters and a
hierarchical variable size mesh-based motion field. Improvements are anticipated
based on various experimental and theoretical findings in the literature, and
described more fully in the project description. In performing the MCTF, a key
problem is to avoid creating artifacts in the lower frame-rate data by
inadvertently filtering along poorly matched paths. A variable size block match
field has been used in the past because it is easy to classify the blocks as to
whether they should be filtered, predicted, or regarded as I-blocks, and just
spatially interpolated. The challenge then is to do the same with the more
accurate mesh-based motion models and on a variable size mesh grid. As we find
the .true. motion paths, we can then make better use of longer filters, to
reduce redundancy and to improve the quality of the video itself. Additionally
such a high quality motion field, when made available at the receiver, can
enable sophisticated post-processing to be done for adaptation to display
characteristics. Level of Effort Statement: During this one-year effort, we will
concentrate on scalable motion vector coding and hierarchical variable size mesh
model for MCTF with longer filters. We will not get to the investigation of
alias problems or the new paradigm . combined video restoration and coding.