* 0430132
* Survey of the Insects in Ghana with Systematic Studies on Spider Beetles and Dung Beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Keith Philips, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 402,619.00

NSF Proposal DEB-0430132&lt;br/&gt;Philips&lt;br/&gt; A survey of the insects of
the Upper Guinean Forests&lt;br/&gt;in Ghana with systematic studies on spider
beetles and dung beetles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Upper West African Guinean
forests are considered one of 25 biodiversity&lt;br/&gt;hotspots in the world
and are a vital refuge and region of high species&lt;br/&gt;endemicity.
Knowledge of insect diversity in this habitat is poor relative to&lt;br/&gt;that
found in other threatened areas in the tropics. There is extreme
urgency&lt;br/&gt;for an insect survey in the Upper Guinean forests because this
ecosystem is more&lt;br/&gt;threatened and is disappearing more quickly than
most other global hotspots.&lt;br/&gt;Severe pressure on these forests results
from some of the highest human&lt;br/&gt;population growth rates, most intensive
logging, and rampant bushmeat hunting&lt;br/&gt;found anywhere in the world. The
main goals of this project are: 1) to conduct&lt;br/&gt;an intensive survey of
insects in the Guinean forests of Ghana and two&lt;br/&gt;additional areas in
savannah and sub-sahalian regions, using a wide variety of&lt;br/&gt;collecting
techniques, resulting in the collection of a large diversity
of&lt;br/&gt;invertebrate groups previously unavailable to systematists; 2) to
develop and&lt;br/&gt;rehabilitate a host country authoritative reference
collection thereby creating&lt;br/&gt;a national insect collection and
integrating it into the global systematics&lt;br/&gt;community; 3) to educate
and train students and collaborate with scientists from&lt;br/&gt;Ghana
(University of Ghana (Legon), Centre for Scientific and
Industrial&lt;br/&gt;Research, and The Ghana Wildlife Society) and students from
Western Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;University on insect sampling techniques,
biodiversity studies, and insect&lt;br/&gt;curation providing much needed
scientific systematic expertise in Ghana; 4) to&lt;br/&gt;partner with The Ghana
Wildlife Society and other organizations and individuals&lt;br/&gt;by providing
web accessible databases with identification keys and images of&lt;br/&gt;spider
beetles and dung beetles and all available biological information on
the&lt;br/&gt;group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of this
proposal is to ultimately better understand&lt;br/&gt;the biodiversity of these
poorly studied and highly threatened forests by&lt;br/&gt;providing large
numbers insect samples for study to improve insect taxonomy
and&lt;br/&gt;classifications, the cornerstone of biology, while they still
exist. This work&lt;br/&gt;will also result in knowledge on the diversity and
evolution of two main target&lt;br/&gt;groups: 1) the spider beetles which are
arguably the most poorly known group of&lt;br/&gt;African beetles, and 2) the
dung beetles that are still very poorly known and&lt;br/&gt;studied. The latter
group is also ecologically unstudied in this region and is&lt;br/&gt;of great
interest because of the complex communities and behaviors
exhibited.&lt;br/&gt;They are also indicative of ecosystem health and hence
extremely useful to&lt;br/&gt;conservation organizations. The broader impacts
include a better understanding&lt;br/&gt;of African tropical forest
biodiversity, its evolution, ecology, and&lt;br/&gt;biogeography. Additionally,
the vital aspect of student training, developing a&lt;br/&gt;systematics
infrastructure in Ghana, partnering with the primary
conservation&lt;br/&gt;agency in this country, and creating web accessible
information on insects will&lt;br/&gt;lead to better education of citizens of
Ghana and the United States and&lt;br/&gt;hopefully protection of the
irreplaceable natural heritage of biodiversity in&lt;br/&gt;the Upper Guinean
forests of West Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;