* 0430161
* Integrating Security and Fault Tolerance in Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Kenneth Birman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* carl landwehr
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,600,000.00

Proposal Number: NSF-0430161&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: Integrating Security
and Fault Tolerance in Distributed Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Andrew C.
Myers, Ken Birman, Fred B. Schneider&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trustworthy
distributed systems should tolerate both malicious attacks and benign faults
while preserving data integrity and confidentiality. This research aims to
produce methods for constructing distributed systems that are trustworthy in the
aggregate, even when some nodes in the system have been compromised by malicious
attackers. The security and fault-tolerance communities have developed their own
solutions to aspects of these problems, but the solutions are incompatible. The
goal of this project is to reconcile that incompatibility. One key idea is to
use automatic compile-time transformations to rewrite programs to run securely,
even when some host machines are untrustworthy. Code and data are transformed to
synthesize distributed systems that, by construction, provide confidentiality,
integrity, and availability. The planned research also includes new distributed
computation techniques needed to make these transformations effective. These
techniques include proactive recovery, proactive obfuscation, and threshold
cryptography, which can help systems survive malicious intrusions and denial of
service attacks while offering data integrity, high availability, and
cryptographic protection for secrets. Gossip-based and epidemic communication
algorithms can provide robust, scalable, and efficient information aggregration
over a large distributed system. In summary, the plan is to combine new compile-
time and run-time techniques to make distributed systems more
trustworthy.&lt;br/&gt;