* 0430102
* Foundations of Event Correlation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Zohar Manna, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 275,600.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0430102&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a
unified theory of event correlation. Event correlation is a very powerful
technique in publish-subscribe systems, an increasingly popular architectural
design choice for embedded systems. Event correlation allows components to
subscribe with the middleware with complex temporal patterns of events rather
than with single events as in event filtering. This has several advantages: it
improves performance by reducing network traffic and unnecessary component
activations and by&lt;br/&gt;enabling more accurate component scheduling; it
simplifies system development by transferring functionality from components to a
standard service in the middleware; and finally, it increases analyzability by
making component dependencies explicit, and hence can make systems more
reliable. Despite these advantages event&lt;br/&gt;correlation is hardly being
used. The reason is that system developers do not trust existing
implementations: theoretical foundations that guarantee that all relevant events
are indeed delivered are lacking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are
developing a theoretical framework for event correlation that addresses the
following fundamental problems: &lt;br/&gt;* the expressiveness of different
event correlation languages and the relations among their operational models;
&lt;br/&gt;* the datatypes and algorithms for their run-time evaluation;
&lt;br/&gt;* the complexity of associated algorithmic analysis problems;
&lt;br/&gt;* the development of formal testing and verification
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is a new direction in the application
of formal methods. Its starting point was the development of an event-
correlation language by the investigators for the Boeing Bold Stroke platform
under the DARPA PCES program. The current project develops the theoretical
foundations for that language, and extends it&lt;br/&gt;with memory and real-
time facilities to accommodate more sophisticated event forwarding strategies
and systems with real-time constraints. Efficient analysis algorithms, based on
automata theory,&lt;br/&gt;are being developed to enable system verification and
optimization. These languages, models, and algorithms are evaluated on actual
complex embedded systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
benefit embedded systems development at many levels: &lt;br/&gt;* a formal
semantics will give system developers the confidence to use complex correlation
patterns, which provides a concise and easily comprehensible way to express
event dependencies;&lt;br/&gt;* a hierarchy of operational models will allow
compilers to generate efficient implementations, appropriately choosing the best
space/time/parallelism tradeoffs according to the target platform; &lt;br/&gt;*
solutions to the underlying decision problems will lead to the development of
practical reasoning tools, such as compilers implementing complex optimizations
of correlators, static analysis tools, and run-time
monitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;