* 0430987
* SEI+II (GEO):     An IT-Enabled, Hierarchical and Patch Dynamic Environment for Modeling Complex, 3D Groundwater Systems Across Multiple Spatial Scales
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Qun Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 550,000.00

Despite the recent dramatic growth of computational capability, our ability to
model complex, 3D groundwater systems is still severely limited because of a
number of tough computational and conceptual challenges including: the machine
bottleneck; the algorithmic bottleneck; and the data assimilation problem. This
research addresses systematically these fundamental difficulties in large-scale
groundwater modeling using an interdisciplinary approach. In particular, the
research takes advantage of hierarchy theory and develops: a hierarchical and
patch dynamic framework for modeling complex groundwater systems across multiple
scales; and a new modeling paradigm that resolves a significant computer science
problem - a barrier to the practical implementation of hierarchical modeling.
Specifically, the new, IT-enabled, and hierarchical patch dynamic framework
will: (a) allow modeling complex groundwater systems without having to solve
large, ill-conditioned matrix systems and thus eliminate or substantially
alleviate the infamous "curse of dimensionality" and the associated
computational bottlenecks in 3D groundwater modeling; (b) provide a systematic
"scaling ladder" to link data and models across multiple scales and assimilate
information from disparate sources; and (c) provide on the fly integration of
hierarchical computations and visualizations, free users from having to interact
with each subscale modeling patches, and eliminate the associated human
bottlenecks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed hierarchical modeling
environment may potentially change the way computational modeling is done in
groundwater hydrology and substantially improve our ability to understand
subsurface systems, processes, and scale interactions and to develop model-based
tools for integrated water resources management and environmental cleanup.
&lt;br/&gt;