* 0430983
* Distributed Methods for Statistical Decision Making in Networked Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* William Karl, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 07/31/2009
* USD 384,652.00

Abstract: Recent advances in sensor and computing technologies enable
&lt;br/&gt;massively distributed networks of sensors as candidate technologies
to &lt;br/&gt;provide real-time information in diverse applications such as
building &lt;br/&gt;safety, environmental sensing, habitat monitoring, power
systems and &lt;br/&gt;manufacturing. The potential of networked sensing by such
devices is &lt;br/&gt;enormous, yet there are significant system-level
challenges in realizing &lt;br/&gt;this potential by designs that are reliable,
efficient and scalable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves the
development of fundamental systems-level &lt;br/&gt;framework for uncertain
decision making in ad-hoc networked and power &lt;br/&gt;limited environments.
Although some of these issues have been&lt;br/&gt;previously tackled in
isolation, we will develop a unified approach, &lt;br/&gt;addressing multiple
interacting dependencies to obtain systems level &lt;br/&gt;tools for rational
design and implementation. Accordingly this research &lt;br/&gt;has three
principle thrusts: 1) Adaptive Querying Strategies (AQS) -- a &lt;br/&gt;top-
down viewpoint based on hierarchical architectures that involve
&lt;br/&gt;designated decision agents(s). In this thrust we propose novel
feedback &lt;br/&gt;strategies for sensor querying at low data rates (low
granularity). 2) &lt;br/&gt;Distributed Detection -- a bottom-up approach which
amounts to consensus &lt;br/&gt;building via local message passing on sub-
networks. 3) Distributed &lt;br/&gt;Estimation -- Strategies for scaling
information granularity from a set &lt;br/&gt;of known sensors to known
destinations under operational constraints is &lt;br/&gt;proposed. The novelty
of this approach is to develop tools for sensor &lt;br/&gt;fusion for
transmitting information about non-ergodic, non-random &lt;br/&gt;parameters
observed in stochastic noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;