* 0430566
* Collaborative Research:    SecureCore for Trustworthy Commodity Computing and Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Cynthia Irvine, Naval Postgraduate School
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel M. Weber
* 06/30/2008
* USD 568,450.00

The SecureCore project will investigate and design a secure integrated core
architecture for trustworthy operation of mobile computing devices consisting
of: a security-aware general-purpose processor, a small security kernel and a
small set of essential secure communications protocols. The research will use a
"clean slate" approach to define a minimal set of fundamental architectural
features required for such a secure core, for use in resource-constrained,
ubiquitous computing platforms exemplified by secure embedded systems (e.g.,
computer in a heart monitor), pocket devices (e.g., contact-less smart card),
and mobile computing devices (e.g., handheld web-enabled computer). This
approach shows what is possible when security is designed in at the beginning
rather than added as an after-thought. It also changes the design paradigm from
an emphasis on performance to one on trustworthy, dependable operation. The goal
is to achieve the desired security levels without compromising performance,
size, cost, energy consumption, or usability. Threat models will be re-examined
in the new context of continuously networked commodity devices and Internet-
scale epidemics such as DDoS, worms and viruses. The broader impact is to
provide the scientific basis for trustworthy computing, communications and
storage in pervasive computing environments. SecureCore impact will be immense
if its architecture influences the design of future trustworthy commodity
products, as well as the curriculum for computer hardware and software
engineering education.