* 0430565
* Trustworthy Data Sharing and Management for Collaborative Pervasive Computing Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Stephen Yau, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 320,000.00

Collaborative pervasive computing applications can greatly improve the
investigative capabilities and productivity of scientists and engineers in many
fields. Users of such applications usually form groups to collaboratively
perform their tasks, supported by their computing devices, including desktop
computers, pocket PCs, and/or smart phones, over Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANET),
LAN and Internet. Users of collaborative pervasive computing applications
usually need to share various types of data, including experimental data,
sensitive documents, multimedia data, etc. In data sharing and management, a
very important issue is trustworthiness. To support trustworthy data sharing and
management among groups of users for collaborative pervasive computing
applications, secure group communication, trustworthy shared data discovery,
flexible access control mechanisms, effective data replication, data quality
assurance mechanisms, and intrusion detection mechanisms are needed. So far,
little research has been done in trustworthy shared data discovery and flexible
access control mechanisms for collaborative pervasive computing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, an innovative approach is
proposed to trustworthy shared data service management to provide users of
collaborative pervasive computing applications with the capabilities of sharing,
discovering and accessing shared data with high confidence. Our approach will be
based on Web Services architecture, emerging OWL technology and our
Reconfigurable Context-Sensitive Middleware (RCSM) and Secure Group
Communication Service (SGCS). In our proposed approach, shared data services are
used to provide access interfaces to shared data. Our proposed trustworthy
shared data service management will include trustworthy shared data service
specification and generation, shared data service discovery, and secure access
to shared data services. The proposed research will generate a new trustworthy
shared data service management technique, including an OWL-based trustworthy
shared data service specification language, an automated service generation
technique, a trustworthy shared data service discovery protocol and a
lightweight situation-aware access control framework. The expected results will
be implemented as a set of middleware components and services to support the
development of trustworthy data sharing and management capability in
collaborative pervasive computing applications. We will develop a demonstration
application to demonstrate and evaluate our expected results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed research includes
(a) using automatically generated web services as the unified interface for
accessing shared data to overcome organizational barriers, (b) integrating
access control policies with OWL-based data description and access interface
specification to enhance semantic interoperability and enable intelligent
service discovery, (c) incorporating situation-awareness in access control to
enforce flexible high-grained access control policies based on the situation and
different local access control models in various security domains, and (d)
developing a lightweight, secure and fault-tolerant service discovery
protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will have the following
broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;(1) The results of the proposed research can greatly
improve the user confidence in collaborative pervasive computing applications
and increase the effectiveness of collaborative research or development among
scientists, engineers and/or businessmen in pervasive computing environments.
&lt;br/&gt;(2) Since the proposed research is based on the widely accepted Web
Services architecture and the Resource Description Framework (RDF) standards of
the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), the results of the proposed research can be
extended to general applications using Internet, Grid and Semantic Web, with
increased trustworthiness.&lt;br/&gt;(3) The results of the proposed research
will be included as a part of the senior/graduate level course on information
assurance and a new graduate-level course on data and application security at
Arizona State University. The new material in these courses should attract high-
quality students to participate in research on cyber trust.&lt;br/&gt;