* 0430191
* Signaling by Ethylene Receptors of Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2007
* George Schaller, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/2007
* USD 311,881.00

&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr. G. Eric Schaller of the University of
New Hampshire to study signaling by ethylene receptors in the plant Arabidopsis.
The gas ethylene is a plant hormone that induces a variety of responses
including ripening and senescence. Plants perceive ethylene through use of
specific proteins known as ethylene receptors. These receptors are capable of
directly binding ethylene and then signaling the cell to undertake the
stimulation of genes that mediate the ripening and senescence responses. This
project will elucidate the mechanism of signaling that occurs as a consequence
of ethylene detection. Hormone signaling requires the interaction of receptors
with additional proteins. Therefore, this project will use established and novel
biochemical approaches to identify proteins that interact with the ethylene
receptors. In addition, this project will use genetic approaches to determine
how the ethylene receptors signal to these proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
regulation of ethylene signaling in plants has broad commercial application. For
example, ethylene is widely used to induce ripening of fruit such as tomato. The
interruption of ethylene signaling has been shown to extend the shelf-life of
transgenic tomatoes and the vase life of transgenic flowers. Results from the
proposed research will benefit society by providing a mechanistic framework for
engineering modifications into the early steps of ethylene signaling.
Modifications of ethylene sensitivity will enhance our ability to regulate such
processes as abscission and fruit-ripening in crops of agronomic
importance.&lt;br/&gt;