* 0430826
* Collaborative Research:   SEI (EAR):   Adaptive Fusion of Stochastic Information for Imaging Fractured Vadose Zones
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Manish Parashar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 278,146.00

A stochastic information fusion methodology is developed to assimilate
electrical resistivity tomography, high-frequency ground penetrating radar, mid-
range-frequency radar, pneumatic/gas tracer tomography, and hydraulic/tracer
tomography to image fractures, characterize hydrogeophysical properties, and
monitor natural processes in the vadose zone. The information technology
research will develop: (1) mechanisms and algorithms for fusion of large data
volumes; (2) parallel adaptive computational engines supporting parallel
adaptive algorithms and multi-physics/multi-model computations; (3) adaptive
runtime mechanisms for proactive and reactive runtime adaptation and
optimization of geophysical and hydrological models of the subsurface; and (4)
technologies and infrastructure for remote (pervasive) and collaborative access
to computational capabilities for monitoring subsurface processes through
interactive visualization tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of the
stochastic fusion approach and information technology can lead to a new level of
capability for both hydrologists and geophysicists enabling them to "see" into
the earth at greater depths and resolutions than is possible today. Furthermore,
the new computing strategies will make high resolution and large-scale
hydrological and geophysical modeling feasible for the private sector,
scientists, and engineers who are unable to access supercomputers, i.e., it is
an effective paradigm for technology transfer. &lt;br/&gt;