* 0430735
* Implementation-friendly Geometric Algorithms for Provable Surface and Volume Meshing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Tamal Dey, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2008
* USD 180,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Numerous applications in science and engineering require
meshing a surface or a volume into a triangulation. The problem arises at the
micro-level in molecular modeling and at the macro-level in automotive designs,
in the scientific study of natural phenomena and in the engineering of man-made
machine tools and appliances. As varied the applications are, so are the types
of their inputs. Almost no provable algorithm exists for many of these input
domains. As a result, many of the commercial products catering to the huge needs
for quality meshing rely on heuristics which often produce poor meshes.

This research will fill the gap between the need for quality meshing of a
variety of input domains and the algorithm and software that can achieve it with
guaranteed correctness. To this end, this research will consider inputs as
varied as implicit, parametric, point-sampled, polyhedral, piecewise smooth
surfaces as well as volumes enclosed by them. Each of these inputs poses
difficulties that are unique to its kind. The project will focus on the design
and analysis of the provable meshing algorithms and software systems based on
them for these input domains.

Broader Impact: The developed tools in this project will enable meshing
complicated geometry with guarantees and enhance further analysis using them.
This will impact a variety of areas in science and engineering including
physics, biology, environmental science, computer aided designs, manufacturing,
health care, entertainment and so on.

The development will influence the research in the areas of computational
geometry, computational topology, geometric modeling, computer graphics and
visualization. Course notes, seminars and software systems developed through the
project will enable educators and students to attack meshing problems in a
formal setting with guaranteed correctness.

