* 0430622
* Privacy-Protecting Mechanisms for Data Escrow and Transaction Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Stanislaw Jarecki, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* James French
* 08/31/2008
* USD 320,000.00

Collection and monitoring of personal and business data will help government
agencies detect crime, fraud, terrorism, natural disasters, and other
emergencies. On the other hand, government collection and monitoring of massive
mounts of data would create tremendous threats to people's privacy and an
unnecessary potential for abuse. While low-tech collection of information by
government agencies has been an accepted practice, the increased connectivity
and transaction speed enabled by the Internet make centralized oversight of
various transactional activities both more desirable and potentially more
dangerous. For example, banks and individuals were for a long time required to
report transactions involving more than $10,000 in cash. After 9/11, the Patriot
Act asked each bank to report more patterns of suspicious activities, including
for example series of smaller cash transactions or international transfers
adding up to $10,000. However, since Internet banking makes it easier to conduct
transactions via multiple financial institutions, what the crime fighters would
really like is an ability to collect data from all financial institutions, and
moreover, an ability to mine this data at will. Of course, this would be a
nightmare to citizens' privacy. Indeed, the availability of all this data at the
hands of a government agency is in fact bound to create new threats to the
security of the banking system, possibly more serious than the threats the
centralized monitoring attempted to solve. And yet, from the standpoint of
cryptography, the conflict between the needs for data monitoring and the need
for data privacy is not irreconcilable!&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research
objective is to create mechanisms that limit the privacy threats posed by the
data collection and monitoring applications, while still enabling their
efficient operation. We believe that new cryptographic techniques can help
resolve the conflicts between the benefits and threats posed by various data
collection and monitoring scenarios. Fundamentally, we have no hope of resolving
this conflict if the task of monitoring some activity for suspicious patters
requires an unconstrained access to all the generated data. However, if the
monitoring agency can be restricted in its access to the data, for example it
can access only the data that satisfies some pre-defined suspicious patterns,
then we can hope to enforce, using cryptographic mechanisms, (1) the correctness
of the accessed data, and (2) the secrecy and anonymity of the data that does
not meet the searched-for patterns. In other words, if conditions under which
the agency should learn the data can be spelled out, then we can design data
escrow protocols that allow the agency to do its monitoring work with no more
intrusion on citizens' privacy then is absolutely
necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the financial monitoring example, the
research question is to find an efficient encryption-like escrow scheme with the
property that all escrowed transactions remain anonymous and undecipherable by
default, except of, for example, transactions which form a pattern of
international money transfers originating from the same person and adding up to
$10,000.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach addresses a general problem of
minimizing the threats posed by centralized collection and monitoring of
sensitive private data. This is a novel but natural scenario for cryptography.
It is also open-ended: Since different monitoring applications have different
types of searched-for data patterns, this task will require a variety of
approaches which are likely to produce privacy and/or correctness-enforcing
mechanisms useful in other cryptographic applications. Our preliminary
investigations identified the link between quite simple privacy-protected data
escrow applications and deterministic encryptions, unlinkable signatures on
ciphertexts, and fair two-party computation of probabilistic
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a new area of
research on cryptographic tools and applications. While it's clear that
centralized monitoring of various distributed activities might bring societal
benefits, our research will help determine under what conditions and in what
settings such monitoring can be done in a secure and maximally private manner.
This research has a strong potential to impact the technical and political
feasibility of data escrow and monitoring, strong PKI infrastructures (e.g.
electronic IDs), and fault-tolerant cryptographic services.&lt;br/&gt;