* 0430848
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:     SEI + II (AST):    Bypass-Yield Caching for Large-Scale Scientific Database Workloads in the World-Wide Telescope
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Aniruddha Thakar, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 09/30/2008
* USD 631,863.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The World-Wide Telescope (WWT) is a
virtual observatory that federates astronomy and astrophysics databases at a
global scale, with the ultimate goal of unifying all on-line data and making it
available to everyone from everywhere. It dramatically improves the ability to
perform multi-spectral and temporal studies by allowing researchers to access
many databases with a single query. In its current form, increasing the number
of sites and users in the WWT leads inevitably to a network crisis. As data-
intensive scientific applications increase in scale, bandwidth constrains the
performance of all applications sharing a network. As more scientists and
educators adopt and rely on the WWT, the increased bandwidth requirements will
degrade the performance of all &lt;br/&gt;applications. Federations need to
focus on being good "network citizens," using shared resources conscientiously.
If not, the workloads generated by these applications will make them unwelcome
on public networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To avert the network crisis, this
project will develop and release an open-source, commodity caching appliance
based on two crucial technologies: bypass-yield caching and self-organizing
database storage. Bypass-yield caching is an altruistic caching framework for
scientific database workloads that balances parallelism in federations against
the benefits of caching. It adopts &lt;br/&gt;"network citizenship" as its
principal goal -- caching in order to minimize network traffic. Database caching
introduces an acute storage management problem for which traditional
administration is inappropriate. The dynamic creation and destruction of tables
in a cache requires automated, incremental storage management with low space
overhead. Self-organizing database storage&lt;br/&gt;automates storage
management and database organization, turning the cache into an administration-
free appliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Caching appliances are an enabling
technology, making it possible for the WWT &lt;br/&gt;to accept a large number
of users without impeding the performance of shared &lt;br/&gt;networks. Open-
source software and commodity hardware make the acquisition of the appliance
inexpensive and the self-organization of the cache makes it maintenance-free.
The caching appliance will enhance astrophysical and astronomy research, making
it possible for scientists to conduct experiments and find correlations across
heterogeneous data sets at previously unforeseen &lt;br/&gt;rates. The WWT and
the caching gateways will also bring telescope research and education to
communities of users for which it was previously unavailable, particularly
undergraduates and high school students. Project plans include outreach in the
form of a pilot program that will install and maintain WWT gateways at high
schools, colleges, and science museums and libraries, and &lt;br/&gt;assist
those institutions in curriculum development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;