* 0430915
* Collaborative Proposal:     II+SEI Mediation Technology for Biological Pipeline Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2005,07/31/2009
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2009
* USD 781,615.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While biological databases are well-curated and
richly interconnected, data integration remains a manual, time-intensive, and
error-prone process. The proposal develops a computational infrastructure that
exploits biologists' domain expertise to express and execute data integration
protocols for biological pipelines. Several challenges to be addressed include:
(1) an exploration interface that can express high-level complex queries that in
turn are translated into lower-level data manipulation operators, (2) the
specification and population of an alternative splice protein analysis pipeline,
and (3) a mediation testbed that is implemented using XML based wrapper
technology and mediator technology (IBM DB2 II).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
metrics of links and paths existing between integrated databases may be used to
characterize query results in ways that are useful to biologists and data
administrators and this proposal develops models to predict these metrics.
Navigational queries require traversing multiple paths that differ in cost and
benefit (result cardinality). Cost models and domain and task specific semantics
are used to choose the best path or set of paths for a biological pipeline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses many of the SEIII challenges of
large scale data sharing. The project addresses the exploration of databases by
biologists; captures and exploits domain specific knowledge; develops efficient
methodology to compute results and designs and populates a publicly accessible
pipeline and website. The broader impact beyond the specific biological
resources and protein pipeline is the development of a methodology and
evaluation platform that can be applied to any task that requires access to, and
analysis of, multiple inter-connected heterogeneous
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;