* 0430205
* The Nelder-Mead Simplex Method: Theory, Performance, Context, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Margaret Wright, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 07/31/2006
* USD 126,000.00

The Nelder-Mead ``simplex'' method, first published in 1965, is one of the
world's most popular techniques for unconstrained minimization of nonlinear
functions without using derivatives; Nelder-Mead lies at the heart of hundreds,
probably thousands, of scientific and engineering applications that involve
optimization.

The virtues of the Nelder-Mead method include simplicity of description and
implementation, and excellent ``best case'' behavior, especially in achieving
rapid improvement with a relatively small number of function values. Its flaws
include stagnation or failure, typically slow and painful. And, despite almost
40 years of widespread use, its fundamental nature remains unclear and even
mysterious. The proposed research aims to improve understanding of the Nelder-
Mead method in both theory and practice.

No theoretical convergence results for the original Nelder-Mead method were
obtained until 1998, and its known theory today is limited (to dimensions one
and two) as well as relatively, perhaps unavoidably, weak. It is almost
embarrassing that the mathematical and convergence properties of this nearly
ubiquitous, seemingly simple method are not fully settled. In attempting to
produce the needed theory, the proposed research will apply tools like discrete
dynamical systems and characterization of geometric properties, which are
nonstandard in analysis of unconstrained optimization.

Since non-derivative optimization methods have been developed in the last 15
years that possess essentially complete theories, one might wonder why it is
worthwhile to study the Nelder-Mead method. The reason is that, despite its lack
of known theoretical underpinnings, Nelder-Mead very often produces a good
enough answer more rapidly than its competitors. But Nelder-Mead does not
consistently work well---its performance is sometimes excellent, sometimes
terrible---and the reasons for this variation have not been examined in detail.
A second part of the proposed research is to explore what happens (and why) to
the method on a large, carefully selected set of test problems. A hope is that
``Nelder-Mead-like'' methods will emerge that retain the flavor and desirable
properties of the original but overcome its worst flaws.

Given the popularity of the Nelder-Mead method, the result of the research
should be improved non-derivative optimization methods that are capable of
reliably solving a variety of scientific and engineering problems.

The principal investigator was one of the first to prove theoretical results
about the original Nelder-Mead method and to focus attention on the Nelder-Mead
method, which was scorned or ignored for many years by the mainstream
optimization community. While at Bell Labs, she gained practical experience by
implementing the Nelder-Mead method in a successful product (the ``WISE'' tool
for wireless system design).

Because the Nelder-Mead method is easy to visualize and explain, it is an
obvious candidate for Web-based dissemination of animations and explanatory
material that can be used in graduate and undergraduate education, as well as by
practitioners, in science, engineering, and medicine.