* 0430907
* Enhancing the Multimedia Experience in Emerging Networks: Rate-Distortion Optimization in Multimedia Networking
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Yucel Altunbasak, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 08/31/2007
* USD 180,001.00

As multimedia processing and networking technologies, products
and&lt;br/&gt;services evolve, the number of people communicating
interactively&lt;br/&gt;is growing rapidly. Consequently, multimedia
communication&lt;br/&gt;services are starting to consume a considerable share of
the&lt;br/&gt;backbone traffic. This highlights the problem of
transmitting&lt;br/&gt;real-time media efficiently. Effective multimedia
communication&lt;br/&gt;demands appropriate media-aware and application-
specific&lt;br/&gt;solutions, without which the full benefits of such services
will&lt;br/&gt;not be realized. Poor approaches often lead to such
system&lt;br/&gt;performance degradations as unacceptable presentation
quality&lt;br/&gt;perceived by the clients, possible network collapse due to
the&lt;br/&gt;high-bandwidth nature of multimedia applications, and
poor&lt;br/&gt;performance observed by other network flows due to
the&lt;br/&gt;unresponsiveness of such applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given
the fact that existing protocol suites are unable to provide&lt;br/&gt;the
desired features, the study of media-aware transport protocols&lt;br/&gt;is
overdue. The focus of this research is on the design and&lt;br/&gt;evaluation of
end-to-end solutions for reliable multimedia&lt;br/&gt;services. Nonetheless, it
is a challenging task to develop a&lt;br/&gt;generic solution that can satisfy
the needs of the broad range of&lt;br/&gt;multimedia applications available
today. Such an approach would&lt;br/&gt;result either in an unnecessarily
complicated protocol that is far&lt;br/&gt;beyond real implementation or in a
very high-level one that cannot&lt;br/&gt;exploit the specific features of the
media. The investigators' aim&lt;br/&gt;is to develop a suite of Multimedia
Transport Protocols (MMTP)&lt;br/&gt;that integrate media properties,
application requirements, and&lt;br/&gt;network characteristics in such a way
that the presentation&lt;br/&gt;quality is optimal in the rate-distortion sense.