* 0430531
* Collaborative Research: New Automata Theories for Analyzing Infinite-state and Membrane Computing Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Zhe Dang, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 54,252.00

Providing fundamental theories and techniques for analyzing/verifying infinite-
state systems is of great interest in many areas of computer science, such as
embedded/hybrid systems, security protocol analysis, software verification, and
even emerging areas like membrane and DNA computing. The traditional model-
checking techniques are limited to finite-state systems, though most real-world
systems (such as software designs) are inherently infinite-state. This research
will investigate the use of automata-theoretic and related techniques (such as
nonlinear Diophantine equations) in analyzing many forms of restricted infinite-
state systems.

Specifically, the project will address the following issues: The first is to
build a new automata theory for analyzing systems with dense counters and other
unbounded discrete structures. The second issue is to develop a new verification
technique based on nonlinear Diophantine equation theory. The third issue is to
establish a new automata theory for nonuniversal membrane computing systems and
study automata-theoretic approaches to DNA computing. The fourth issue is to use
structural information on a transition system to improve the efficiency of
verification algorithms and use complexity theory to obtain tight lower bounds
for some of the algorithms. This project will significantly advance the state of
the art of model-checking theories as well as automata theories. In the long
term, this research will eventually provide practitioners with new verification
techniques that will help engineers build current and future computing systems
that are faster, better, and verifiable.