* 0430650
* Techniques in Approximation Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Samir Khuller, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2009
* USD 212,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study the approximability measures and the
design of heuristics for NP-hard optimiza-&lt;br/&gt;tion problems. This
endeavor will result in the development of techniques that enable a deeper
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of the principles that underlie the design of
approximation algorithms for NP-hard problems. An approxima-&lt;br/&gt;tion
algorithm is a polynomial time algorithm that produces solutions provably
\close" to optimal.&lt;br/&gt;Many of the problems we study are graph theoretic.
Graphs are powerful tools that can be employed to&lt;br/&gt;model objects, as
well as the relationships between them. Indeed, many distinct optimization
problems can be&lt;br/&gt;cast in graph theoretic terms. Specifically, graph
theory provides an excellent way to model problems related&lt;br/&gt;to areas
such as transportation, network design/routing, facility location, and cluster
analysis. This powerful&lt;br/&gt;framework allows us to both develop and
illustrate the power of different algorithmic tools. In addition
to&lt;br/&gt;graph problems, we also study some fundamental scheduling, data
management and broadcasting problems.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: An increased
understanding of techniques to develop and apply approximation
algo-&lt;br/&gt;rithms will have a significant impact on both research and
practice. As we are well aware, NP complete&lt;br/&gt;problems are abundant in
many scientific and engineering disciplines, any technique that effectively
copes&lt;br/&gt;with this diffculty will have a significant impact on the design
of heuristics.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader scientific goals are to
both further the field of algorithms in terms of our&lt;br/&gt;understanding of
what problems can be solved efficiently and what problems cannot. In addition,
we explore&lt;br/&gt;applications of these algorithms in other areas such as
networking, GRID computing, parallel computing etc.&lt;br/&gt;The project will
train two full time PhD students in conducting research both in Universities and
through&lt;br/&gt;internships during the summer at National Labs and Industrial
Research Centers.