* 0430073
* Collaborative Research:    DefCOM:   Distributed Defense Against DDoS Attacks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Peter Reiher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 179,999.00

Collaborative Research: DefCOM - Distributed Defense against DDoS Jelena
Mirkovic, University of Delaware Peter Reiher, UCLA

Award 0430228

Abstract

This project investigates a distributed cooperative solution to the problem of
distributed denial-of-service attacks. The proposed defense system, DefCOM,
combines the advantages of victim-end defenses (accurate attack detection) and
source-end defenses (efficient response and precise separation of the legitimate
traffic from the attack traffic). It also enlists the help of backbone routers
to control attack traffic in partial deployment scenarios where many potential
sources do not deploy a source-end defense.

DefCOM nodes will be deployed in source, victim and core networks, and will
cooperate via an overlay to detect and stop attacks. Overlay communication will
ensure effective operation even if DefCOM nodes are sparsely and non-
contiguously deployed. DefCOM's response to attacks is twofold: defense nodes
reduce the attack traffic, freeing the victim's resources; and they also
cooperate to detect legitimate traffic within the suspicious stream and ensure
its correct delivery to the victim. Because networks deploying defense nodes
directly benefit from their operation, DefCOM has a workable economic model to
spur its deployment. DefCOM further offers a framework for existing security
systems to join the overlay and cooperate in the defense. These features create
excellent motivation for wide deployment, and the possibility of a large impact
on the DDoS threat.

