* 0430724
* The Woods Hole Center for Oceans and Human Health
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2011
* John Stegeman, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/2011
* USD 3,897,820.00

ABSTRACT OCE-0430724&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-NIEHS Research Center of
Excellence in Oceans and Human Health at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from this award, researchers at
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) will establish an NSF-NIEHS
Center for Oceans and Human Health (COHH) in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. This
will be a multi-institutional Center, with a mission to be a focal point for
research and communication on issues at the intersection of oceanographic,
biological and environmental health sciences, to improve the public health. The
Center will involve investigators and facilities of the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, the Marine Biological Laboratory, and the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology. The Woods Hole COHH will address fundamental issues of the
distribution of biological agents with potential human health consequences, in
the theme area of the temperate coastal ocean, including bays, harbors and
estuaries. Within this geographic theme, research projects in the Center will
focus on harmful algal blooms and on human pathogens and infectious agents, in
both cases with focused and complementary physical oceanographic studies and
biological studies of causative agents &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will
comprise an Administrative Core and four Research Projects. The Research
Projects will be coupled with an advanced Genomics Facility Core, establishing a
combination of unusual strength, and supplemented by a Pilot Project program.
The proposed Cores and Projects are: an Administrative Core; Project 1.
Alexandrium Population Biology in the Gulf of Maine; Project 2. Hydrodynamic
forcing of Alexandrium population biology; Project 3. Human Pathogens and
Coastal Ocean Processes.; Project 4. Microecology; and Evolution of Two Marine
Pathogens; Genomics Facility Core; and a Pilot Projects
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The establishment of a COHH at
WHOI is expected to have a number of broader impacts. It will compliment an
already strong set of inter-institutional research and educational alliances
between WHOI and other organizations involved in marine science. The Center will
also focus special attention on an aspect of ocean sciences that has been
present at the institution for several decades but with the added dimension of
being directed toward interaction with a broader segment of the biomedical
community. This center is also expected to play a significant role in the
support and training of graduate students and postdoctoral associates for
careers related to the oceans and human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;