* 0430077
* CPA:  Closing the Gap in VLSI Physical Design
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Jason Cong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2010
* USD 300,000.00

PROPOSAL NO: 0430077&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: University of California-Los
Angeles&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Cong, Jason&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: CPA:
Closing the Gap in VLSI Physical
Design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Moore's famous
observation that the number of transistors per integrated circuit doubles every
two years has held true for the last four decades. The impact of this explosive
increase has already transformed practically all areas of society, making
possible all the recent revolutions in information technology: personal
computing, telecommunications, bioinformatics, digital imaging, electronic
commerce, etc. As the final economic and physical barriers to continued
increases in silicon-based circuit densities begin to take shape, automated
design tools play an ever more important role in determining system performance.
Recent studies showed that existing circuit-placement tools are surprisingly far
from optimal (70-150% excess wirelength) on simplified circuit benchmarks
adapted from real industrial test cases. If this quality gap can be closed, the
resulting benefit will be equivalent to advancing several generations in
fabrication process technology, the cost of which, when feasible, is normally
measured in billions of US dollars. The goal of this research is to develop new,
scalable algorithms for VLSI physical design to enable multiple Moore's-Law
generations of performance improvement through 3-D design optimization in the
presence of complex timing and temperature constraints. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
The focus in this project will be primarily on circuit placement, as it is the
step that most constrains the layout of the interconnect wiring which dominates
system performance. The core placement problem is to arrange all circuit
elements within a given rectangle such that no two of them overlap and such that
a standard estimate of total wirelength is minimized. A broader and deeper
analysis of existing algorithms' deviation from optimality and how that
deviation changes as design sizes increase will be used to develop a highly
efficient and optimized placement engine for the core placement model problem.
Scalability of the engine will derive from a multiscale framework, in which
objectives and constraints are simultaneously represented and manipulated across
a hierarchy of resolution scales. This engine will then be and augmented to
handle various complex constraints in both the 2-D and 3-D settings, e.g.,
signal propagation times, maximum wiring density, maximum temperature, and
circuit elements of widely varying sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of advancing the equivalent of an entire technology generation at almost
negligible cost would be considerable. A large jump in raw computing power
ultimately translates into new qualitative understanding, as previously
intractable problems gradually become solvable. Of potentially even greater
impact, moreover, are the possible advances in basic science to be obtained by
incorporating detailed physical modeling into a scalable program for
optimization over millions of interconnected elements. Ultimately, the vast size
and complexity of nanoscale design problems can realistically be approached only
by scalable algorithms yet to be developed. The successful formulation of a
truly scalable methodology for physically realistic VLSI designs can be expected
to have lasting and far-reaching impact on future design paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;