* 0430682
* Approximation Algorithms for Scheduling, Packing, and Related Logistics Problems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* David Shmoys, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Most logistics problems, ranging from the design of large-scale networks, the
management of inventory, the coordination of the supply-chain for a
manufacturing enterprise, to the scheduling of production in a chemical
processing facility, are NP-hard, and hence, unlikely to have algorithms that
are guaranteed to find optimal solutions quickly. Nonetheless, these problems
must be tackled in an automated way, and so one tries to design algorithms that
produces good solutions, if not optimal ones. In many cases, this is done in an
ad hoc way, and one has little assurance that the solutions found are really
close to the best one can do. The goal of the theory of algorithms is to study
simplified models, so as to extract certain algorithmic paradigms that can then
be applied to more realistic settings. By studying theoretical models, one has
the aim that the insight needed to prove strong theorems about the quality of
the solutions found, translates into algorithmic principles that lead to
algorithms that work well on the problems that industry needs to solve. The
intellectual merit of this proposal is based on outlining a number of specific
logistics problems, focusing primarily on problems from scheduling inventory
management and network design, and giving details of specific algorithmic
approaches that should lead to improved approximation algorithms: algorithms for
which one can prove that the solutions found are guaranteed to deviate from the
optimal by a small amount. Specifically, we consider the joint replenishment
problem, the one-warehouse, multi-retailer distribution problem, the capacitated
facility location problem, the bin-packing problem, the asymmetric traveling
salesman problem, and the no-wait flow-shop scheduling problem. Finding good
approaches to gain new efficiencies in logistical planning is an issue that is
important for the overall US economy, and this is one of the significant broader
impacts of this proposal. Furthermore, it is important that the US workforce has
sufficient expertise to meet the technological challenges of the coming century.
This proposal seeks funds that will aid in the training of doctoral students, in
this very important area for the economic competitiveness of the US, who will
become the next generation of faculty teaching our college population. Finally,
current undergraduate courses need to reflect the current understanding of the
basic principles of algorithms in optimizing logistics, so that our graduates,
tomorrow's workforce, are prepared to meet the challenges ahead.



