* 0430742
* Collaborative Research: SEI(BIO)--Automated Methods for Generating High-Resolution GIS Databases from Remotely Sensed Data for Biodiversity Predictions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Howard Schultz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,107,086.00

Abstract NSF-0430742

Consequences of global change for land cover, carbon cycles, and biodiversity
loss involve complex interactions at fine scales, such as resource availability
in forest understories, to regional land-cover, climate, and CO2. Global change
research requires models developed through careful study of local phenomena that
can be extended to landscape, regional, and global scales. Unfortunately,
environmental scientists have been limited in their ability to determine how
factors that operate at different scales impact landscapes. The primary long-
term goal of the research is to enhance the ability of biology and geoscience
research programs to acquire, analyze, and distribute high-resolution GIS
databases of important environmental attributes. In support of this goal the
computer science team will develop new techniques to extract forest attributes
in the form of GIS databases from remotely sensed data. The computer science
team will build an aerial remote sensing platform and a suite of analysis tools
for creating GIS databases of environmental attributes with sub-meter geo-
registration and elevation accuracies. The image acquisition, analysis and GIS
tools developed by UMass and MHC provide the critical broad-scale, yet high-
resolution, data needed to parameterize and validate models used to study global
change. The products of these analyses will be integrated within a modeling
framework at Duke University that includes extensive field data, application of
new statistical computation methods, and development of a stand simulator. The
combined effort will be used to determine how diversity is maintained in forest
stands based on a comprehensive accounting of environmental impacts and
uncertainties.