* 0430963
* The Seventh International Congress of Neuroethology to be held August 8-13, 2004 in Nyborg, Denmark.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Sarah Bottjer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

The International Congress of Neuroethology (ICN) serves as the scientific
meeting of the International Society for Neuroethology (ISN), and has been held
every three years since 1986. The focus of these meetings is to bring together
diverse neuroscientists who are investigating the neural basis of naturally-
occurring behaviors across a broad spectrum of taxa (both vertebrate and
invertebrate). This meeting provides an outstanding venue to bring international
scientists together who have a broad range of perspectives, but a common focus
on basic-science questions with important implications for neural function and
disease. The major focus of the meeting regards basic questions pertaining to
relationships between neural mechanisms and complex processes of behavior.
Themes of the meeting include sensory and motor systems, integrative processing
in the brain, neural development, learning and memory, basic processes of neural
communication at the cellular level, and neural-systems approaches to
understanding behavior. A major goal is to promote consideration of how the
promise of modern techniques of molecular biology can influence the study of
behavior, and to define ways in which neuroethology can enhance genetic and
molecular biological studies of behavior. Likewise, rapid developments in neural
imaging and cognitive neuropsychology, and in behavioral neuroscience in
general, make for timely opportunities to promote cross-fertilization between
different disciplines. The program for the meeting represents different levels
of analysis (from biophysics to behavior), as well as different techniques and
approaches (neurophysiology, molecular biology, imaging). Thus, benefits to
American scientists in general, and to young investigators in particular, will
be an opportunity for exposure to cutting-edge research and techniques from
around the world.