* 0430844
* Development of a Bili-Microchip-Analyzer: Shipboard Determination of Phycobiliproteins in Ocean Water Samples
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2003,09/30/2005
* James Landers, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 09/30/2005
* USD 168,258.00

This ocean science technology development project will provide oceanographers
with a shipboard instrument capable of separating and quantifying
phycobiliproteins in seawater. No routine method currently exists for separating
phycobiliproteins, despite the fact that they are diagnostic pigments for
important phytoplankton groups. By combining expertise from various fields, the
investigators plan to use capillary electrophoresis (CE) with laser-induced
fluorescence (LIF) detection to facilitate the determination of
phycobiliproteins. By transposing conventional CE-LIF methods to a task-
specific, monolithic microchip platform, and by incorporating acousto-optical
deflection (AOD) for self-alignment of the laser in the detection scheme, the
project will address difficulties that would otherwise be encountered by a
shipboard phycobiliprotein measurement system. The specific goals of the project
include (1) optimization of conditions necessary for the separation and
enumeration of individual phycobiliproteins in a mixture, along with optimal
extraction procedures for these pigments from picophytoplankton; (2) design and
construction of a micro-chip CE-LIF system with AOD-based laser beam scanning
for self-aligning detection; and (3) employment of the micro-chip system
developed on cruises to determine phycobiliproteins in natural water samples in
"real time," and to compare these results with those of subsequent laboratory-
based analyses to determine the effects of seawater sample storage and
transport. Fulfillment of these goals will provide the oceanographic community
with a robust, multidisciplinary tool capable of determining distributions and
concentrations of various phytoplankton derived pigments like phycobiliproteins,
which will facilitate studies of global primary production and carbon biomass.