* 0430683
* Computational Upper and Lower Bounds via Parameterized Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Jianer Chen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2008
* USD 156,000.00

Many well-known NP-hard problems can be solved by straightforward enumeration
algorithms of running time O(nk). For example, the clique problem (determine if
a given graph of n vertices has a clique of k vertices) can be solved in time
O(nk) by simply enumerating all subsets of k vertices in the graph. Based on the
widely accepted assumptions in parameterized complexity theory, this proposed
research will develop powerful new lower bound techniques to prove that the
above enumeration algorithms are essentially the best possible solutions for a
large group of well-known NP-hard problems. For example, it will be proved that
the clique problem requires time n(k) even if one restricts the parameter values
k to be of the order of any fixed function (n) &lt; n/ log n. The lower bound
techniques will also provide new methods for the study of the trade-off between
approximation ratio and running time of approximation algorithms, and for
deriving computational lower bounds on polynomial time approximation schemes for
certain NP-hard problems, in particular for some problems arising in
computational biology. New design and analysis techniques for the development of
improved algorithms will also be investigated for well-known parameterized
problems with important applications in the real-world of computing.&lt;br/&gt;
The intellectual merit of the proposed activity. Computational lower bounds have
been one of the most difficult topics in the study in theoretical computer
science. The proposed research will tackle this difficult problem by introducing
a new methodology based on parameterized complexity theory, by which
computational lower bounds on well-known NP-hard problems can be effectively
derived. The research will also study new design and analysis techniques for the
development of improved algorithms for important parameterized problems in
practical applications. Our research agenda is motivated by, and will build on,
the success we have already achieved recently in our current study on
parameterized computation and complexity. The proposed research will
significantly advance the understanding on the concepts of computational
tractability and computational intractability, from both theoretical and
practical points of view.&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts resulting from the
proposed activity. Progress made in this proposed research will have significant
impact in education, science, and computational technology. First of all, the
proposed research will be expected to strongly interact on other research fields
in science and engineering, leading to collaborations of interdisciplinary
research in Texas A&amp;M University. The project will establish an excellent
environment to broaden students' knowledge and research experience, benefit the
undergraduate and graduate students from all areas involved in the research, and
encourage underrepresented minorities and women to participate in advanced
research. The results produced by the proposed research will enhance the
undergraduate and graduate curriculum in computer science education.