* 0430991
*  Studies in Computational Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Vinodchandran Variyam, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 07/31/2008
* USD 200,000.00

Studies in Computational Complexity Theory: Project
Summary&lt;br/&gt;Computational complexity theory focuses on understanding
capabilities of resource bounded computations.&lt;br/&gt;Computations are
broadly classi.ed as uniform computations (Turing machine based)&lt;br/&gt;and
non-uniform computations (circuit based). Typical resources studied are time
steps and memory&lt;br/&gt;space for uniform computations, and circuit size and
depth for non-uniform computations. By&lt;br/&gt;limiting various resource
requirements of computations to certain robust bounds we get
complexity&lt;br/&gt;classes, which are the fundamental objects of study in
complexity theory. Research in complexity&lt;br/&gt;theory broadly centers
around two themes (1) proving relations, in the form of inclusions and
separations,&lt;br/&gt;among various complexity classes (2) quantifying the
di.culty/easiness of solving real-life&lt;br/&gt;computational problems using a
computer. These two themes are interconnected by the notions&lt;br/&gt;of
completeness and reductions. The overall goal of this proposal is to advance
computational&lt;br/&gt;complexity theory along these two themes. The overall
goal will be accomplished through three&lt;br/&gt;related
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Investigate interrelations among uniformity,
nonuniformity, and derandomization.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate a number
of issues in uniform vs non-uniform computations and&lt;br/&gt;their relation to
derandomization. Speci.cally, the PI will investigate uniform
derandomization&lt;br/&gt;of Arthur-Merlin games, some related non-uniformity
questions including uniform upper&lt;br/&gt;bounds for languages with high
circuit complexity, and certain cover-based approach to
resource&lt;br/&gt;bounded measure with applications to lower complexity classes
and derandomization.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Investigate computational problems
with intermediate complexity. The PI will&lt;br/&gt;continue his investigation
of problems that are intermediate between P and NP-complete such&lt;br/&gt;as
Graph Isomorphism problem and some computational group-theoretic problems. A
number&lt;br/&gt;of questions related to lowness properties of these problems
will be investigated. E.cient&lt;br/&gt;program checkers for a host of
computational group-theoretic problems will be designed.&lt;br/&gt;Objective 3:
Explore the interconnections between complexity theory and
computational&lt;br/&gt;learning theory. The PI will explore interconnections
between complexity theory and learning&lt;br/&gt;theory. In particular, the PI
will investigate learning problems such as learning DNFs and&lt;br/&gt;Boolean
Circuits in the Teaching Assistant model, and the applications of learning
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;to complexity theory.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
proposed research activity will have several broader impacts.
Complexity&lt;br/&gt;theory indirectly impacts many areas of computer science.
Thus proposed research has potential to&lt;br/&gt;scienti.cally impact these
areas. Research results from this grant will be published in peer-
reviewed&lt;br/&gt;journals and will be presented in international conferences,
thus enabling broad dissemination of the&lt;br/&gt;the results to enhance
scienti.c understanding. New courses will be created and taught along
the&lt;br/&gt;theme of this project, thus integrating teaching and research. The
grant will also be used for various&lt;br/&gt;human resource development
activities such as supporting and mentoring graduate students,
and&lt;br/&gt;inviting visitors.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Progress made in
complexity theory is essential for furthering the knowledge&lt;br/&gt;of what
can and cannot be solved by a computer using reasonable amount of resources. The
results&lt;br/&gt;from this proposal will extend our knowledge of complexity
theory in several directions. Research&lt;br/&gt;in derandomization and non-
uniformity will solve some signi.cant open problems in the area
and&lt;br/&gt;will contribute to better understand the role of randomness in
computation. Part of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;research directly relates to
important real-life problems such as Graph Isomorphism problem and&lt;br/&gt;DNF
learning problem and has potential to become practically applicable. The
research on program&lt;br/&gt;checkers is expected to have some practical
applications.