* 0430743
* SEI+II(BIO):     BioTagger - Biological Entity Tagging Using Online Resources and Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Cathy Wu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2006
* USD 823,109.00

As the pace of biological research increases, computers are being used to manage
the explosive amount of biological information. Much of information relevant to
biological research is recorded either as coded data in biological databases or
as free text in journal articles and in annotation fields of biological
databases. Natural language processing tools have shown to have the potential to
decrease the difficulty of managing information in biomedical free
text.&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use online resources (e.g., genetic
databases, free-text corpora or machine readable dictionaries) and machine
learning techniques for the construction of a biological entity tagging system
that associates terms mentioned in text with entries in databases. Biological
entity tagging is extremely challenging because of novelty, synonymy and
ambiguity associated with terms representing biological entities in text. The
project includes the construction of a biological entity dictionary and the
acquisition of disambiguation knowledge using online resources. It also includes
the development of dictionary lookup method and the employment of machine
learning techniques for resolving ambiguity, discovering novelty, and
recognizing synonymy. The research will generate several deliverables and the
enriched information on gene/protein names, bibliography, and other annotation
fields will be integrated into UniProt/PIR databases, which is an ongoing
international effort on protein databases.&lt;br/&gt;The project provides an
opportunity of furthering the collaborations among Columbia University,
Georgetown University Medical Center and University of Maryland at Baltimore
County. The project also integrates educational and research activities by
having graduate and undergraduate students involved in the overall
project.&lt;br/&gt;