* 0430061
* Design Automation of Compute-Intensive Networked Embedded Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2008
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 11/30/2008
* USD 250,000.00

Networked embedded systems such as wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have the
potential for revolutionizing data collection and analysis in physical sciences
and other fields by allowing intelligent dense monitoring of the environment.
State-of-the-art research in WSNs treats the problem of designing sensor network
applications primarily as one of manual customization of low-level network
protocols. The design complexity and required expertise make this approach
insufficient for increasingly complex, compute-intensive distributed sensor
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a clear need for a new top-down
methodology that automates a bulk of the low-level implementation aspects of
design and allows the end user to focus on high level algorithm design and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt; * Development
of models and methodologies for design automation of compute-intensive sensor
networks, with a focus on two WSN applications: (i) networked structural health
monitoring (SHM) where a large-scale network of thousands of sensor and actuator
devices embedded into a building or bridge is deployed to continuously monitor
the structure, trigger alarms that identify the onset of damage, precisely
pinpoint the location of damage and also provide a long-term history of ambient
stresses imposed on the building, (ii) networked micro-climate monitoring (MCM)
where a network of multi-modal sensors is deployed to provide information about
climatic variables such as temperature, light, humidity, etc., in the
operational environment (e.g. a wildlife reserve). &lt;br/&gt;*Application
representation: A suitable model of computation (MoC), will be defined to
capture the structure of computation and communication in the algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;*Virtual architectures: The virtual architecture (abstract machine
model) for the target sensor networks will include a network model, a set of
computation and communication primitives, cost functions, and middleware
services. &lt;br/&gt;*Algorithms for design automation: Algorithms will be
developed and middleware services used for in-network processing, such that the
desired performance is achieved..&lt;br/&gt;*Demonstration: The design
automation methodology will be validated and demonstrated for the two target
applications through simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;*The target applications are of great benefit to society: SHM
networks will improve the safety of our civil infrastructure including roads,
bridges and buildings; while the MCM networks will advance our scientific
knowledge of the complex ecological interactions between organisms&lt;br/&gt;
and their environment. &lt;br/&gt;*More broadly, the proposed methodology will
facilitate the rapid design and synthesis for a&lt;br/&gt; wide range of
compute-intensive sensor network applications. &lt;br/&gt;*The results of the
proposed work will be disseminated&lt;br/&gt; on a timely basis to the research
community and to industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;*This project will build on
their existing collaboration which includes co-advising of PhD&lt;br/&gt;
students, and joint publications.&lt;br/&gt;*The proposed research will also
provide educational material for an advanced graduate&lt;br/&gt; course on
sensor networks at USC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;