* 0431271
* U.S.-India Cooperative Research:  Creep Anisotropy in Titanium -Textural and Microstructural Origin
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2008
* K. Linga Murty, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2008
* USD 40,170.00

0431271 K.L. Murty

Description: This award supports the U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Creep
Anisotropy in Titanium - Textural and Microstructural Origin. Professors K.L.
Murty, North Carolina State University (NCSU) and Indradev Samajdar, Indian
Institute of Technology Bombay (IITB), Mumbai, India will study the anisotropic
deformation behavior of titanium and its alloys. Both the chemistry and the
thermo mechanical processing can affect these behaviors and selected grades of
titanium alloys will be subjected to biaxial creep testing at NCSU. Micro
textural studies at the IITB along with micro structural aspects will be related
to the macroscopic behaviors of these materials. Working together will enable
the researchers to make much better progress in the field of anisotropic
deformation behavior of hexagonal close-packed metals and creep anisotropy in
titanium alloys. By having access to each other's facilities, they expect to
progress rapidly in fundamental understanding and development of textured
Titanium alloys and resolve some of the recent observations about creep
anisotropy in application's systems.

Scope: These investigations are of direct relevance for predicting the
dimensional changes in-service of structures made of these lightweight materials
that find application in varied technologies used in aerospace, chemistry,
energy and defense. The expertise and facilities at NCSU and IITB complement
each other. US PI Murty has worked extensively in Zirconium and Titanium alloys
for more than two decades and has conducted academic research on
crystallographic textures, anisotropic deformation and creep. Indian counterpart
Samajdar is highly experienced in texture analysis/prediction and microscopy.
This research lends itself to incorporation in courses offered at undergraduate
and graduate levels at both institutions. Postdocs and research assistants will
participate in the research at their respective home and counterpart
institutions.

