* 0431293
* Fourth International Symposium on Turbulence and Shear Flow Phenomena to be held in Williamsburg, VA on June 27-29, 2005
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Karl Drews, National Institute of Aerospace Associates
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 10,439.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0431293 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: KARL DREWS INSTITUTION:
NATIONAL INST. OF AEROSPACE ASSOCIATES

FOURTH INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON TURBULENCE AND SHEAR FLOW PHENOMENA

Partial funding is provided for the Fourth International Symposium on Turbulence
and Shear Flow Phenomena (TSFP) to be held in Williamsburg VA on June 27-29,
2005. NSF support will defray the cost of the conference and pay partial travel
expenses for graduate students and young researchers. The workshop is co-funded
by NASA Langley Research Center, Office of Naval Research and Air Force Office
of Scientific Research, as well as through exhibitors and publishers fees. The
intellectual merit of the symposium involves primarily the exchange of technical
information in the important field of turbulent fluid flow. The Turbulence and
Shear Flow Phenomena symposia bring together specialists from fields of
turbulence and shear flow phenomena that are of important current topical
interest. The topics emphasized include modeling, measurement and simulation of
complex turbulent and transitional flows, environmental and geophysical
turbulent flows, multiphase and reacting flows, and biological and biomedical
flows. The size and scope of the symposium is ideally suited for technical
exchanges among participants. The broader impacts of the proposal are as
follows. The Turbulence and Shear Flow Phenomena Symposia in the past have
encouraged and have been fortunate to be able to support young investigators in
participating in the symposia. TSFP4 will continue that policy and will use the
support form the NSF to partially fund that effort. The location of the TSFP4
symposium in the mid-Atlantic region of the United States provides the
opportunity to impact a large number of such young investigators. The consortium
of schools associated with the National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) further
enhances ability to reach a broad potential list of contributors, which includes
North Carolina A & T State University. In addition to the proceedings provided
to each participant at the time of the symposium, it is customary to select
papers presented at the symposium for possible publication in a special issue of
an archival journal.

