* 0431844
* Curriculum Reform Plan for Civil and Environmental Engineering at WPI
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Frederick Hart, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2006
* USD 95,205.00

This planning grant is developing a sustainable curriculum reform plan for the
civil engineering department at WPI that could also be implemented by other
civil engineering programs in the United States. Objectives are to develop a
curriculum reform plan that will: (1) Adopt sound pedagogical principles, (2)
Introduce emerging technologies related to civil engineering practice and
research, (3) Enhance the learning environment through new multimode teaching
approaches, and (4) Use a strategy that is sustainable and will foster future
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of six civil engineering faculty members
with six external advisors plus staff from WPI.s Center for Educational
Development, Technology and Assessment (CEDTA) will kick off this initiative at
a two-day retreat to exchange information and ideas, and to develop a
preliminary outline of the department's curriculum reform plan. The second phase
of this project will take the concepts developed from the three-month study and
retreat, and show how a well-established and comprehensive civil engineering
department such as found at WPI may proceed to successful curriculum reform
implementation. Each faculty member with an external advisor (researcher or
practitioner) will develop new or modified pilot courses and service learning
projects. Monthly meetings will bring all members of the team together to
collaborate on how their activities are proceeding (what works and what doesn't
work), to discuss how these activities are meeting the goal and objectives, and
to maintain a close collaboration needed to establish an integrated curriculum.
Discussions with the entire civil engineering department through regularly
scheduled faculty meetings, as well as lunch seminars and informal discussions
will occur throughout this project to receive their feedback suggestions. An
assessment strategy to measure how the resulting reformed curriculum compares
with the existing curriculum and the suitability of implementing these reform
measures by other programs will also be developed through collaboration with the
CEDTA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of this curriculum reform plan
will be to identify necessary components needed to develop a sustainable method
for assessing, revising and continuously improving a curriculum that brings
together expertise from academia and practice. The resulting curriculum reform
plan will demonstrate the systems prospective of the field of civil engineering
and the compatibility of visions from academia, research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the resulting curriculum
reform plan include a model for: (1) Other schools to follow, (2) Department
level reform that will remain sustainable as teaching approaches and
technologies evolve, and (3) Continuously introducing new technologies to the
CEE curriculum as they emerge.&lt;br/&gt;