* 0431167
* Numerical and Combinatorial Algorithms for Location Problems arising in Wireless Sensor Networks and Other Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Guoliang Xue, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lenore M. Mullin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 212,000.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop better algorithms for
solving various location&lt;br/&gt;problems. Sample applications of these
problems include sensor localization{where we compute the&lt;br/&gt;location of
every sensor node in a wireless sensor network, relay node placement{where we
compute&lt;br/&gt;the locations for the placement of the minimum number of more
powerful but more expensive&lt;br/&gt;relay nodes into a sensor network, and
amplier placement{where we compute the locations for the&lt;br/&gt;placement of
the minimum number of optical ampliers in a wide area optical
network.&lt;br/&gt;Location in the Euclidean plane is a problem that is well
studied by researchers in location&lt;br/&gt;science and has applications in
transportation and logistics. Sensor networks is a booming new
re-&lt;br/&gt;search field due to its applications in homeland security,
medical, and many other areas. Knowledge&lt;br/&gt;of sensor locations can
greatly improve various routing algorithms. However, due to the
energy&lt;br/&gt;constraint in sensor networks, GPS can not be used. Also due to
the ad hoc nature and the energy&lt;br/&gt;constraint, localization and other
algorithms in wireless sensor networks have to be localized
or&lt;br/&gt;distributed. Therefore it is diffcult to apply traditional location
techniques to sensor networks&lt;br/&gt;directly.&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of
the proposed research is to take advantage of the PI's expertise in
location&lt;br/&gt;theory and numerical optimization to design better sensor
localization algorithms that are suitable&lt;br/&gt;for wireless sensor
networks. Another goal of the proposed research is to design better
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for relay node placement using techniques from both
numerical and combinatorial optimization.&lt;br/&gt;Our approach to the sensor
localization problem is numerical in nature, including
investigations&lt;br/&gt;of numerical stability in distributed sensor
localization. Our approach to the relay node placement&lt;br/&gt;is
combinatorial in nature. Due to the non-convex nature of the program, numerical
optimization&lt;br/&gt;is used only for subproblems or for relaxations. It is
worth noting that the same problem finds&lt;br/&gt;applications in both relay
node placement in a at sensor network, and in amplifier placement in
a&lt;br/&gt;wide area optical network. We would like to point out that our
research focus is on effective algo-&lt;br/&gt;rithms for solving some basic
problems with wide ranges of applications, rather than on
hardware&lt;br/&gt;related issues of specific applications.&lt;br/&gt;The
Intellectual Merits of this research include: (a) numerical algorithms for
sensor local-&lt;br/&gt;ization that are more accurate, efficient, and scalable;
(b) stability analysis of distributed sensor&lt;br/&gt;localization and a
methodology for error propagation control that may be used in other
distributed&lt;br/&gt;algorithm such as time synchronization in wireless sensor
networks; (c) better algorithms (both&lt;br/&gt;numerical and combinatorial) for
relay node placement and related problems.&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of this
research include the following: (a) Homeland security{&lt;br/&gt;advanced
localization algorithms can help improve the technology our military. (b)
Human&lt;br/&gt;resources{highly skilled graduate students will be trained. (c)
Dissemination of research re-&lt;br/&gt;sults through high-quality
publications{the PI is actively publishing in high quality
journals&lt;br/&gt;and conferences.