* 0431953
* Balancing the ECE Curriculum with the Kolb Learning Cycle
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Michael Ciletti, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

The Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) Department at the University of
Colorado at Colorado Springs (UCCS) is planning to accelerate the pace and
broaden the scope of its curriculum innovation, and ground these efforts in
modern learning theory. The department has begun a migration to a more balanced
curriculum in the ECE Department as a result of a continuing cycle of
assessment, feedback, and course updating. They are exploring possibilities of
(1) developing a unified curricular theme, and (2) introducing significant
components of hands-on instruction to reinforce this unified theme. They are
focusing efforts on the systems core, but are also developing a progression of
hands-on laboratory experiences integrated with theory from the areas of
information technology and microelectronics (including MEMS). An overall goal is
to provide a more relevant foundation for senior-level technical electives and
capstone design course. They plan to weave the themes of robotics, signal
processing, and wireless communications throughout their curriculum by means of
a coherent set of courses. They have the following objectives in their new core
curriculum design. (1) Expose students to engineering computational methods
sooner and increase their use throughout the undergraduate curriculum; (2) Weave
design practices throughout the new core course sequence so that they will flow
naturally into the senior year where the curricular content consists of
technical electives and the capstone design course; (3) Place more emphasis on
developing the students' communication and interpersonal skills; (4) Encourage
more critical thinking throughout the new core course sequence and into the
senior-level technical electives and the capstone design course; 5) More tightly
couple lectures with laboratory experiences throughout the curriculum. An
assessment procedure specially intended for the proposed core curriculum
development will be designed in cooperation with the University's Teaching and
Learning Center so that we can determine if the core curriculum is accomplishing
its objectives and implement adjustments for better achieving them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Realizing the redesigned curricula
will require significant research and considerable self-examination. They intend
to explore the workforce and educational needs of local and national industry,
understand the strengths and weaknesses of students entering our programs, and
determine how to combine these in motivational, functional, and personal ways.
They plan to explore the literature to evaluate best practices implemented at
other institutions, and will creatively adapt these methods to fit their own
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: They will develop a curriculum
that strongly emphasizes innovative practices and explore and develop delivery
methods to engage students with diverse learning styles. They will incorporate
student-conducted research in the undergraduate education process, from the
freshman through senior levels. The will develop specific program objectives to
support students of under-represented groups, and connect them to resources
available on campus. The investigators will participate in multi- and
interdisciplinary conferences and workshops, and publish their findings in the
open literature. Society as a whole will benefit from a careful redesign of
their curriculum taking into account contemporary technologies, as new
engineering graduates are stimulated to move forward and impact the future of
science and technology, improving all aspects of life in the U.S. for the
decades to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;