* 0431140
* Techniques and Tools for Parallel Solution of Irregular Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2008
* Srinivas Aluru, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lenore M. Mullin
* 10/31/2008
* USD 262,000.00

Designing practically efficient parallel algorithms with rigorously
&lt;br/&gt;analyzed run time guarantees seems to be difficult for a large class
&lt;br/&gt;of problems, commonly known as irregularly structured problems. The
&lt;br/&gt;solutions for such problems typically depend on run time workload
&lt;br/&gt;monitoring and dynamic load balancing, and the run time is often
&lt;br/&gt;critically dependent on the particular instance of the problem being
&lt;br/&gt;solved with no easy way to guarantee optimal, worst-case run times.
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to design theoretically rigorous
&lt;br/&gt;and practically efficient parallel algorithms for selected irregular
&lt;br/&gt;applications and to develop software to demonstrate their
effectiveness. &lt;br/&gt;Research will also be conducted in developing
distributed tree data &lt;br/&gt;structures and software libraries to support
these and other irregular &lt;br/&gt;applications. Three important classes of
applications will be studied:&lt;br/&gt;grid and particle based methods in
scientific computing, sequence &lt;br/&gt;alignment problems in computational
biology, and computing aggregates &lt;br/&gt;on multidimensional data cubes in
data mining. The work in scientific &lt;br/&gt;computing will be focused on
providing spatial data structure support &lt;br/&gt;for problems such as
molecular dynamics, adaptive mesh refinement &lt;br/&gt;and multigrid methods.
Several computationally intensive irregular &lt;br/&gt;problems in sequence
homology detection will be studied including&lt;br/&gt;spliced sequence
alignments for gene discovery, multiple sequence &lt;br/&gt;alignments to
discover protein motifs and full genome comparisons for &lt;br/&gt;comparative
genomics. The third application area is computation of&lt;br/&gt;aggregates on
multidimensional data. Using techniques from computational&lt;br/&gt;geometry,
efficient parallel algorithms for computing aggregates and &lt;br/&gt;answering
queries on sparse, multidimensional data sets will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;The
goal is to discover common underlying themes to provide a unifying
&lt;br/&gt;way to address seemingly disparate problem areas. For example,
spatial &lt;br/&gt;distribution of the data or the geometrical structure of the
problem &lt;br/&gt;domain is the source of irregularity for most of the problems
considered. &lt;br/&gt;Similarly, tree data structures are often the backbone of
parallel &lt;br/&gt;algorithms for many irregularly structured
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research
include fundamental&lt;br/&gt;contributions to solving irregularly structured
problems, a major &lt;br/&gt;theme of research in parallel processing. Student
participation in&lt;br/&gt;research is pursued using multiple strategies -
graduate students &lt;br/&gt;through direct funding under the project,
undergraduate students &lt;br/&gt;via senior design projects, female students
through Iowa State's Women&lt;br/&gt;in Science and Engineering program, and
minority students through&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with a minority serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;