* 0431561
* Junior to Undergraduate Mentoring Project
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Cadance Lowell, Central State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2010
* USD 496,765.00

Proposal 0431561&lt;br/&gt;Junior to Undergraduate Mentoring
Program&lt;br/&gt;Central State University&lt;br/&gt;Cadance A.
Lowell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project (Junior to Undergraduate Mentoring
Program, or JUMP) is working with high school students in their junior and
senior years with B and C averages from the Dayton Public Schools who have
expressed an interest in careers in STEM fields. It helps these students, who
are already motivated, successfully matriculate to postsecondary education at
CSU and major in the natural sciences, computer science, manufacturing
engineering, water resources management, or mathematics. Each year, twenty
students are recruited into the program by the spring of their junior year and
receive academic training and mentoring for the remainder of their high school
studies. These students participate in a four-week summer academic program that
develops test-taking, applied mathematics, and science
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The project promotes
increased participation and retention of African-Americans and women in STEM
fields by recruiting high school students who have an interest in STEM fields
but not intense course work in science and mathematics. These students go
through summer instruction and academic year research mentoring. Students who
matriculate to CSU are tracked and mentored through existing retention
strategies in STEM fields. Through the summer instruction and academic year
mentoring on science fair projects, JUMP students learn to develop and test
scientific hypotheses, employ appropriate experimental and laboratory
techniques, analyze results with appropriate statistical tools, and communicate
the results in written and oral form. They are given instruction to improve
their standardized test scores (ACT) and math skills so that they may
matriculate to CSU STEM majors with enhanced preparation and at a higher level
than that typical of the majority of CSU students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. Because of the program's additional training and retention intervention
strategies, these students are expected to graduate and continue on to
successful careers in STEM fields and become mentors and role models to the next
generation of undergraduate students. In addition, these undergraduates will
influence their peers to become interested in STEM careers.