* 0431828
* A Peer-to-Peer Mentoring Approach for Sensor Technology Education for Civil Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Peter Chang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 01/31/2007
* USD 99,996.00

In this project, a modular courseware to introduce sensors technology to civil
engineering students is being developed. The course is based on self-paced
modules that students learn and then pass on what they have learned to the other
students. The direct benefit of the proposed course is to broaden the breadth of
the civil engineering curriculum to include the emerging area of sensing and
monitoring that touches every specialization within the major. The modular self-
paced format of the course allows students to acquire as much as they desire in
a just-in-time fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of the course will
be directly linked to the other courses that are being offered&lt;br/&gt;in the
department as well as research projects that are being performed by the faculty
of the&lt;br/&gt;department. The linkage between the material in this course to
the materials from other courses&lt;br/&gt;serves to reinforce how new
technology fits into the traditional material. Using research
projects&lt;br/&gt;as subjects for the modules of the proposed course has the
additional benefit of introducing&lt;br/&gt;cutting-edge research ideas to
undergraduate as well as graduate students. The course also serves&lt;br/&gt;as
a way to train beginning graduate students to become research assistants for
many research&lt;br/&gt;projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
proposed course uses a different pedagogical approach to deliver
the&lt;br/&gt;material to the students. Instead of the lecture-examination mode,
students in this class learn from&lt;br/&gt;a hands-on experimentation approach.
In addition, students who have recently learnt the material&lt;br/&gt;can
reinforce their learning by passing on their knowledge to the new students.
Learning efficiency is another benefit of the proposed approach as students
learn only what is&lt;br/&gt;needed when they need it. This just-in-time
learning approach is more efficient in learning&lt;br/&gt;because students
typically are not ready to learn when they go to classes. By combining
their&lt;br/&gt;readiness with the hand-holding from their peers who have
recently finished the material, students can learn the material in a much
shorter amount of time while retaining more of the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The hands-on nature of the
learning modules and the self-paced learning style&lt;br/&gt;that they are
intended for opens the material to students with varied learning styles. This
is&lt;br/&gt;especially important for the material being delivered in this
course as the content is traditionally&lt;br/&gt;considered to be in the domain
of electrical engineering, but the students are in civil
and&lt;br/&gt;environmental engineering. The proposed format will appeal to a
wider audience&lt;br/&gt;with different backgrounds. This course will help
reform the Civil and Environmental Engineering department at the University of
Maryland. The same modules can easily be adopted by other similar departments at
other universities. It can also serve as a model for other departments of the
engineering college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;