* 0431227
* SGER:  A New Direction for Applied Scheduling and Sequencing Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Leyuan Shi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a unified framework to solve
large-scale, practical scheduling and sequencing problems. The framework is
inspired by PI's recent breakthrough in the solution of a sequencing problem.
The framework to be developed will leverage the power of this new solution
procedure in solving any general problem through a clever Dantzig-Wolfe
decomposition scheme and column generation technique. The general scheduling
problems under consideration involve jobs or operations to be performed on
different manufacturing equipment (for example, flow shop and job shop). The
scheduling objectives encompass a wide range of commonly used criteria such as
makespan, total weighted completion time, total weighted tardiness, and total
weighted earliness-tardiness. A series of computational experiments with four
specific problems will be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful
completion of this project will be sufficient to demonstrate the power of the
proposed framework and stimulate broader interest among researchers and
practitioners for follow-up research along this direction. It is expected that
the research will contribute to the state of the art in scheduling and
sequencing theory. More importantly, it will provide new algorithms for tackling
large-scale, real-life problems. These research results will generate tools to
improve daily scheduling decisions in manufacturing firms with complex
scheduling issues.&lt;br/&gt;