* 0431940
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Changing Technologies and Transformations in the Value of Metalwork During the Bronze Age in Samara, Russia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Michael Dietler, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 11,770.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Michael Dietler, David Peterson will develop a
social history of prehistoric metalwork through intensive analysis of materials
gathered during his archaeological fieldwork in Samara, a Russian administrative
district in the western Eurasian steppes. Metalworking was first practiced in
this region by 5000/4500 BC. Local researchers have concluded that during the
Bronze Age (circa 3500-1000 BC), along with pastoralism, metallurgy provided a
principal way of making a living by producing a commodity that could be
exchanged for food and other goods. The Samara River Valley links the region to
extensive ore deposits in the Ural Mountains, while the Volga River connects it
to sources of arsenical copper in the Caucasus, by way of the Caspian Sea and
its western shoreline, which was utilized in the western Eurasian steppes by the
Middle Bronze Age. These factors have made Samara an ideal setting for an
investigation of early metal technology and the role of metalwork in ancient
Eurasian societies.&lt;br/&gt;Peterson conducted a field survey and test
excavations near traces of ancient copper mining in northeastern Samara, which
recorded the first evidence for the Bronze Age settlement of the area. He will
gain training in metallography, wavelength dispersive spectrometry (WDS) and
energy dispersive spectrometry (WDS) at the Department of Materials, Oxford
University, in the analysis of samples from over 100 pieces of metalwork and
production debris from Samara, together with comparative samples of Early Bronze
Age metalwork from the northeastern Caucasus. His analysis will examine the
combinations of techniques and materials that metalworkers used in creating
characteristics such as color, form, hardness, and durability from which the
value of their products was arguably derived, and how metal technology changed
over the course of the Bronze Age. This will be joined with an examination of
the social uses of metalwork in representations of identity, and ceremonial
expressions of value, in the burials in which these artifacts were found. The
project will thereby demonstrate an innovative archaeological approach to the
value of prehistoric material culture, which is often considered to be simply a
function of scarcity and distance from raw materials, or an elusive quality that
is inaccessible to archaeology. Faunal analysis and AMS radiocarbon dating of
materials Peterson collected in his fieldwork will create the basis for
examining the relationship between metallurgical and pastoral economies, and
will more precisely determine the period in which these activities took
place.&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral dissertation that is developed from this research
will incorporate relevant material culture and social theory in an approach to
ancient material culture and technology, which will be of broad interest to
researchers in archaeology, anthropology, and other areas of the social
sciences. It will enhance current knowledge of the prehistory of the Eurasian
steppes, a pivotal area of interactions in the ancient world which is still
poorly understood in the US. The dissemination of these findings to researchers
in the US, Russia and Dagestan will increase the level of understanding and
cooperation between scholars in these countries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;