* 0431230
* U.S.-Mexico Dissertation Enhancement Research:  Indigenous Natural Resource Management  and Food Production in Southern Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Jay Martin, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/2006
* USD 20,492.00

Proposal # 0431230&lt;br/&gt;P.I. Martin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas
Program award will support dissertation research by Mr. Steward Diemont under
the supervision of Dr. Jay Martin of Ohio State University, in collaboration
with Dr. Samuel Levy-Tacher and scientists from El Colegio de la Frontera Sur
(ECOSUR), Mexico. The researchers aim to discover how land management methods
used by the Lacandon Maya of Chiapas, Mexico result in sustainable production of
food and raw materials as well as conservation of soil fertility without the use
of pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers. By identifying practices leading to
these and other beneficial processes, organic methods will be found that reduce
the fallow times and increase the production of tropical agricultural systems.
While past research has qualitatively explored Lacandon agroforestry systems,
the next phase of understanding these systems should focus on quantitative
examinations of their ecological processes and management techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of the research will characterize and
compare the plant community, soil ecology, and soil chemistry of the
successional stages of the system for non-traditional and traditional Lacandon
farmers. The second objective will link specific management practices and
ecological processes to physical characteristics that result in
&lt;br/&gt;sustainable agroforestry. To fulfill the objectives of this project,
sampling will be conducted in six previously identified agroforestry systems in
Lacanja, Chiapas, Mexico &lt;br/&gt;every three months between November 2004 and
May 2005.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;