* 0431205
* Distributed Space-Time Communication For Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Upamanyu Madhow, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

Wireless sensor networks have a large array of potential
applications,&lt;br/&gt;including environmental monitoring, home and factory
automation, and&lt;br/&gt;homeland security. This research addresses efficient
data collection&lt;br/&gt;from sensor networks, which is one of the fundamental
bottlenecks to&lt;br/&gt;large-scale deployment of low-cost sensor nodes. Two
key difficulties&lt;br/&gt;are scale (how to manage very large numbers of
relatively&lt;br/&gt;unsophisticated nodes) and energy (communication is energy-
intensive,&lt;br/&gt;but sensor nodes must operate for months or years on
battery, or by&lt;br/&gt;scavenging energy from the environment). This research
has two&lt;br/&gt;complementary research thrusts, both investigating novel
techniques&lt;br/&gt;for data collection from sensor networks, exploiting the
natural&lt;br/&gt;distribution of sensor nodes in space. The first, termed
virtual&lt;br/&gt;radar, enables deployment of extremely simple sensor nodes
which do&lt;br/&gt;not need networking or position location functionality, by
moving the&lt;br/&gt;complexity to a sophisticated data collection node. The
second&lt;br/&gt;approach requires more sophisticated nodes, and increases
energy&lt;br/&gt;efficiency and range by obtaining the functionality of multi-
antenna&lt;br/&gt;transmission by intelligent coordination between
neighboring&lt;br/&gt;(single-antenna) sensor nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
first thrust, termed virtual radar, sensor nodes with activity&lt;br/&gt;to
report electronically reflect a beacon transmitted by a&lt;br/&gt;"driveby" or
"flyby" collector node, thus&lt;br/&gt;creating a radar-like geometry. The
collector employs sophisticated&lt;br/&gt;synthetic aperture radar like signal
processing techniques to obtain&lt;br/&gt;an "image" of the activity in the
sensor field.&lt;br/&gt;Tracking of events moving across the sensor field, and
exploiting&lt;br/&gt;multiple antennas at the collector, are investigated. The
second&lt;br/&gt;thrust, termed distributed transmission, involves investigation
of&lt;br/&gt;beamforming, diversity and power gains obtained by
coordinating&lt;br/&gt;between neighboring nodes, as a function of the level
of&lt;br/&gt;synchronization achieved among the nodes. Methods of achieving
such&lt;br/&gt;synchronization are also considered.&lt;br/&gt;