* 0431818
* A Project- and Design-Oriented Innovative Electrical Engineering Program
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Jon Young, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,023,688.00

The establishment of this program, coincident with the creation of a new College
of Engineering at the University of North Texas, is resulting in the development
of a model curriculum representing a significant change in the manner Electrical
Engineering (EE) students are educated.

This innovative curriculum is engaging students in enhanced cognitive self-
realization in a learning-to-learn (L2L) process integrated with project-
oriented industrial experiences at the freshman level, with additional project-
oriented courses added each semester. Instructors recruited from nearby
industries are helping team-teach the project-oriented courses. Such industry-
university collaborations are helping students integrate theory, practice and
business sense, ensuring that the engineering curriculum continues to be
relevant, competitive, global and directed toward future technological
developments. While traditional programs in electrical engineering emphasize
modular structures and specialty disciplines, the approach of this project
combines insights from cognitive science and learning/teaching styles with an
appreciation of the practical challenges raised by focusing the attention of
students on project design issues in a class. Thus, the project is integrating
project-based learning and L2L throughout the curriculum.

The benefits of this approach include increased student participation in the
learning process (active learning and self-learning), enhanced communication
skills, adaptation of pedagogies to a wider set of learning styles, and
promotion of critical thinking and problem-solving techniques. Major features of
the approach include industry-university partnerships, the focus on active
learning, the emphasis on team-building, business and entrepreneurship
education, lifelong learning and the importance of relevant engineering
activities applied to real-world problems.