* 0431166
* Collaborative Research: II: Integrating Digital Libraries and Earth Science Data Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* James Frew, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2009
* USD 672,651.00

The OPen Network Data Access Protocol (OPeNDAP) is the leading network protocol
for content-based access to online Earth science datasets. The Alexandria
Digital Library (ADL) is the world's leading digital library for geospatial and
georeferenced information. The functionalities of OPeNDAP and ADL are almost
perfectly complementary and their combination will yield a unified set of
network interfaces for query-based discovery, evaluation, verification, and
retrieval of Earth science information across a distributed network of
independent information providers.

The project integrates ADL and OPeNDAP by: (1) implementing a federated
discovery system in ADL over an existing network of OPeNDAP servers; (2) adding
Thematic Realtime Environmental Distributed Data Services (THREDDS) cataloging
metadata (both in-line and third-party) to the OPeNDAP protocol; (3) developing
a generic user interface, analogous to a desktop "open file" dialog, for
ADL/OPeNDAP datasets; and (4) adding OPeNDAP functionality (content selection
and projection operations) to ADL queries, so that the same query can apply to
subsets of OPeNDAP datasets and to other library holdings (text, GIS layers,
etc.).

The project forms an integrative bridge between digital libraries with their
focus on query-based retrieval of heterogeneous content and Earth science data
systems with their focus on functional access to (relatively) homogeneous
content. The resulting coupling of query-based access to science data content
with content-specific access to library holdings will enable a broad community
of scientists and students to use the same query to compare the peer-reviewed
knowledge in a library against the latest research results direct from the
responsible researcher.