* 0431413
* Coupling between Physical Processes, Biological Dynamics and Air-Sea CO2 Fluxes in the Labrador Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Peter Strutton, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 07/31/2006
* USD 95,670.00

ABSTRACT

OCE-0431413

The Labrador Sea plays a critical role in ocean physics and biogeochemistry. It
is a region of deep water formation, and experiences an intense phytoplankton
bloom that peaks in the second half of June. This bloom makes the region a
significant sink of carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere. In contrast to
other sink regions of the global ocean that return to the surface on shorter
(decadal) time scales, atmospheric CO2 sequestered in waters of the Labrador Sea
are removed from contact with the atmosphere for millennia. Recently, the NSF
Physical Oceanography and Chemical Oceanography Programs funded researchers at
several institutions to study the dynamics of the physicochemical sequestration
of CO2 in the Labrador Sea - but not the biological aspects.

In this project, researchers at the Oregon State University will enhance the
ongoing Labrador Sea study by adding a study of CO2 drawdown during the spring
plankton bloom. The seasonally high primary productivity of the region is
partially responsible for its status as a CO2 sink, so it is essential to
quantify the biological carbon uptake. Doing so requires estimates of community
biomass, productivity and export. Furthermore, the physical and ecological
processes controlling the spring bloom - mixing, light, grazing - are of
interest in and of themselves. The sub-daily time series of pCO2 and DO, already
funded, is rich in biological information, but cannot be fully exploited without
the additional biological parameters contributed by this proposal. Thus this
project involves a synergy between a study of gas fluxes, which will benefit
from biological measurements, and a study of biological processes, which will
benefit from the detailed chemical flux measurements.

Broader impacts: This work addresses a problem of global societal concern,
namely the exchange of CO2 between the ocean and atmosphere and the potential of
the ocean to sequester CO2 at climatically significant time scales. During the
course of the project, undergraduate students will gain experience in the
analysis and interpretation of satellite data. The results of the program will
be incorporated into graduate teaching and disseminated at scientific meetings
and on the principal investigator's website.

