* 0431841
* Training Tomorrow's Technology Leaders Through Educational Transformation
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Jeanne Ferrante, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This grant is directed towards planning the new curriculum which will
produce more computer engineering graduates who are better prepared for the
rapidly changing and diverse world of industry. A key component of this new
curriculum will be the incorporation of service learning and multidisciplinary
teamwork. This is part of a larger effort at UC San Diego for incorporating
multidisciplinary teamwork and service learning, undergraduate research,
communication skills, and intervention to realize student potential into the
engineering curriculum at the Jacobs School of Engineering at UC San Diego. They
are building on UCSD-TIES a service learning activity, initiated with the
National EPICS program at Purdue University. The program offers undergraduates
an opportunity to be part of a multidisciplinary team that provides technical
expertise to non-profit community organizations. Students are being guided by
faculty, community organizations, graduate students and each other in their
quest to provide engineered products and services unavailable to organizations
in need. The program goals are to provide skills in teamwork, leadership,
technical prowess, organization, discipline, cooperation, communications, and
motivation to students through the application of engineering principles to
real-life problems and opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It will also produce
a model program which could be easily replicated for similar benefits at other
institutions. The proposed interventions would also improve performance and
success of their more diverse population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;