* 0431290
* AToL: Collaborative Research: Systematics of Cypriniformes, Earth's Most Diverse Clade of Freshwater Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Paula Mabee, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Rafael O. de Sa
* 08/31/2010
* USD 179,200.00

Intellectual Merit - This study will develop a phylogeny and classification for
the fishes of the Order Cypriniformes, the largest group of entirely freshwater
fishes in the world with 3,285 described, and as many as 2,600 undescribed
species. This group contains the minnows, suckers, loaches, river loaches and
algae eaters. Many of these fishes have economic and scientific importance.
Several large carp are an important protein source in Asia, and paradoxically,
are nuisance, invasive species in North America. The zebrafish is a model
organism for developmental biologists; the fathead minnow is used as an
indicator species in environmental work; and goldfish are widely studied by
physiologists. Many species are kept by aquarists, a hobby that has vast
educational and economic impacts. Our project is international in scope with 27
collaborators, including some of the most prominent cypriniform systematists
from across the globe. The group includes paleontologists, neontologists,
developmental biologists, and molecular systematists. We will develop
phylogenies using genomic data for a set of nuclear and mitochondrial genes,
including a subset of complete mitochondrial genomes as well as morphological
data from fossil and extant species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts - The
phylogeny, including the developmental information, will broaden the scope of
work based on the zebrafish and other model species, and will produce a stable
classification. We will describe new species, expanding our understanding of
biodiversity. Our study has significant broader impacts beyond pure research
with student education in systematics, evolution, biodiversity, development, and
morphology, international collaboration, and critical information on model
organisms like the zebrafish, fathead minnow, and goldfish. The prncipal and co-
principal investigators reresent a diverse group of scientists at many career
stages (2 of 10 are female; 2 of 10 are minorities; 2 of 10 have physical
disabilities; 5 of 10 are new investigators) and come from diverse institutions
(3 private universities and 4 public universities; 4 of the institutions are in
EPSCoR jurisdictions). A NOVA television program will be produced and public
meetings will be held. Information will be disseminated via a project web portal
(http://bio.slu.edu/mayden/cypriniformes/projects.html) as well as conventional
scientific publication. &lt;br/&gt;