* 0431119
* Collaborative Research:    SEI:    Information Modeling for Comparative Visualizations and Analyses -   Informatics for Comprehensive Two-Dimensional Gas Chromatography
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Stephen Reichenbach, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 389,228.00

This project is investigating and developing information modeling for
comparative visualizations and analyses of complex chemical separations produced
by comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography (GCxGC). GCxGC is a powerful
new technology that provides an order-of-magnitude increase in separation
capacity over traditional GC. A few advanced laboratories are pioneering GCxGC
for a variety of applications, such as environmental monitoring and health-care,
but researchers lack advanced information technologies for analyzing and
interpreting the large, complex data generated by
GCxGC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models being developed in this project abstract
essential analytical information for comparative visualization and analyses.
Analytical methods are being developed to extract model components from the
structural characteristics of both GCxGC intensity data and data from GCxGC with
mass spectrometry (GCxGC-MS). The models support calibration for varying
chemical concentrations and measurements of the quality of fit to the data.
Comparative visualizations of the GCxGC information models employ multiple
viewing strategies with colorization and animation to provide users with
multiple avenues for interactive analyses. Interactive analyses support
comparisons with view navigation and controls, queries and edits of model-based
information and metadata, and structured reporting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
model-based information technologies facilitate advanced chemical analyses in a
broad range of problems. The project is demonstrating their value for two
applications of GCxGC. One application analyzes changes of complex mixtures of
petroleum hydrocarbons in the environment following an oil spill. The other
application uses GCxGC to fingerprint fragrances for classification and
identification.&lt;br/&gt;