* 0431335
* SGER: Developing Tools for the Analysis of Reproductive Barriers
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Patricia Bedinger, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2007
* USD 199,662.00

Intellectual Merit The molecular nature of interspecific barriers between pollen
and pistils in higher plants is not currently understood. We plan to study
interspecific barriers in tomato, an important crop species with significant
genetic and molecular advantages. However, before we embark on the molecular
analysis of these barriers, there are several tools we need to have in hand. The
objective of this proposal is the development of these tools. First, we will
develop a system for the visualization of growing pollen tubes within pistils.
Second, we will develop a Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization or "FISH-cassette"
for the marking of chromosome arms and identifying linked genes important in
reproductive barriers. This cassette will contain a Ds-based engineered
transposable element that can be used for both mutagenesis and enhancer
trapping. Third, we will take an emerging technology ("secretome" analysis) and
test its applicability to the detection of proteins secreted from pollen and
pistils. These cellular and molecular systems will have a wide utility in plant
biology research beyond this project.

Broader Impacts The work will have a broader impact at several levels. First,
undergraduate students at Colorado State University will be involved with many
aspects of the work throughout the duration of the project. As noted above, the
work will impact the plant research community, since the tools to be developed
will have wide application. In addition, the work will permit the expansion of
genomic approaches to biodiversity studies with the comparison of domesticated
and wild species. Finally, research in plant reproduction represents an area of
significant economic importance to society at large, and efforts toward
understanding of reproduction at the genomic level have been limited to date.
The understanding reproductive barriers is directly relevant to horizontal gene
transfer; both in terms of transferring desirable traits from wild species into
domesticated ones, and in terms of limiting transfer of transgenes from crops
into wild species.

Project outcomes 1. Arabidopsis and tomato pollen promoter-GFP fusions will be
available to the scientific community after initial publications upon request
from the Bedinger lab. These constructs will be of use to numerous researchers
with interests in pollen tube growth and pollen-pistil interactions. 2. The
initial transgenic tomato lines with a mapped FISH cassette generated during the
funding period will be bulked up and the curation process initiated in
preparation for generating a complete series of transgenic lines in the future.
Once a complete set of transgenic lines (with a transgene cassette mapped to
each chromosome arm) has been generated, these will be announced on the
Solanaceae Genomics Network http://www.sgn.cornell.edu/ and will be made
available to the tomato research community. 3. Data from the secretome studies
will be deposited in Dr. Jocelyn Rose's developing secretome database, available
on his website http://labs.plantbio.cornell.edu/rose/ and sequences will
additionally be deposited into GenBank.