* 0431970
* A "Bottom-Up" Approach to Interdisciplinary Engineering Education in Nanotechnology
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Emily Allen, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2006
* USD 99,690.00

This project is addressing a contemporary need for modernizing engineering
curricula, by developing effective methods of designing and implementing
educational content for highly interdisciplinary subjects, nanotechnology in
particular. It is a planning effort for piloting a "bottom-up" approach to
interdisciplinary teaching and learning in this field. Nanotechnology requires
very broad knowledge of all basic sciences and many different engineering
disciplines, yet its deeper substance requires focused expertise in highly
specialized topics. Therefore, the essence of this strategy is to enable
subject-specific experts to develop subject-specific content using a bottom-up
approach.

The bottom-up approach will be balanced by a complementary "top-down" framework
that reaches across a broad organizational level to provide structure and
consistency. In the case of this planning effort, the organizational level is
the College of Engineering at San Jose State University. The deliverable
outcomes will be manifested as (1) enhanced content modules in three existing
courses from three different engineering departments, (2) a flexible online
library of short learning modules that share a common online delivery structure,
and (3) a college-wide presentation of the modules to incorporate faculty
feedback as well as promote sustained growth. This pilot work also provides
valuable planning knowledge for broader implementation of this bottom-up
approach, wherein the fundamental concepts could be extended to include Colleges
of Science and/or Applied Sciences & Arts, for example.

The intellectual merit is two-fold. A first merit is to create a means of
developing the richest and most appropriate technical content for engineering
students, by leveraging the specialized knowledge of subject experts. This
brings emerging and contemporary knowledge of nanotechnology into the student
learning environment. The other primary merit is to create a model for
multidisciplinary and interdepartmental collaboration at a level that is higher
than individual instructors leading individual classes. Structuring short
learning modules into online tools furthermore contributes consistency,
flexibility, and sustainability.

The broader impact of this effort would be to enable widespread adoption of this
model for bottom-up content development and peer-to-peer faculty learning. This
has potential impact not only for nanotechnology but for any interdisciplinary
academic subject. It is particularly well-suited for keeping pace with other
rapidly-evolving areas such as bioinformatics. Our bottom-up approach is also a
way of building content sophistication especially in university environments
that may have no comprehensive "nanotechnology experts" per se. Having faculty
work together to create and develop bottom-up pieces from their related
specialized fields, however, provides a peer-enriched mechanism for providing
and propagating modern knowledge.