* 0431059
* Complexity Aspects of  Knowledge Representation and Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Gyorgy Turan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2008
* USD 305,000.00

The proposed research touches on both theoretical computer science and artifcial
intelligence (AI).&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the techniques of theoretical
computer science will be applied to two significant&lt;br/&gt;problem areas in
AI: knowledge representation and machine learning. Certain forms of
knowledge&lt;br/&gt;representation are extremely important for AI applications.
Some, such as conjunctions of Horn&lt;br/&gt;clauses, have been studied from
AI's earliest days; others, such as decomposable negation normal&lt;br/&gt;form
(DNNF), are relatively new. This project will study the computational complexity
aspects of&lt;br/&gt;these and other forms of knowledge representation, and
formal learnability results for them.&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge representation is
interesting because the choice of representation determines the
ease&lt;br/&gt;or difficulty of various tasks that an intelligent agent must
perform, such as reasoning or planning.&lt;br/&gt;The representations of
interest for this research include various forms of propositional logic,
ranging&lt;br/&gt;from disjunctive normal form to DNNF, and various more
powerful logics, such as modal logics,&lt;br/&gt;some forms of predicate logic,
and probabilistic description logic. This proposal includes a
variety&lt;br/&gt;of problems and approaches, unified by recurring themes drawn
from combinatorics and logic.&lt;br/&gt;One main goal of the proposed work is to
advance the understanding of several aspects of im-&lt;br/&gt;portant knowledge
representation formalisms. This includes answering questions on
expressiveness&lt;br/&gt;for both basic formalisms such as disjunctive normal
forms and decision trees, and also for recent&lt;br/&gt;formalisms such as
DNNFs. It also includes determining the complexity of handling exceptions
in&lt;br/&gt;different formalisms, which is both a practical problem and is also
closely related to some questions&lt;br/&gt;on the efficient learnability of the
representations. The proposed work will include a
probabilistic&lt;br/&gt;analysis of the important reasoning technique of Horn
approximations, in order to identify situ-&lt;br/&gt;ations when the method can
be expected to work efficiently in spite of examples demonstrating&lt;br/&gt;its
worst-case behavior, and an analysis of the possibilities for compiling a
knowledge bases into a&lt;br/&gt;more efficient form having short resolution
proofs of its consequences.&lt;br/&gt;Another goal of the project is to obtain a
better integration of the learnability aspect of the&lt;br/&gt;different
knowledge representation formalisms into the emerging comparative theory of
knowledge&lt;br/&gt;representation. This line of research includes making new
progress on old, well established problems,&lt;br/&gt;such as learning Horn
sentences, the further study of recently introduced problems, such as
revising&lt;br/&gt;Horn sentences, and the exploration of representations that
have not been studied yet from the point&lt;br/&gt;of view of learnability, such
as modal logics. Work is also proposed on the exclusion dimension,
a&lt;br/&gt;promising recent notion, in both propositional and predicate
logic.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The proposal addresses several key issues
in knowledge representation&lt;br/&gt;and learning: expressiveness, efficient
manipulation, efficient reasoning, and efficient learning
and&lt;br/&gt;revision, in propositional, predicate, and modal logic. The
proposal builds on the previous re-&lt;br/&gt;search results of the proposers,
which includes the development of new approaches to logic learning&lt;br/&gt;and
theory revision, and their technical expertise in computational learning theory,
computational&lt;br/&gt;complexity theory, combinatorics and logic, leading up
to a comprehensive, in-depth study of core&lt;br/&gt;problem areas of artificial
intelligence, emphasizing the interactions between the different
aspects.&lt;br/&gt;The proposers have initial results in several of the
suggested research directions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The rapid increase in
both the amount of, and the inherent complexity&lt;br/&gt;of data greatly
increases the importance of expressive knowledge representation formalisms
that&lt;br/&gt;are suitable for efficient manipulation, reasoning, automated
acquisition and revision. Symbolic&lt;br/&gt;knowledge representation formalisms
based on propositional, predicate, modal and other logics&lt;br/&gt;form an
indispensable component in a large number of applications. Understanding the
complexity&lt;br/&gt;obstacles in these applications, and identifying possible
avenues for circumventing them, is a crucial&lt;br/&gt;component of further
development.