* 0431349
* SGER: Particles to Control Structure and Dynamics of Multiphase Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 04/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0431349&lt;br/&gt;S. Velankar, University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SGER: Particles to control structure
and dynamics of multiphase polymers &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concept: If particles
are added to a system of two immiscible liquids, they tend to locate at the
interface between the two liquids and decrease of the interfacial tension
between the immiscible liquids. These characteristics are reminiscent of
surfactants i.e. particles can behave like surfactants even though they are not
amphiphilic. The hypothesis of this proposal is that such interfacially active
particles can be employed to control the morphology of two-phase polymer blends.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivation: Immiscible polymers are commonly blended
together in the melt state to achieve materials with properties not feasible
with single homopolymers. Many of the desired properties require the blend to
have a specific microstructure e.g. a conductive blend may be realized by
blending a small amount of conductive homopolymer into an insulating one
provided the conductive homopolymer is the continuous phase. An ability to
control the morphology resulting from two-phase blending operations is therefore
critical. Success of this project will provide an entirely new method to control
two-phase morphologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Proposal: In past
research on particles at interfaces, particles were deposited directly at the
interface in a spreading solvent. This procedure of depositing particles
directly at the interface is unsuitable for polymer blend applications. The
first goal of this project therefore is to devise a mechanical blending
procedure that will deliver particles to the interface and allow them to adsorb
there. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second goal is to quantify the concentration of
particles at the interface at any location in the two-phase structure, the
corresponding interfacial tension, and the contact angle of the particles at the
interface. The final goal is to demonstrate that the dynamics of two-phase
flows, and the morphology resulting from them, can indeed by modified using
particles. The overall objective is to establish proof-of-principle of the
hypothesis above, and lay the ground for more detailed research on two-phase
structure control with particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Merits: While particles
are commonly used to modify the bulk properties of homopolymers, this proposal
attempts to exploit particles specifically as surface-active agents. It offers a
radically new approach to controlling the morphology of polymer blends. At
present, the only common surface-active agents for polymers are block
copolymers. These are generally system-specific; a given block copolymer is
surface-active for only a few homopolymer pairs. A significant advantage of
particles is that they are non-specific and may be used in a wider range of
blends. This research will complement other research on multiphase flow in the
PI's lab. It will train one graduate and one undergraduate student on
experimental research in polymers. The research on capillary instabilities to be
conducted as a part of this project is relevant to a variety of applications
such as dispersive mixing, inkjet printing, etc. and thus important in its own
right. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has extensive knowledge and experimental
skills in the research topics covered here. All the necessary experimental
resources are either available, or will be procured or fabricated during this
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;