* 0431490
* Planning Meeting for NEES/E-DEFENSE Collaboration in Earthquake Engineering
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Ian Buckle, NEES Consortium, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 02/28/2007
* USD 85,000.00

Proposal Title: Planning Meeting for NEES/E-DEFENSE Collaboration in Earthquake
Engineering Institution: NEES Consortium, Inc. Abstract Date: 08/10/2004 Project
Summary The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation
(NEES) initiated by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) in late 1999 is
intended to transform the nation.s ability to carry out earthquake engineering
research. With over $80 million in new cutting-edge tools for experimentation,
networking, data curation and communication, the best minds in earthquake
engineering will be able to challenge and solve the most difficult impediments
to reducing the nation's vulnerability to earthquakes. To accelerate attainment
of NEES's goals, and avoid unnecessary duplication of effort, US investigators
need to collaborate and have access to data and facilities internationally. A
major long-term, research initiative has begun in Japan known as .E-Defense..
This initiative is managed by the National Research Institute for Earth Science
and Disaster Prevention (NIED) on behalf of the Japan Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MExT). A key component of this
initiative is a new, large (20 by 15 m) shaking table capable of subjecting
full-scale, five-story tall, specimens to three-dimensional seismic excitations
larger than those experienced in the devastating 1995 Hyogo-ken Nanbu
earthquake. In addition, a long-term research program using this shaking table
and other major facilities for experimentation and computer-based simulation is
planned. This program calls for a strong, but as yet undefined, component of
international collaboration. As such, a Planning Meeting is being convened in
Shin-Kobe, Japan, near the E-Defense shaking table facility, during April 6-8,
2004 to discuss opportunities for collaboration between the NEES and E-Defense.
A small, but diverse group of representative researchers from the US and Japan
are meeting, along with representatives from NIED, MExT, NSF, the NEES
Consortium, Inc. (NCI), to identify research topics of mutual interest that
fully take advantage of the unique capabilities of the E-Defense facilities,
mechanisms for developing NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION Proposal Abstract
Proposal:0431490 PI Name:Buckle, Ian Printed from eJacket: 08/10/04 Page 1 of 2
research plans and projects, and steps needed to implement NEESgrid and related
services within E-Defense so that the full potential of collaboration between
those involved in the NEES Collaboratory and E-Defense can be realized. The
findings of the meeting are being distributed widely to potential sponsors and
researchers in Japan and in the US. Intellectual Merit: The E-Defense program in
Japan provides truly phenomenal opportunities for discovery and innovation not
possible within the current NEES portfolio. By leveraging US and Japanese
resources through focused collaborative effort, it is possible to accelerate the
pace of discovery and innovation needed to mitigate catastrophic losses due to
large earthquakes. NEES/E-Defense is expected to provide the overall US
earthquake engineering community access to rich sets of data. Broader impacts
resulting from proposed activity: Explicit NEES/E-Defense collaboration will
provide heightened opportunities for international cooperation. These include
conduct of collaborative research projects, sharing of unique research
resources, development of international standards and capabilities for
documenting, archiving and sharing information, and exchange of personnel.
Participants in NEES/E-Defense projects are expected to include junior
researchers, women and members of underrepresented groups, as well as senior
members, of the earthquake engineering and IT research communities NATIONAL
SCIENCE FOUNDATION Proposal Abstract Proposal:0431490 PI Name:Buckle, Ian