* 0431646
* Increasing the Engineering and Computer Science Graduates
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Bevlee Watford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,999,999.00

The project consists of three activities: a bridge program for freshman, a
mentoring programs for freshman and transfer students, and a residential
learning community for freshman students. Additionally a transfer-student
recruiting program provides a structured effort to work with Virginia community
colleges to facilitate the successful transition of community college graduates
to Virginia Tech. These programs are based on existing, and highly successful,
programs for under-represented engineering students. By expanding these programs
to a larger population of freshman and transfer students, we expect to improve
the overall graduation rate for all students entering the engineering and
computer science programs. The Student Transition Program enables 100 students
to spend five weeks at Virginia Tech prior to their freshman year learning what
they must do to adjust to the rigors of undergraduate engineering and computer
science education. A weeklong transition program for transfer students ensures
that they establish a firm initial connection to engineering and computer
science faculty and staff. The mentoring program facilitates development of peer
mentoring relationships that assist 400 freshmen and 60 transfer students to
negotiate undergraduate degree programs successfully. Finally, the Galileo
residential program allows 200 freshmen to be a part of a mutually supportive
living and learning environment. The goal is to increase the freshman and
transfer student first to second year retention by 3%-5% each year of the
funding period, resulting in a minimum of 85% first to second year retention for
each group. This should translate into approximately 300 more graduates
annually. The proposed activities are demonstrating how undergraduate
institutions can successfully increase their retention of all undergraduate
students by broadly applying existing practices that have been developed to
address under-represented engineering student retention. Dissemination of the
results of the proposed activities is enabling other undergraduate institutions
to understand how to implement these programs on a larger scale.