* 0431603
* STEPs to Bridge the Way
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Robert Driggs, Kirkwood Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eun-Woo Chang
* 09/30/2010
* USD 499,960.00

This recruitment, articulation, and scholarship project is designed to increase
the number of students pursuing and receiving degrees in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. "STEPs to Bridge the Way"
offers students support in a seamless transition from high school to community
college and on to a four-year degree program through 2+2+2 articulation efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;1. Increase by at least
10% the number of secondary school students who participate in STEM Career Edge
Academies, and other dual high school and college credit programs each year.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Increase by 25% over five years the number of students at the
college with a declared major in one of the STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Improve the retention and persistence of STEM students at the college by 20%
over five years. &lt;br/&gt;4. Increase the number of students who graduate with
a STEM-related associate degree from the college and/or transfer to four-year
institutions as STEM majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is
reflected in the efforts across three educational levels: secondary, community
college, and four-year institutions. Students have financial resources
available, as well as solid academic support through coursework, exploration,
tutoring, and mentoring. Efforts to generate excitement about STEM include 1)
outreach activities to promote career awareness, 2) recruitment and preparation
through a Summer Bridge program for students who want to explore and/or
accelerate study in STEM disciplines; and 3) the addition of a Science Career
Edge Academy in which high school students earn college credit for coursework
they take at their high schools. Retention efforts at the community college
center on a Technology Seminar, mentoring, and expanded use of support services.
Articulation efforts are expanding, moving beyond course-by-course articulation
to program articulation. One additional element that provides a solid foundation
for the success of the entire project is a summer faculty workshop, spanning all
three levels of academia. The professional development topics include
recruitment, pedagogy, technology, and articulation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this project is twofold. First, Skills 2006 reports the need
for over 10,000 employees in the area by 2006, with the highest job growth in
STEM disciplines. 75% of new and replacement jobs require education beyond high
school with 60% of new jobs requiring a four-year degree or greater. By
broadening students' career perspectives and encouraging them to pursue STEM
disciplines, this project plays a role in filling the workforce needs in Eastern
Iowa. Second, the collaboration with secondary and four-year institutions and
the efforts to recruit underrepresented students into STEM offers a solid
foundation for improvement in STEM programs across three levels of academia,
increased availability for a STEM education, and a smoother transition for
students as they work toward their educational goals in attaining a STEM career.
&lt;br/&gt;