* 0431614
* Brooklyn Outreach for Science Careers (BOSC)
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Louise Hainline, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,016,956.00

The Brooklyn College departments of Physics, Geology, and Education and
the&lt;br/&gt;Interdepartmental Program in Environmental Studies are
collaborating to implement an innovative program to redirect students to majors
in under-enrolled science majors. The program offers a four-year program in
support of STEM majors in Physics, Earth Science, and Environmental Studies.
Participants are selected from among&lt;br/&gt;entering freshmen who have
performed well in high school mathematics and science but have not expressed an
interest in majoring in STEM fields. The program provides a summer bridge
program to develop quantitative reasoning, problem solving and study skills and
to expose students to career opportunities in physical-science related,
socially- rewarding professions. It continues in the freshman year with
activity-based instruction in physics, block-programming in other coursework and
Peer-led Team Learning (PLTL) support in the context of a science Learning
Community. Summer internships provide guided experience with research in years
one, two and three. Coordinated class enrollments continue for years 2-4, but
participants are weaned from formal support. We project that 50% of entering
participants will ultimately graduate as majors in the physical sciences
identified above, increasing graduation rates in these areas by a factor of
five.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is testing a model for
increasing the number of STEM majors in physical sciences including physics,
earth sciences and environmental studies by redirection of qualified students
who have not expressed interest in a STEM major. This project is based upon the
hypothesis that if entering college students are made aware of the variety of
rewarding careers available to STEM graduates, they can be induced to enter STEM
majors in the physical sciences. A second hypothesis is that activity-
based&lt;br/&gt;instruction supported by Peer-led Team Learning will help retain
these redirected students. A third hypothesis is that a summer bridge program
will ease the transition to the critical first year of college-level science
study and contribute to success among redirected students. A fourth hypothesis
is that a learning environment that is supportive both socially and academically
will contribute to retention of these redirected students in STEM majors. A
final hypothesis is that such a program can become self-sustaining in a
comprehensive publicly-supported urban institution.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The project is developing and testing a prototype for redirection
of&lt;br/&gt;qualified college students into majors in physical sciences that
can be replicated in other large urban colleges. Locally, our city's young
people will be made aware of, and provided with, an avenue to enter a broader
range of financially and socially rewarding careers. The project also is
expected to increase the number of well-trained local high school science
teachers, which should positively impact the pipeline of qualified STEM majors
from the largely minority area high schools in the future.&lt;br/&gt;