* 0431991
* CRIF-ID: Development of a novel photofragmentation ion trap/time-of-flight mass spectrometer for peptide analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* James Reilly, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2009
* USD 825,000.00

Professor James P. Reilly of Indiana University is funded by the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and Facilities: Instrument Development (CRIF-ID)
program to develop a tandem mass spectrometer for peptide sequencing and protein
identification. Selectivity in peptide fragmentation is achieved through a non-
thermal activation process which produces daughter ions that have more diverse
structures than those formed by conventional approaches. A linear ion trap first
stage accomplishes ion collection and selection. Cooled ions selected by the
trap photodissociate upon exposure to vacuum ultraviolet laser light. High
resolution and accurate mass analysis of the fragments is achieved in a
reflectron time-of-flight (TOF) second stage. With this instrument the vacuum
ultraviolet spectroscopy and photochemical propensities of peptide and protein
ions are being investigated to improve the speed and accuracy of sequencing and
analysis procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peptide sequencing and protein
identification technology is of central importance to fields such as
biochemistry and proteomics. Current methodologies identify a relatively small
fraction of the mass spectra recorded in analyses of complex protein mixtures.
They also encounter difficulties coping with mutations, post-translational
modifications and genome sequencing errors. The ion trap-photofragmentation-TOF
instrument under development is addressing these issues. Fundamental advances
have the potential to impact our understanding of the molecular basis of disease
and life processes. &lt;br/&gt;