* 0431863
* Confidentiality Issues Arising from the Integration of Remotely Sensed Data with Social Science Survey and Other Self-Identifying Data
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Paul Stern, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 50,000.00

Remote sensing technology creates significant scientific opportunities and
possibilities for improving the quality of information available for public
policy. It does so by linking high-resolution observation of the physical
evidence of human activity, and it offers potentials for linking remotely sensed
data with data from survey research and other social observations. These data
linkages can provide valuable new insights about a broad range of topics and
issues. For example, they can improve understanding of the causes and
consequences of land-use dynamics, such as urban development, agricultural
extensification, and deforestation, and they can help identify human activities
and societal sectors within specific geographical regions that are particularly
vulnerable to natural disasters and environmental changes. These possibilities
also create difficult tradeoffs among data quality, data sharing, and
confidentiality, however. The tradeoffs have become more difficult as federal
agencies urge grantees to make their data widely available while maintaining or
increasing concern with the privacy rights of research subjects. This award will
help support a National Research Council panel under the Committee on Human
Dimensions of Global Change (CHDGC) to conduct a workshop to address the
scientific value of linking remotely sensed and self-identifying social science
data. Among topics to be addressed at the workshop are tradeoffs involving data
accessibility, confidentiality, and data quality; associated legal issues; costs
and benefits of different methods for addressing confidentiality in the
dissemination of such data; and appropriate models for addressing the issues
raised. The panel will produce a report that would include selected background
papers from the workshop and a consensus statement by the panel summarizing
ideas presented at the workshop regarding key conceptual issues, the state and
progress of the field, and options for addressing the tension between open
access and confidentiality in this area of data and research
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will provide new insights that
are of value to a broad range of users, including social science researchers,
government agencies that produce and use remotely sensed and socioeconomic data,
and individuals and organizations engaged with interests in policy making and
human and social dynamics. Federal agencies have an interest in promoting the
scientific advances that can come from linking spatially explicit and self-
identifying data. The workshop will help develop guidelines for the conduct of
research and for data sharing that can reconcile the competing demands of
openness and confidentiality. Institutional review boards have the same need.
Workshop results also will influence the development of procedures governing
data collection and sharing. This award complements awards made by the National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and other federal
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;