* 0431825
* Instrumental Development:  Infrared Multiphoton Dissociation Spectroscopy in a Cold Ion Trap
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Tomas Baer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Instrument Development (CRIF:ID) Program, Professors Roger Miller, Tomas Baer,
and Gary Glish of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill will develop a
state-of-the-art infrared laser system and cooled ion-trap mass spectrometer for
infrared multiphoton dissociation (IRMPD) spectroscopy. This new instrument will
enable high-resolution IR spectroscopy of molecular ions, which is currently
only available using very expensive equipment such as free-electron lasers at
multi-user facilities. The project will combine the expertise of Miller's group
in developing IR lasers with the Glish group's experience building ion-trap mass
spectrometers. Baer will add a complementary level of theoretical expertise to
interpret experimental photoelectron spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
instrumentation will use new optical parametric oscillator technology to obtain
a wide tunability and a build-up cavity to achieve high power. The quadrupole
ion trap will use an electrospray ionization source and will be cooled with a
closed-cycle cryogenic refrigerator. The IR spectra that the instrument will be
able to record will be used by the PIs to make progress in using spectroscopy to
determine secondary structures of polypeptides and proteins. Other work will
include gas-phase studies of ion solvation, metal binding in biomolecules, and
studies of ion dissociation dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A postdoctoral
associate and a graduate student will do the bulk of the instrument development.
Once constructed, it will be available as an advanced tool for approximately 30
students and postdocs in the three research groups. The PIs will also make the
instrument accessible to collaborators and will disseminate results to aid
others in developing similar instruments. This laboratory-scale instrumentation
will greatly expand the accessibility to high-resolution IRMPD spectroscopy,
which could have a large impact in a variety of scientific fields. Extending use
of the instrument to more applied areas such as interrogation of large
biomolecules is anticipated by the PIs. &lt;br/&gt;