* 0431496
* Differential Plasmid Representation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Alan Tartakoff, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2006
* USD 249,609.00

Many phenotypically "silent" mutations (e.g. deletion of gene X, or the presence
of a mutant protein) are compatible with survival since cells synthesize
appropriate compensatory proteins and avoid the expression of others. By
identifying these functionally related proteins, one can characterize the
biological significance of Xp, and therefore develop indirect means of
regulating functions in which it participates. This project will develop a
broadly-applicable method for identification of such proteins, using
"Differential Plasmid Representation" (DPR). DPR will first be used to compare
wild type yeast to an isogenic mutant which grows well but does not synthesize
the transmembrane protein, Wsc1p. Classical approaches have already
characterized Wsc1p, which is thought to function as a "stress sensor" and
initiate signaling to the "cell integrity" pathway. Both wt and mutant strains
will be transformed with a centromeric cDNA library. The mixture of
transformants will then be grown in selective medium under conditions which
induce expression of a single ectopic cDNA in each cell. This will cause
competition among the many transformants, which constitute a diverse set of
genetic backgrounds. After 10-20 generations, the cDNAs will be recovered from
both types of transformants in order to determine - using DNA microarrays - the
relative abundance of each of the plasmids which was originally present. Each
plasmid should retain its initial relative abundance if it provides no growth
advantage or disadvantage. Comparison of the enrichment/depletion data for wt vs
mutant strains will therefore make strong predictions as to which cDNAs exhibit
a positive or negative "synthetic" relation with deletion of Wsc1p. The
functionally significant cDNAs are expected to overlap - at least in part - with
those which are already known to be related to the cell integrity path. The
present project will generate preliminary data to develop this novel method. DPR
will allow identification of multiple genes which contribute - to differing
degrees - to the ability of cells to tolerate "silent" mutations. DPR is
substantially simpler and faster than classical approaches for identification of
"synthetic lethal" interactions between genes (in which a second gene must
continue to be transcribed if a first gene is mutated or deleted). It should
also make it possible to detect a class of genetic interactions which is less
accessible by classical methods. In these "synthetic survival" interactions,
mutation of one gene is compatible with survival only if a second gene is also
mutated. Later studies will use DPR to investigate the consequences of deletion
of other yeast genes or the expression of specific mutant proteins. Adaptations
of this strategy should be applicable to investigation of the many murine genes
which can be knocked out without apparent effect. Experiments based on the same
methodologies should also facilitate investigations of tissue engineering and
the responses of cells to environmental and genetic stress. Development of these
novel experimental strategies will be immediately educational for the group of
high school, college, and PhD students, as well as postdoctoral fellows, in the
investigator's laboratory. As these novel methods become widely accepted, the
educational and practical value will extend considerably. This project does not
aim to solve a single biological puzzle, but is instead designed to develop a
broadly applicable method.

