* 0431551
* Blood Pressure Regulation During Early Vertebrate Organogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 10/31/2003,12/31/2004
* Stephen Warburton, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 12/31/2004
* USD 2,974.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project is directed at understanding the function and control of
the heart and vascular systems of vertebrates during the early stages of
development. The heart is one of the first organs to form and assume its adult
function, yet it does so long before the developing nervous system can reach it.
This project will help define the ability of the nascent cardiovascular system
to regulate itself without the assistance of the nervous system. It is suspected
that the blood vessels themselves may provide the key to regulation during these
very early stages of development. Research in this area is hampered by the
minute size of vertebrate embryos and larvae, and only recently has it been
technologically possible to determine blood pressure and blood flow in embryos
and larvae.&lt;br/&gt;The question of blood pressure regulation is especially
interesting in light of the knowledge that the cardiovascular system is
responsive to the pressures and flows it generates and is capable of remodeling
in response to increased or decreased pressure. Thus, maintaining appropriate
pressures and flows during development may be critical for appropriate
cardiovascular morphology to appear. Abnormal pressures or flows may result in
pathological abnormalities, but may also account for the ability of heart shape
and vascular geometry to evolve in such a fashion as to support the widely
varying lifestyles of the vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed herein,
will also involve training a large number of students from high school to
graduate level at New Mexico State University. This is especially valuable in
this locale given our high density of underrepresented minority students. This
research will serve as a training ground to provide "hand on" research
experience to these students.&lt;br/&gt;