* 0431242
* AToL: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Resolving the Trunk of the Angiosperm Tree and Twelve of its Thorniest Branches
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Charles Davis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2006
* USD 164,163.00

&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Flowering plants (angiosperms) are the largest
(&gt;270,000 species), most diverse, and economically most important group of
green plants. Understanding the origin, patterns of variation, and relationships
among angiosperms is challenging. Despite progress, relationships among major
groups remain unclear, as do relationships within major subgroups (e.g., roses
and allies). Our multigene and genomics approaches target 12 problematic groups
and subgroups; their resolution should clarify the framework for angiosperm
phylogeny. We also will develop the first comprehensive non-DNA database for
angiosperms and populate it with key morphological features. Together, our
approaches will lay groundwork for collaboratively building the tree of all
12,000 genera of angiosperms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
angiosperm tree will be useful to comparative biologists including
physiologists, ecologists, paleobiologists, and genomicists. The Botany Browser
we develop will provide an informatics infrastructure to bring many data
resources to users' desktops. The Angiosperm MorphBank will facilitate group
diagnosis, analyses of character distributions, and study of fossils. Our
interdisciplinary training of postdoctoral fellows and students will emphasize
recruitment of minorities. Our website on angiosperm diversity will be valuable
to researchers, K-12 teachers, and students. We will construct pages for the
Tree of Life Web Project including TreeHouses designed for K-12 students and
teachers. A movable museum exhibit highlighting advances in our understanding of
plant phylogeny will be distributed to museums represented in our project.
Posters detailing the angiosperm tree will be designed and distributed and made
available on CD. Additional outreach will be provided through presentations to
local public schools.&lt;br/&gt;