* 0431648
* A SySTEMS Approach to STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2005,09/30/2010
* John Bailey, Prince George's Community College
* Standard Grant
* Scott Grissom
* 09/30/2010
* USD 988,253.00

The project is developing an integrated system with multi-levels of activities
to increase the number of STEM graduates by thirty-seven students and to
increase the number of students majoring in STEM fields by 30%, or 499 students.
Methods include developing a Collegian Center, infusing interdisciplinary
modules throughout STEM classes, creating linked classes, increasing the success
rate of students in mathematics courses and providing a recruitment effort that
targets underrepresented classes of students in local high schools. A study is
determining the effectiveness of each of the elements of the projects and is
providing feedback to improve the process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM students
are invited to join a vibrant, holistic and nurturing Collegian Center where
they become part of a cohort of STEM scholars. Students participating in the
center are demonstrating an "Evidence of Competency" by participating in
activities such as completing a capstone course and presenting their work at an
annual institutional student conference, leading a "Build Your Own Computer"
weekend activity, engaging in summer research internships and/or completing a
community based service-learning project. The scholars are being provided with a
number of services that include mentoring, mentor training, and field trips to
transfer institutions and industry to explore career opportunities. They are
being rewarded with scholarships for academic achievement and are serving as
role models to encourage other students to pursue a STEM degree program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is increasing the number of students who
succeed in college level pre-calculus courses through Peer-Led Team Learning
(PLTL), a model adapted from City College of New York that was developed for
chemistry through NSF funding. PLTL is a mentoring model that engages teams of
students in collaborative, problem solving activities that are guided by a peer
leader who has successfully completed the mathematics course. A mathematics
learning-center called the "pi-Shop," is providing students with individualized
access to computer technology, walk-in tutoring and technology assistance, and
cooperative learning activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;