* 0431068
* Preconditioning Techniques for Linear Systems of Equations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Vivek Sarin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 08/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

NSF Proposal Number: 0431068&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Preconditioning
techniques for linear systems of equations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Vivek Sarin,
Dept. of Computer Science, Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solution of
linear systems of equations is a fundamental problem that&lt;br/&gt;must be
tackled in various areas of science and engineering. Iterative&lt;br/&gt;methods
are used to solve large sparse systems from partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations as well as large dense systems from integral
equations.&lt;br/&gt;Preconditioning techniques are necessary to accelerate the
rate of&lt;br/&gt;convergence of these solvers. An ideal preconditioner should
be robust,&lt;br/&gt;effective, parallelizable, and inexpensive to compute and
apply to the&lt;br/&gt;linear system. When solving dense systems, the
unavailability of the&lt;br/&gt;coefficient matrix often limits the choice of
preconditioners. The goal of&lt;br/&gt;the project is to develop novel
preconditioning techniques for sparse and&lt;br/&gt;dense linear systems. These
techniques will use a sequence of linear&lt;br/&gt;transformations to obtain a
preconditioned system from the original one.&lt;br/&gt;Techniques will be
developed to analyze the preconditioned system, and&lt;br/&gt;schemes will be
developed to improve the effectiveness of the&lt;br/&gt;preconditioner. The
resulting preconditioners will be robust, effective,&lt;br/&gt;and inexpensive.
These preconditioning techniques will be implemented,&lt;br/&gt;analyzed, and
tested on a variety of problems. These efforts will be&lt;br/&gt;integrated with
interdisciplinary collaborative research activities to&lt;br/&gt;ensure a
greater impact on application areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;