* 0431409
* Collaborative Research: Studies of Explosive Crystallization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 02/28/2006
* USD 95,190.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CTS-0431431CTS-0431409&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Benard J. Matkowsky and Alexander A. GolovinCostas
Grigoropoulos&lt;br/&gt;Affiliation: Northwestern UniversityUniversity of
California-Berkeley&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: Studies of
explosive
crystallization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Explosive
crystallization of amorphous materials is a fascinating phenomenon that has
attracted much attention from engineers, physicists, materials scientists and
others for over two decades. It manifests itself as a thermally activated,
highly exothermic phase transition of a solid material from a metastable
amorphous state to a stable crystalline state, that occurs in the form of a
self-propagating crystallization front. The front propagation can be triggered
by a local heat rise produced mechanically, or by a laser beam. The laser-beam-
triggered explosive crystallization of amorphous semiconductor films is a widely
used modern technology for producing silicon-on-insulator structures that have
many applications in various photovoltaic devices like solar cells or infrared
detectors, low-cost, low-power consuming at panel displays, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed project is to initiate and
develop a fruitful collaboration between the theoretical group at Northwestern
and the experimental group at Berkeley, to carry out systematic theoretical and
experimental investigations of several important aspects of explosive
crystallization that have not been previously studied. The collaboration will
focus on mathematical modeling and experimental studies of
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;dynamics of instabilities exhibited by explosive
crystallization fronts and the resulting microstructures. Specifically, we
propose to investigate the stability and nonlinear dynamics of explosive
crystallization fronts in several different modes of frontal propagation, as
well as explosive crystallization in alloys and the effect of dopants on the
crystallization dynamics. From the fundamental point of view, the significance
of the proposed research is in elucidating such important effects as the
instabilities and nonlinear dynamics of explosive crystallization fronts in
several modes that provide examples of complex nonlinear behavior in systems far
from thermodynamic equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;From the technological point of view,
the results will enhance our understanding of the modern technological process
of explosive crystallization in thin amorphous films. The established
collaboration will allow us to move further in our future joint research to more
detailed investigations of microstructure in explosively crystallizing materials
which is a necessary prerequisite to control and optimization of the process.
The broader impact of the proposed research lies in its interdisciplinary
nature, its importance for both&lt;br/&gt;scientists and engineers. It will also
create a sound basis for training graduate students in future stages of the
collaborative research that will provide them with the unique opportunity to
participate in important research at the cutting edge of engineering, applied
physics and applied mathematics, combining both theoretical and experimental
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has been funded jointly by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Mathematics and Physical Sciences
Directorate and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems in the
Engineering Directorate. Funding is from the Mathematical Sciences: Innovations
at the Interface with the Sciences and Engineering Program, Announcement NSF
04-538.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;