* 0431218
* Judging the Evidence Base for "Best Practices" in STEM Teaching and Assessment
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Norman Fortenberry, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,099,914.00

The National Academy of Sciences is taking initial steps toward characterizing
the education research base underlying instructional and assessment practices
for enhancing student retention, persistence, progression, and professional
success. Particular emphasis is being placed on post-secondary engineering with
collateral attention to science, technology, and mathematics education. The work
is being performed by the Center for the Advancement of Scholarship on
Engineering Education of the National Academy of Engineering. The outcomes of
this effort will be as follows:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Identification of fewer
than 400 papers (distilled from more than 10,000) that address instructional
practices and assessment;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Characterization of these
papers with respect to their outcome focus (e.g., academic or career skills),
locus of application (e.g., classroom or departmental and beyond), purpose
(e.g., improve teaching, redesign courses, or change learning environment)), and
nature of research (qualitative, quantitative, or
anecdotal);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Identification of various instructional
practices, the populations on which they are asserted to work, and the
circumstances under which they are asserted to work;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4.
Creation of an easily accessible and searchable prototype database with the
above information; and &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Beta and pilot testing of the
prototype database and website interface for utility and usability by
engineering educators.&lt;br/&gt;