* 0431744
* The Fourth IMACS International Conference on Nonlinear Evolution Equations and Wave Phenomena: Computation and Theory;  April 11-14, 2005; Athens, GA
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Thiab Taha, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 15,000.00

The Fourth IMACS International Conference on Nonlinear Evolution &lt;br/&gt;
Equations and Wave Phenomena: Computation and Theory&lt;br/&gt; April 11-14,
2005&lt;br/&gt; University of Georgia&lt;br/&gt; Athens, GA 30602, USA
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial Support is requested
for `The Fourth IMACS International Conference &lt;br/&gt;on Nonlinear Evolution
Equations and Wave Phenomena: Computation and Theory' &lt;br/&gt;to be held at
the University of Georgia (April 11- 14, 2005) and sponsored by&lt;br/&gt;IMACS
(International Association for Mathematics and Computers in
Simulation).&lt;br/&gt;Presentations will be both invited (about 4) and
submitted (about 120), and &lt;br/&gt;attendance is estimated to be 150 or so.
The requested support is for the&lt;br/&gt;expenses of the four invited
speakers, students, recent doctoral recipients, &lt;br/&gt;and some of the
direct costs of operating the conference. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
conference will focus on computational and theoretical &lt;br/&gt;aspects of
nonlinear waves and optical fiber communication systems. &lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear
wave equations describe a wide class of physical phenomena in &lt;br/&gt;plasma
physics, anharmonic crystals, bubble-liquid mixtures, fiber optics, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;It is to be noted that fiber optics communications has experienced
tremendous&lt;br/&gt;growth in the last twenty years. In the last decade alone,
data rates have &lt;br/&gt;increased by orders of magnitude. At the same time,
the recent rise of the &lt;br/&gt;Internet and the World-Wide Web has quickly
contributed to make this area one &lt;br/&gt;of the key technological sectors in
the national and global economy, and has &lt;br/&gt;generated an unprecedented
demand for even higher transmission capacities.&lt;br/&gt;At the conference,
researchers will present recent research in the broad area &lt;br/&gt;that
include theory and computations of solitons.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, research
will be presented that uses high performance computers&lt;br/&gt;for solving
computationally intensive problems. &lt;br/&gt;This conference will build on the
success of the previous year's conference. &lt;br/&gt;In 2003, at the third
conference in this series, more than 135 research papers &lt;br/&gt;were
presented. This includes contributed papers and papers presented in
&lt;br/&gt;organized sessions. In addition, a tutorial on `Introduction to
Optical Fiber &lt;br/&gt;Communication Systems' was given. Six invited speakers,
ten students and &lt;br/&gt;1 post-doc were fully or partially supported by the
grant. Three `best paper' &lt;br/&gt;awards were give to graduate students. More
than 13 students and post-docs as &lt;br/&gt;well as 11 women have participated
in the conference. A good number of &lt;br/&gt;scientists from the Naval
research laboratories as well as the Los Alamos &lt;br/&gt;National laboratories
were present. We expect an even greater representation &lt;br/&gt;of women at
the fourth conference, and we are working hard to increase the
&lt;br/&gt;representation of minorities and persons with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;This conference is expected to have a substantial impact
on the quality of the&lt;br/&gt;research and teaching in the major areas of
discourse which is due to its&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary nature as well as to
the high quality of the invited &lt;br/&gt;speakers and participants.
Participants from Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;Computer Science,
Engineering and Industry were present at the previous &lt;br/&gt;conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;