* 0431920
* A Planning Project to Redesign the Delivery of Fundamentals in a Flexible Electrical and Computer Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Suzanne Laurich-McIntyre, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 99,942.00

This project is planning to develop new methods for selecting the content and
delivering core components in the highly flexible curriculum of the Electrical
and Computer Engineering (ECE) department at Carnegie Mellon University. With
the help of students, faculty, alumni and industry representatives, a number of
"use cases" will be created that illustrate how their curriculum can provide the
foundation for productive careers in specific fields, with an emphasis on social
impact. The project aims to develop a balance between flexibility and
fundamentals within the broad discipline of ECE, and create means to help
students better understand the role of fundamentals in a wide variety of careers
that have significant impact on society. The content of ECE curricula will be
analyzed using graphical tools to evaluate alternatives for structuring an
effective four-year ECE curriculum that offers a solid foundation in the
fundamentals with the &lt;br/&gt;flexibility to pursue opportunities identified
by our use cases. The one-year study will lead to a new structure for the core
courses, and a set of tools for continuing evaluation and improvement of the
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop two innovations for curriculum design. The
"use case" approach to curriculum design creates clear connections between
elements of an ECE curriculum and profession options. It complements the
decomposition of the curriculum into traditional technical areas that are not
well understood by students, and will guide the selection of fundamental
material that can serve best multiple ends. The graphical analysis of the
elements of the ECE curriculum provides novel metrics for evaluating alternative
organizations of the curriculum. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The novel methods and tools for identifying and
delivering fundamental material in an ECE curriculum will be made available to
other universities through the project web site. The development of use cases
for our curriculum will also attract a broader, more diverse set of students who
seek careers with high social impact into electrical and computer engineering.
The use cases will also be available on the web site in an attractive way that
encourages even high school guidance counselors to explore with high school
students the possibilities for careers based on an ECE education. &lt;br/&gt;