* 0431946
* Reforming Undergraduate Education in Environmental Engineering: Urban Studios as Knowledge Delivery Systems and Vehicles for Service Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Upmanu Lall, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2009
* USD 999,494.00

This project is being carried out at the Department of Earth and Environmental
Engineering (EEE) at Columbia which was created recently as part of the Henry
Krumb School of Mines to address planetary habitability and sustainable use of
resources as a key issue. The focus of this department is that a broad range of
physical, chemical, ecological, social and economic knowledge is needed to
address practical problems in this field.

This project is addressing the difficulty of meaningfully integrating these
areas into an undergraduate curriculum that also requires exposure to laboratory
and field techniques as well as numerical and statistical modeling skills. This
project has chosen Urban Studios as a vehicle for curricular reform. There are
several reasons for this. First, urban problems provide the opportunity for
depth (e.g., combustion processes and pollutant production from cars) and
breadth (e.g., the link between flood control strategies, vector borne disease,
and cumulative ecological impacts in receiving water bodies). Second, the
setting naturally lends itself to service projects and interactions with
engineering professional practice. Third, urbanization is a global concern, and
an appropriate focus for a University located in New York City. Finally, ongoing
experience with Urban Studios at the Graduate School of Architecture, Planning
and Preservation (GSAPP) makes it possible to rapidly implement, re-evaluate and
refine the proposed curriculum, while providing interactions for engineering
students with urban planners and architects.

This proposal is initiating the development of a Studio based curriculum that
provides access to this mode of learning through all 4 years of the program,
complementing traditional classes. Engineering and GSAPP students will work
together in the Studios.