* 0431572
* STEM Pioneer Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Mary Pat Liggio, Tidewater Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eun-Woo Chang
* 09/30/2009
* USD 617,208.00

Under the supervision of the Tidewater Community College Women's Center, the
Pioneer Project is demonstrating that bright, community college women at risk of
dropping out of college can graduate within three years with A. S degrees in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) prepared for transfer
to B. S. programs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project include:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Persistence to graduation. 115 women, who would not have been able
to graduate in STEM majors, graduate. &lt;br/&gt;2. Retention of women.
Retention of women students in STEM classes rises from the present level of 74%
to 85%. &lt;br/&gt;3. Recruitment. The number of women enrolled in STEM
disciplines rises from current levels of 40% to 59%, their proportion of the
college population. &lt;br/&gt;4. Academic and career success. Long-term
tracking shows that 60% of participants are persisting at the transfer college
and entering their chosen profession. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project
participants are being tested to assure that they are in the best program for
their interests and abilities. They receive both academic advising and
intervention counseling. Trained supplementary instruction leaders as well as
mentors are available to all participants. Participants meet regularly in a
support group for career guidance and transfer assistance. STEM faculty attend
annual workshops to receive training in how to create a female-friendly
classroom and select materials intrinsically interesting to women; faculty are
also be helped to improve their academic advising. During their final semester,
students take an experiential capstone course in women's work in which they
regularly shadow a professional in their field. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project addresses a seldom-studied problem
which is low graduation rates for bright, at risk, community college women who
wish to enter STEM professions. The project builds on special assistance efforts
taking place at this large, urban community college. Strategies to be employed
include those which have succeeded with other populations at this college and at
other colleges, but which are combined in a new form and with the addition of a
newly created hands-on course for students in their last semester. Faculty
workshops by an experienced trainer from an institution that has warmed its
chilly classrooms for women are being carried out each year until all full-time
STEM faculty are trained. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By creating a
model program to benefit smart, at-risk community college women, the goals are
to not only improve the environment for the college's women to succeed, but also
to create materials and a replicable model that would pave the way to success in
science, math, engineering, and technology for the many non-traditional college
women whose only avenue to STEM professions is through the first line of access
to higher education, the community college. &lt;br/&gt;