* 0431517
* Creating Opportunities for Success Through Recruitment, Retention, and Faculty Development
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* David Wilson, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Curtis T. Sears
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,000,000.00

The primary goal of this project is to increase the number of students entering
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) majors and to increase
the number of students receiving baccalaureate degrees in STEM disciplines at
Buffalo State College. Our project involves a combination of efforts including:
increasing our outreach and recruitment activities in order to target
prospective STEM students in area high schools; attracting and retaining
undeclared students interested in STEM fields through their participation in a
year-long learning community with the theme "the urban environment"; taking
advantage of the College's Freshman Seminar Program to offer introductory STEM
courses for students interested in becoming STEM majors and for students who
entered the college with a declared STEM major; providing STEM students with
opportunities to participate in summer research between their freshman and
sophomore years; increasing the support services available to students enrolled
in introductory STEM courses by introducing problem-solving sessions in math
(pre-calculus through calculus II and statistics) and peer tutoring for all
introductory STEM courses; and providing faculty development opportunities to
support substantive revision to introductory courses to shift from primarily
lecture to guided inquiry with an emphasis on developing problem-solving skills.
The intellectual merit of this project includes the sound practices and research
base for the pedagogical approach we are taking to recruit and retain students.
Our evaluation plan is designed to determine the impact of the various
activities we are using, and our results should be applicable to others desiring
to increase the retention of STEM majors. We also are focusing on a variety of
faculty development efforts and our assessment of this aspect of our project
should help advance our understanding of the role faculty play in contributing
to student success. The broader impacts of this project include addressing the
nation's need for STEM graduates through our efforts to increase the retention
and graduation rates of STEM majors at Buffalo State College. The focus of our
learning community, "the urban environment", should appeal to diverse student
audiences and should also contribute to greater participation by
underrepresented students in STEM programs. The dissemination plan provides an
opportunity for faculty at other campuses to learn from our experiences. The
regional workshop, to be held near the end of this proposed project, should
facilitate sharing best practices among faculty and institutions within this
region. The inclusion of two other campuses currently with active NSF-STEP
awards should contribute to wider dissemination of project results.