* 0431480
* Grantees Workshop On The NSF-ONR Research Initiative-Electric Power Networks Efficiency  And Security (EPNES) being held July 12-14, 2004 in Mayaguez, Puerto Rico.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Lamine Mili, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2010
* USD 35,000.00

This grant will support the organization and hosting of a workshop on the
NSF/ONR research initiative in "Electric Power Networks Efficiency and Security
(EPNES)". The workshop will include research performers from each of the
institutions awarded grants in 2002 and 2003, representatives from FERC, NERC,
DoE, ONR, EPRI, Entergy, and 4 African invitees from Nigeria, Cameroon, and
Botswana who are Co-PIs with the US EPNES Principal investigators. It will also
include the preparation of workshop proceedings that will feature technical
information provided by the grantees. These proceedings will later be developed
into chapters of a special edition of a book.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: This grant will create interaction between EPNES researchers and will
stimulate intellectual discussions between them and representatives from FERC,
NERC, DoE, ONR, EPRI, Entergy, the Puerto Rico utility, and African
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This grant will (i) broaden
the activities of the investigators to a&lt;br/&gt;national level, (ii) include
minorities who will inspire and encourage more minorities to participate in this
type of research, and (iii) include a workshop proceedings and a book that will
disseminate the findings to a wide audience of other researchers in this area
and areas related to network efficiency and security.&lt;br/&gt;