* 0431054
* Workshop on the impact of basin-scale oceanographic and climate-related processes on the dynamics of plankton and fish populations in the North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 44,606.00

This award supports an international workshop to be held in Reykjavik, Iceland
to bring researchers and ecosystem managers together to consider and plan the
next steps in North Atlantic ocean-basin scale analysis, integration, synthesis,
and modeling of biological, chemical, and physical oceanographic data sets.
Intellectual Merit: This workshop is intended to lay the foundation for the
integration and synthesis of data resulting from major oceanographic research
programs, including GLOBEC programs in the USA, Canada, UK, and EU-funded
programs, including TASC, ICOS, and others. The workshop will provide a forum
for discussion of an action plan that will describe steps leading to new
knowledge of the processes controlling dynamics of ocean-basin populations of
zooplankton and fish and the input needed to improve management of fisheries
resources. One expectation is that a critical element in the plan will be the
development of conceptual and quantitative models capable of elucidating
ecosystem dynamics and responses on a broad range of space and time scales. Our
goal is to build upon previous and ongoing research in the North Atlantic,
integrating and synthesizing the results of these programs, thus elucidating the
mechanisms that link zooplankton, fish, and the environment at ocean basin
scales. Broader Impacts: The workshop will encourage and promote trans-Atlantic
exchange, collaboration, and team building between scientific investigators and
ecosystem/fisheries managers. The workshop results will be distributed through a
technical report of the workshop proceedings, and articles published in venues
such as the GLOBEC International Newsletter, the IGBP newsletter, and EOS.