* 0431092
* Space-Time Transmitter and Receiver Design with Delay Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Zhengdao Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 07/31/2008
* USD 177,250.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Communication with multiple antennas is a
promising technology for&lt;br/&gt;future high-rate wireless communication
systems. It is often referred&lt;br/&gt;to as space-time communication because
the transmitted signal is&lt;br/&gt;encoded both across the antennas (space) and
time. Over the past ten&lt;br/&gt;years, various space-time coding and decoding
schemes have been&lt;br/&gt;developed. They can be roughly divided into two
categories:&lt;br/&gt;short-frame code designs and long-frame code designs.
Relatively less&lt;br/&gt;attention has been given to the transceiver design
issues in&lt;br/&gt;space-time communications with medium-length frames, i.e.,
those&lt;br/&gt;containing more than a few but less than, say, a thousand bits.
We use&lt;br/&gt;medium-length frames in practice for several reasons: i) The
data may&lt;br/&gt;be bursty and of medium-length, which is often the case in
Internet&lt;br/&gt;traffic; ii) There may be stringent delay constraints which
forbid&lt;br/&gt;long frame transmissions, such as in real-time computing and
control&lt;br/&gt;applications. Such medium-length transmissions are not in
the&lt;br/&gt;space-time block-code (or short-code) paradigm and yet not long
enough&lt;br/&gt;to allow powerful error-control codes such as turbo or low-
density&lt;br/&gt;parity-check codes to demonstrate their full
``power''.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates several key issues in
medium-length&lt;br/&gt;space-time communications. Firstly, it pursues the
problem of&lt;br/&gt;transmitter code design for delay-constrained space-
time&lt;br/&gt;communications. Secondly, it investigates the problem of high
decoding&lt;br/&gt;complexity in space-time systems with a large number of
transmit&lt;br/&gt;antennas and/or a large modulation constellation, and
develops&lt;br/&gt;low-complex detectors for such scenarios. Thirdly, it deals
with the&lt;br/&gt;problem of space-time channel estimation at the receiver with
or&lt;br/&gt;without training symbols. The research in these topics will
also&lt;br/&gt;benefit long-frame space-time communication systems, as well
as&lt;br/&gt;important applications in multi-user detection and in future
sensor&lt;br/&gt;networks.&lt;br/&gt;