* 0431085
* Statistical Data Mining of Time-Dependent Data with Applications in Geoscience and Biology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Padhraic Smyth, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 566,644.00

This project is developing novel statistical data mining methods that will help
scientists to explore and understand large observational data sets. A specific
focus of this research is on developing algorithms that can extract, from large
data sets, models of dynamic behavior of objects over time, with an emphasis on
selected data-driven problems in biology and geoscience. Examples include
automated discovery of genetic regulatory mechanisms from expression
measurements over time, and clustering and prediction of cyclone behavior over
time. Statistical learning principles are being used to guide algorithm
development and to produce publicly-available software tools. An educational
component of this project is leading to an increased awareness among students of
the important role of computer science and statistics in data-driven
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this project have the potential
for significant and broad impact in the primary focus areas of geoscience and
biology, as well as in other scientific and engineering areas involving large
observational data sets from dynamic processes. In the geosciences, the new
algorithms can yield improved modeling and prediction of extra-tropical and
tropical cyclones, reducing the socio-economic risks associated with cyclonic
events and potentially provide valuable clues about possible climate change. In
the biosciences, improved understanding of gene regulatory mechanisms (obtained
via new network discovery algorithms) can provide the basis for significant
advances in systems biology and medicine, such as the identification of the
regulatory mechanisms for cancer-related genes and resultant development of
gene-specific medical treatments.&lt;br/&gt;