* 0431488
* Science Talent Expansion Program
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Gregory Van Doren, Heritage University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2009
* USD 499,880.00

Abstract

Proposal 0431488 Science Talent Expansion Program Heritage College Gregory S.
Van Doren

This project includes an active multicultural science student recruiting
program, incentive scholarships, tutoring, professional and peer mentoring,
internships, student teaching stipends, student membership in professional
societies, and travel to regional and national meetings. It will more than
double the average number of science majors graduating each year with
baccalaureate degrees. The objective is to graduate students who "do science."

Intellectual Merit: This project addresses both the need for science graduates
who are ready to do science and the need to provide financial incentives and
support for college students that are struggling in their pursuit of a science
degree. It includes a comprehensive support structure to help science students
succeed as well as research internships that will prepare them to be research
scientists.

Broader Impacts: An increase in science baccalaureate degrees would positively
impact local shortages of science professionals. The Yakima Valley has a wealth
of undeveloped science talent in its youth who need certified science teachers
who also know their students' cultures. Local schools have large numbers of
Hispanic and Native American students. This project will place science teacher
graduates within local hard-to-staff schools, as role models and professionals.
These teachers will encourage more youth to succeed in science earlier in their
scholastic careers and be prepared for college.