* 0431279
* Continuing Support for the Board on Infrastructure and the Constructed Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Richard Little, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/2005
* USD 55,000.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;Directorate for Engineering&lt;br/&gt;4201
Wilson Boulevard, Room 545&lt;br/&gt;Arlington, Virginia
22230&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
CMS-0431279&lt;br/&gt;PI: Richard Little&lt;br/&gt;Institution: National Academy
of Science&lt;br/&gt;Date: May 27, 2004&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
represents continued partial support of the Board on Infrastructure and the
Constructed Environment (BICE). The National Research Council, through its
Division of Engineering and Physical Sciences, established the BICE in 1994 to
investigate questions of technology, science, and public policy applied to urban
systems and services; above ground and underground construction; the
relationship between the constructed and natural environments, and their
interaction with human activities; the effects of natural hazards on constructed
facilities; and related issues of planning, design, construction management,
surety, and use of the built environment. The BICE brings together in an
independent forum expertise from a wide range of scientific, engineering, and
social science disciplines to address problems and issues of infrastructure and
the build environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funding for
the Board to reassess its strategic plan, Guidance for Strategic Action on Civil
Infrastructure Issues, as a means to foster dialog on emerging issues affecting
critical infrastructure. As a result of this exercise, the Board will develop a
program of activities including colloquia, roundtables, and lectures to
implement the goals of the BICE strategic plan. These activities will be closely
coordinated with sponsor agencies and designed to enlarge the knowledge base and
advance policy discussions in areas such as building technology and performance,
asset management, sustainable communities and infrastructures, the role of
information technology in civil infrastructure systems, the effects of natural
and technological hazards on the built environment, defensive design principles
for facility and infrastructure safety and security, infrastructure investment
and performance strategies, socio-technological factors in infrastructure and
community design, building rehabilitation technologies, construction
technologies, and increased use of the underground environment. Funding will
also be used to enhance dissemination of BICE reports and the outcomes of other
BICE activities through presentations and papers at several workshops and
conferences including the 2nd International Conference on the Protection of
Structures Against Hazards, the IEEE Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, and the 38th Hawaii International Symposium on System
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;