* 0431779
* Reformulating General Engineering and Biological Systems Engineering Programs at Virginia Tech
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Kumar Mallikarjunan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,082,944.00

This project is focusing on creating a cohesive General Engineering and
Bioprocess Engineering program built on sound learning theory and pedagogical
principles. A theme-based spiral curriculum approach, based on pioneering work
of Jerome Bruner, is being adopted for the reforms. This Department-Level Reform
project is demonstrating an unprecedented level of collaboration between
engineering and education faculty members at Virginia
Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is reforming the General Engineering and
the Bioprocess Engineering program within the Biological Systems Engineering
Department at Virginia Tech. The specific objectives are: 1) Reformulating the
existing General Engineering and Bioprocess Engineering curricula using theme-
based spiral curriculum design and improved pedagogical methods, 2) Training
faculty in the use of learning centered pedagogical techniques, 3) Developing a
continual assessment plan to measure the impact of the reformulated curricula,
faculty improvement activities, and student learning, and 4) Disseminating the
results of the curricular reformulation and pedagogical changes to peers within
and outside Virginia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central idea of the spiral
curriculum is that students will pursue their study of diverse engineering
topics within the context of one or more organizing themes. Within the
Bioprocess curriculum, the theme most relevant and useful is sustainability. By
investigating progressively more complex problems situated within this theme,
students are able to learn design, systems approach, ethics, and other
engineering fundamentals, while emphasizing sustainability. The nature of the
spiral concept is that students will constantly be working on the same topic-
sustainability-but at progressively higher skill levels, knowledge
representation, and commitment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;