* 0431196
* Working Toward Capacity in Multiple Antenna Radio
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Michael Fitz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Richard Brown
* 08/31/2009
* USD 372,000.00

Over the past several years, there has been a great deal of research to improve
performance of wireless communications in fading environments by exploiting
transmitter and/or receiver diversity and spatial multiplexing. The pioneering
work by Telatar, Foschini and Gans showed that multiple antenna radios (MAR) in
a wireless communication system can greatly improve the performance. The major
roadblock to MAR being a financially viable option for wireless communications
is the cost of the analog portions of the radio. Point--to--point MAR systems
employing complex signaling and signal processing algorithms have been designed
and built and have achieved performance very close to the outage capacity. The
remaining gains that are achievable in MAR will only be exploited by considering
the cost and complexity of analog circuitry in MAR signalling and signal
processing, by considering more complex models for wireless propagation, and by
putting MAR in networking context. The focus of this effort is to push MAR
technology by exploiting the structure in these more complex models and
networking scenarios.

The objectives of the effort can be succinctly stated as: 1) Communication
theory is often interested in normalizing performance for a fixed average power
but in wireless implementations the peak power is a more critical driver than
the average power. The research is examining optimization of performance and
throughput with a peak power constraint in multiple antenna radio. 2) Feedback
communication is likely going to enable a significant improvement in throughput
and demodulator complexity in a networked scenario especially in environments
with low mobility (e.g., wireless computer networks). This research is
approaching feedback communication with a classic scientific method of iterating
between experimentation on real channels and more realistic theoretical problem
formulations based on the results derived in experimentation. 3) The cost driver
in wireless communication currently is the analog circuitry. This research is
examining techniques that would minimize the complexity of the analog systems in
a multiple antenna radio. The objectives are to being met by the following
research tasks a) Improved channel parameterization for long range prediction
for multiple antenna radio, b) Design and field testing of a variety of MAR
automatic repeat request algorithms, c) Experimentation with the proposed
feedback algorithms for MAR, d) Feedback algorithms for MAR with constant
envelop modulations, e) Feedback algorithms for MAR with limited analog
capabilities,