* 0431472
* Integrating Entrepreneurship Concepts and Entrepreneurial  Service Learning Components into Undergraduate Civil and Mechanical Engineering Courses
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Bryan Becker, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2007
* USD 99,978.00

The Civil and Mechanical Engineering departments of the School of Computing and
Engineering (SCE) at the University of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC) propose to
become national leaders in the integration of entrepreneurship concepts and
entrepreneurship service learning components throughout their undergraduate
curricula. This grant will assist with planning for : (1) fundamentally changing
the way certain undergraduate courses are taught in the Civil and Mechanical
Engineering curricula, and (2) establishing entrepreneurship and service
learning as a key feature for developing competitive and productive Civil and
Mechanical Engineering graduates. Significant collaboration is being obtained
from team members belonging to the Henry W. Bloch School of Business and Public
Administration, and the Department of Psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal seeks to increase the relevance of undergraduate education to an ever
increasing need for technical competence in the business world. This project
could influence other disciplines (medicine, law, etc.) into adopting some of
the deliverables provided by this research. The proposed project effort could
have broad impact on those programs interested in emulating the UMKC model. This
integration plan has the potential for increasing the retention of students in
the engineering degree programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;