* 0431767
* WORKSHOP:     Computing Beyond Silicon Summer School 2004
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Andre DeHon, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 01/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

The intellectual merit of the CBSSS(Computing Beyond Silicon Summer School)
program lies in fostering the development of this kind of researcher. The CBSSS
program will bring together a unique collection of pedagogical and novel
research materials representing the fundamental background knowledge necessary
to work in this area and the fundamental challenges this area presents. 40-50
students, mostly undergraduates, will be fully funded to spend 4 weeks at
Caltech hearing lectures from leaders in the emerging fields of quantum
computation, biomolecular computation, and molecular electronics. Students will
also hear&lt;br/&gt;lectures on core computer science and information theory
which is directly relevant to these areas&lt;br/&gt;of research. The students
will work in small teams on projects in this area and be able to turn to
the&lt;br/&gt;lecturers and the broader Caltech physics of information community
for project guidance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of exciting
students about these new areas and giving them the intellectual tools and
pointers they need to properly get started into these research paths. We expect
most students have been educated in their respective disciplines. However, few
undergraduates would currently be&lt;br/&gt;exposed to these novel substrates,
much less cross-educated to think about them. Very few would&lt;br/&gt;have
adequate exposure to contemplate graduate research in this area, much less the
confidence to&lt;br/&gt;write a credible statement-of-purpose for graduate
study. Students completing this program should&lt;br/&gt;be prepared to write
such a Statement of Purpose and get involved with research in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a further benefit, materials for the program will
be posted on the web, providing a central resource&lt;br/&gt;for other students
and for educators who wish to develop courses in this area at their own
university.&lt;br/&gt;CBSSS will also have an impact on the participating
faculty who have a unique opportunity to&lt;br/&gt;interact with each other and
share ideas. The program will help them better see common problems&lt;br/&gt;and
possible solutions and identify collaboration opportunities.