* 0431637
* Epsilon Corps: Expanding STEM Talent Through Exploration, Mentoring and Sequenced Curricular Support
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2004,09/30/2010
* Jing Gao, Kean University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/2010
* USD 966,933.00

The Epsilon Corp is enhancing STEM major recruitment and retention among the
highly diverse students at Kean University, an urban, comprehensive, public
university in northern New Jersey. The project focuses on progressive
recruitment and engagement of incoming students, intensive support and STEM
skill building, community building with synergistic interaction among all STEM
students, and campus-wide, culture-shifting and institutional changes. Epsilon
Corps has five interwoven components: 1) engaging both undecided and intended
incoming STEM students as Epsilon Explorers and encouraging them to choose STEM
majors through peer-led exploration activities in the Summer Epsilon Institute
and in Special Sections of Freshman Seminar; 2) engaging prospective and
declared STEM majors with sophomore status as Epsilon Scholars and enhancing
their STEM skills through mentoring and tutoring in Special Sections of Research
& Technology; 3) engaging STEM juniors and seniors as Epsilon Peer Mentors and
Project Leaders and enhancing their mentoring, project development and
leadership skills through activities in special sections of an interdisciplinary
general education course; 4) using this sequenced curricular support structure
to build and sustain a synergistic STEM community of active learners and peer
mentors, known collectively as Epsilon Corps); and 5) creating a campus-wide
science-friendly atmosphere with coherent motivational and support activities,
programs and facilities (Epsilon Celebration Day, Epsilon Awards and
Scholarships, Epsilon Outreach, Epsilon Web Platform, and Epsilon Activities
Center) to promote student interest in STEM careers and enhance their success in
STEM programs.

