* 0431955
* Collaborative Research: Radiative Effects of Desert Dust Deposits in Alpine Snow
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Christopher Landry, Center for Snow and Avalanche Studies
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2008
* USD 173,652.00

This study will address the following scientific objectives (1) determination of
the modern baseline of absorbing dust deposition frequency and magnitude to
snowcover in the San Juan Mountains, (2) the temporal variation of the
integrated and spectral albedo of snow relative to dust concentration and
layering, (3) develop parameterizations between snow albedo and dust
concentrations for inclusion in radiation modules for general circulation
models, (4) investigate the contribution of dust deposition from the Colorado
Plateau and other sources (natural and anthropogenic), and (5) determine the
temporal variability of regional to local absorbing dust sources to the alpine
snowfields.

The research is intended to provide a framework for understanding the
sensitivity of the hydrologic budget in this semi-arid region where snow albedo
represents the dominant term in the generation of snowmelt. Because of a lack of
measurements, general circulation models have not included accurate
parameterizations of snow albedo and impurities. This work will be communicating
these parameterizations to researchers at the National Center for Atmospheric
Research for inclusion in the Community Climate System Model and other models.

Broader Impact: The project provides programs of Education and Outreach. A
graduate student will work on the project with supervision provided by the PI.
The project will include the outreach programs Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) and Research Experiences for Teachers (RET). A CU-Boulder
undergraduate will participate in field and data analysis as part of a senior
thesis with an REU grant. In the capacity of an RET, the project will involve
teachers from a San Juan region school with a particular focus on teachers from
the Silverton Public School. The Silverton Public School, considered a high
poverty school, has expressed intention to participate in an RET with the
project given its capacity to enhance their science and technology curriculum.

The real-time meteorological data from the Senator Beck alpine and the Swamp
Angel subalpine sites will be distributed via a webserver and used to drive an
online version of the snow physics model "SNTHERM.89". Students at universities
with atmospheric science and snow hydrology courses will be able to access data
from the San Juan Mountains and run the SNTHERM model with local meteorological
and radiative data to predict snowpack properties.