* 0431027
* Impact on Computational Geometry on Depth-Based Statistics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Diane Souvaine, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2008
* USD 224,723.00

Today's real-life experiments generate massive multivariate datasets.
Statistical analysis tools that efficiently and accurately capture the
multivariate features of such experiments are needed. Classical statistical
analysis requires a preliminary assumption as to the underlying probability
distribution of the data. This preliminary assumption affects the analysis.
Increasingly, statisticians are advocating the geometric notion of data depth
(DD) for multivariate data analysis as it requires no prior assumptions on the
probability distribution of data and handles outliers. Data-depth-based analysis
methods exist, but most of them are not yet sufficiently efficient to handle
large datasets. Computational Geometry (CG) focuses on the complexity analysis
of geometric problems and the design of effective algorithmic solutions. This
project applies CG techniques to develop more efficient tools for DD analysis.
Aviation safety analysis, bioinformatics, clinical data mining and statistical
process control are potential applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses underlying CG issues in the development of efficient practical
algorithms for DD and undertakes these major tasks: resolve computational
problems related to half-space-depth and simplicial-depth contours; evaluate the
applicability of depth contours to quantification of multivariate features of
dataset and to their visualization; expand two-dimensional algorithms and assess
approximation algorithms for high dimensions; explore new approaches for outlier
detection and assess their validity. Intellectual merit derives from the
dependence of practical implementations of DD on solutions to complex geometric
questions, the demand from applied scientists for new methods of statistical
analysis and visualization, and the prior recorded success of comparable
investigations. The practical algorithms for scientists to apply DD to larger
real-world datasets and extract fresh insights, the fresh visualization tools
for enhanced understanding, the refinements in the statisticians' DD
formulations based on new computational insights, and the training of diverse
pre-college, college, and graduate students provide the broader impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;