* 0431044
* Collaborative Research:     SEI:     Spatio-temporal Data Analysis Techniques for Behavioural Ecology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Richard Wrangham, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2008
* USD 127,920.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1960, Jane Goodall began the first long-term field
study of the closest living relatives of humans, chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes),
in Gombe National Park, Tanzania to describe their behavior by making extensive
observations in their natural habitat. This study, which continues today, has
made many contributions to understand chimpanzee behavior and human evolution,
and has also inspired people around the world to study science and work toward
wildlife conservation. Analysis of the complete observational dataset from Gombe
and other field studies, such as the Kanyawara chimpanzee project, has the
potential of providing new insights into many unanswered behavioral ecology
questions, e.g. the influence of social relationships within the group on
territorial behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, this observational paradigm
is extremely labor-intensive and only a small part of the Gombe dataset has been
analyzed so far. The goal of this project is to begin developing data analysis
tools and techniques to reduce the time and effort required to analyze
observation datasets. Expected results include a cartridge for mining concept
patterns, a computationally efficient execution environment for concept pattern
mining, and spatial semi-supervised learning algorithms to improve
classification performance in creating maps. Expected results will not only
benefit behavioral ecologists, but also contribute to research in many other
spatio-temporal application domains, including location based services,
transportation and epidemiology. Dissemination plans include development of
instructional tools based on the Gombe data to motivate younger students to
learn science and information technology as well as a workshop to increase
collaboration between Computer Scientists and Behavioral Ecologists.&lt;br/&gt;