* 0431282
* VL/HCC'04 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Mary Beth Rosson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2005
* USD 25,550.00

This is funding to support a research event (workshop) for 10-14 promising
doctoral students from the United States and abroad, along with distinguished
research faculty, which will take place in conjunction with the 2004 IEEE
Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC'04), to be
held September 26-28 in Rome, Italy, and sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society.
Our society has evolved into two distinct classes: the information haves and
have-nots. Because information is power, this class distinction is a highly
effective barrier to the ability of the have-nots to advance in terms of career
and influence, both individually and in groups. The development of programming
tools that allow end users to operate on task information (e.g., via complex
queries and manipulations) may increase this gap even more. It will no longer be
enough to find and use information others create; increasingly, employees and
citizens will be expected to generate and manipulate information in creative
ways to solve complex problems. There is an urgent need to consider the
accessibility of these more powerful information tools, before the gap between
the haves and have-nots becomes too great to cross. We need to design for
inclusiveness as we envision and build programming tools for end users, so that
everyone will have the opportunity to benefit from the power that they offer.
That is the theme of this year's doctoral consortium, the second funded by NSF
in this series. The event will bring together and build community among young
researchers working on different aspects of the research problem, whether their
"home" research community is in Computer Science, Sociology, or Education. The
workshop will emphasize to attendees (both the graduate students immediately
involved and general conference participants) the crosscutting nature of
research relevant to this pressing research problem, which has received almost
no prior study. Goals of the workshop include building a cohort group of new
researchers who will then have a network of colleagues spread out across the
world, guiding the work of new researchers by having experts in the research
field give them advice, and making it possible for promising new entrants to the
field to attend their research conference. Student participants will make formal
presentations of their work during the workshop, and will receive feedback from
the faculty panel. The feedback is geared to helping students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to other human-computer
interaction research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis
research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and
whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Extended
abstracts of the students' work will be published in the conference proceedings,
which has wide print and electronic distribution. The conference steering
committee will evaluate the workshop outcome, and the results will be made
available to the organizers of possible similar future
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop will help shape
ongoing and future research projects aimed at alleviating a pressing problem of
relevance to a great many people within our society. This event will promote
discovery and learning, by encouraging the student researchers to explore a
difficult and challenging open problem, through involvement of a panel of well-
known researchers whose task is to provide constructive feedback, and through
inclusion of other conference participants who will also learn from and provide
additional feedback to the students and to each other.