* 0431328
* EMSI: Center for Environmental Kinetic Analysis (CEKA)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Susan Brantley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2011
* USD 6,764,278.00

Kinetics of abiotic and biotic chemical reactions in both natural and
contaminated environmental systems will be studied. Investigations will
transcend multiple temporal and spatial scales and chemical systems in order to
gain insight into the ways molecular scale behavior affect the macroscopic
world. The Institute is organized into three interest groups focusing on the
processes of dissolution, precipitation, and microbial reactions at surfaces.
Each interest group will study reactions across the molecular, microscopic,
mesoscopic and, in most cases, field scales. Each interest group is studying the
same families of materials (oxides of Fe, Mn, Al; feldspars and silica; Mg, Ca,
Fe minerals) in order to integrate the Institute across interest groups. For
example, dissolution reactions of ferromagnesian silicates may play a role in
groundwater quality because toxic metals may be present in these natural mineral
phases. Study of this natural process and the effect it has on groundwater
quality is useful in its own right, and may also prove relevant to
ferromagnesian silicate conversion into carbonate minerals, a process that is
under investigation for a possible role in CO2 sequestration. In addition, the
abiotic dissolution and precipitation reactions of these phases will provide the
baseline for kinetic behavior as the third interest group researches the
interaction of micro-organisms with these same minerals. The attachment of
bacteria and redox chemistry that occurs between micro-organisms and minerals
are critical factors in maintaining groundwater quality and remediation of many
toxic waste sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physicochemical and microbiological
processes taking place at environmental interfaces influence natural processes
as well as the transport and fate of environmental contaminants, the remediation
of toxic chemicals, and the sequestration of anthropogenic carbon dioxide. A
team of scientists and engineers has been assembled to develop and apply new
experimental and computational techniques to create a database for environmental
kinetics. A cohort of talented and diverse students will be trained to work on
these complex problems at multiple length scales. Development of the human
resources capable of translating molecular-scale information into parameters
that are applicable in real world, field-scale problems of environmental
kinetics will be a major and relatively unique outcome of the Institute's
efforts. Interactions between the applied and academic scientists will drive
research approaches aimed toward solving important problems of national
interest. Examples of the roles molecular processes play in understanding and
managing environmental problems will be used to create 3-D movies to be shown on
GeoWall screens at The Pennsylvania State University Earth &amp; Mineral
Sciences museum and at traveling exhibits throughout the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental Molecular Science Institute (EMSI) awards
are given to interdisciplinary teams of university, industrial and/or national
laboratory scientists working on problems aimed at increasing fundamental
understanding of natural processes and processes resulting from human activities
in the environment at the molecular level. The emphasis in these awards is on
collaborative research among teams with complementary research interests and the
creation of broad educational experiences for students. The Penn State EMSI team
is a partnership among 12 faculty at The Pennsylvania State University (funded
by the National Science Foundation Divisions of Chemistry and Earth Sciences)
and four researchers drawn from Los Alamos National Laboratories, Pacific
Northwest National Laboratories, and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
(funded by the Department of Energy Division of Environmental Remediation
Sciences). &lt;br/&gt;