* 0431949
* Planning Grant for the Creation of an Innovative Pedagogical Strategy to Integrate Design Throughout the Undergraduate Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Thomas Wong, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/2006
* USD 98,827.00

This planning project will develop an innovative strategy to incorporate
concepts of design theory and methodology throughout the Illinois Institute of
Technology (IIT) undergraduate engineering curriculum. Elements of the strategy
will outline specific pedagogical and programmatic components that address the
challenges and opportunities of integrating design throughout an undergraduate
engineering curriculum. The strategy will help answer key planning questions
such as "How can the various topics in design be organized and addressed
throughout an undergraduate experience?" and "How can we modify existing
elements of our learning experience to convey concepts of design?" This
interdisciplinary project involves faculty and students from each of IIT's
engineering colleges, the Institute of Design, the Institute of Psychology, and
industry.

The project will be carried out in five phases: 1) Research to gather
perspectives; 2) Ethnographic domain analysis of design; 3) Creation of optional
strategy elements & prototypes; 4) Evaluation of the strategy elements; and 5)
Creation of the final innovative strategy. The project phases will each use an
appropriate methodology to ensure productive work and reliable results. The
first phase will use ethnographic methods of data collection and analysis to
create an understanding of the various ways design is understood and taught
across the departments. Conceptualization and prototyping will be used to create
alternative elements of the strategy that can be used for critical evaluation. A
Delphi technique will be used to assess the alternative elements of the strategy
and refine them. The last phase will document the resulting strategy for wider
dissemination and in preparation for implementation.

Intellectual Merit The results of this project will contribute to the knowledge
of how U.S. engineering curricula, each with diverse constituents and
challenging constraints, can more effectively integrate design theory and
methods. While the incorporation of more open-ended projects in undergraduate
engineering is gaining momentum, simply offering these projects does not
guarantee they will lead to strong learning experiences. To avoid that
situation, this proposal includes appropriate pedagogical components that teach
design theory and methods before, during and after our project, reducing the
challenges both for students and instructors and leading to more reliable
results.

Broader Impacts This planning project incorporates faculty undergraduate and
graduate students in research of pedagogy and the discovery of new approaches
that can enhance the engineering education experience. With an innovative
strategy to more effectively integrate design theory and methodology,
engineering schools have the potential to attract and retain a broader range of
constituents. It has been shown that improving the undergraduate engineering
learning experience leads to higher recruitment and retention rates of minority
groups and women in particular.