* 0431428
* Symposium: Is Microbial Ecology Fundamentally Different? New Insights into Patterns and Controls of Microbial Diversity to be held August 1-6, 2004 Portland, Oregon
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Brendan Bohannan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2004
* USD 21,779.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microorganisms account for the vast majority of the
world's biomass, and their diversity surpasses that of all other organisms. They
play a central role in many aspects of the Earth's natural history, including
the regeneration of nutrients, the breakdown of pollutants and the formation of
minerals. Despite their numerical dominance and central ecological importance,
microbial biodiversity remains poorly understood. This is due in part to the
disciplinary boundaries that tend to separate microbiologists involved in
microbial diversity studies from ecologists involved in the general study of
biodiversity. A symposium has been organized that will bridge this separation.
This symposium has been included in the program for the Ecological Society of
America (ESA) Annual Meeting (August 1-6, 2004) in Portland, Oregon. The annual
ESA meeting is the largest and most significant meeting of ecologists. Our
symposium, entitled "Is Microbial Ecology Fundamentally Different? New Insights
into Patterns and Controls of Microbial Diversity," will break new ground by
facilitating interdisciplinary research involving microbiologists and
ecologists. A major goal of the symposium is to integrate the work of
microbiologists with the latest trends in ecological theory and practice (until
now, developed largely through the study of macro-
organisms).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the most critical challenges facing
humanity are the conservation, restoration and wise management of the Earth's
diverse living resources. To meet these challenges, society requires basic
information concerning how these resources are generated and maintained.
Characterizing patterns in the diversity of life is a critical first step toward
providing this understanding. Documenting patterns in microbial diversity is
especially critical given the ecological importance of microbes and our relative
ignorance regarding their diversity. The proposed symposium will provide a
unique venue for exchanging information regarding patterns in microbial
diversity, and for promoting collaborative research, nationally and
internationally, between microbial and general ecologists regarding microbial
diversity patterns. The program will serve as a platform to promote women and
early-career researchers as leaders in this emerging area, as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;