* 0431312
* EMSI: Atmospheric Integrated Research Using Chemistry at Interfaces (AIRUCI)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Douglas Tobias, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2009
* USD 6,009,585.00

This Institute will develop a broad understanding of reactions at the air-water
interface and their importance in the atmosphere across a broad range of spatial
and temporal scales. Experiments using a variety of approaches (Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy with long path gas cells and attenuated total
reflectance for thin films, aerosol chamber with spectroscopic and atmospheric
pressure ionization mass spectrometry, laser desorption-Fourier transform mass
spectrometry, thermal desorption mass spectrometry, both conventional and high
pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, aerosol chemical ionization mass
spectrometry, infrared cavity ring down spectroscopy, aerosol photochemistry
apparatus, electron spin resonance studies, computer-controlled scanning
electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray analysis, environmental
scanning electron microscopy, time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry)
will be used to study the air-water interface reactions of halogens, oxides of
nitrogen and sulfur, organic compounds, and mixtures of these. Theoretical
approaches including ab initio quantum chemical calculations, molecular dynamics
simulations, and theoretical treatments of capillary waves on liquid surfaces
will be used to interpret the experimental data at the most fundamental level.
The insights gained from the experiments and theory will be integrated into a
state-of-the art airshed model to assess the implications on local to regional
scales, and this model will be tested first by application to experimental
laboratory data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemical reactions that take place at
the air-water interfaces are important to atmospheric processes in the
troposphere. This team of scientists and engineers will use experimental and
computational techniques to better understand the complex reactions occuring at
the surface of a thin film or the surface of an atmospheric aerosol particle. A
cohort of talented and diverse students will be trained to work on these complex
problems. The EMSI is partnering with the University of California-Irvine Math
Science Partnership award (FOCUS!) to provide continuing professional training
and curricular support in both fundamental chemistry and atmospheric sciences to
regional high school and middle school science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental Molecular Science Institute (EMSI)
awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of university, industrial and/or
national laboratory scientists working on problems aimed at increasing
fundamental understanding of natural processes and processes resulting from
human activities in the environment at the molecular level. The emphasis in
these awards is on collaborative research among teams with complementary
research interests and the creation of broad educational experiences for
students. This EMSI represents a partnership between six faculty at the
University of California-Irvine (funded by the National Science Foundation
Divisions of Chemistry and Atmospheric Sciences), international researchers from
the Czech Academy of Sciences, Russian Academy of Sciences, and the University
of Canterbury, New Zealand together with researchers from the Environmental
Molecular Science Laboratory at the Pacific Northwest National Lab, Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The NSF
EMSI award incorporates a Collaborative Research in Chemistry award,
CHE-0209719. &lt;br/&gt;