* 0431787
* QnTM: Quantum Channel Capacities and Quantum Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Peter Shor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2007
* USD 450,000.00

Recent years have seen the advent of DNA-based computation, as well as the
development of a&lt;br/&gt;DNA nanotechnology that produces objects, robust
devices and periodic arrays. We propose to&lt;br/&gt;combine these areas, by
using a robust 2-state DNA device and DNA array assembly techniques&lt;br/&gt;to
prototype a programmable finite state machine capable of performing simple
computations.&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to produce a system that is programmable,
produces an output and is reusable.&lt;br/&gt;We exploit connections between
Wang tiles, finite state machines (transducers) and com-&lt;br/&gt;putable
functions. The main idea uses DNA TX molecules to represent transducer
transitions&lt;br/&gt;and a sequence of 2-state DNA devices to program the
input. Once the input is programmed,&lt;br/&gt;the computation of the transducer
is obtained solely by DNA self-assembly. Further more, iter-&lt;br/&gt;ations
and composition of transducers is also possible and hence all computable
functions can&lt;br/&gt;be obtained.&lt;br/&gt;The project is composed of two
major tasks,&lt;br/&gt;1. To simulate computation by a finite state machine with
output by a single assembly of&lt;br/&gt;input molecules and TX transition
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;2. To obtain transducer computation with a programmale
input by DNA 2-state devices and&lt;br/&gt;TX molecules.&lt;br/&gt;Intelectual
Merit. The project prototypes a nanomachine that is potentially
programmable&lt;br/&gt;and produces an output that can serve as an input in a
new device or as a template for orga-&lt;br/&gt;nization and growth of
nanostructures used in nanoelectronics. The proposed machine has
a&lt;br/&gt;potential for an algorithmic control of this growth. Theoretically,
the design of the machine and&lt;br/&gt;the need for encoding (locally and
globally) that is error correcting will lead to development of&lt;br/&gt;new
techniques in algorithmic pattern design.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Research in
DNA-based computation relies on many disciplines, such as&lt;br/&gt;computer
science, DNA chemistry, nucleic acid enzymology, thermodynamics and
molecular&lt;br/&gt;physics. Few individuals enter in to it with adequate
preparation. We will attempt to provide&lt;br/&gt;some remedy for this problem
during the course of this project. The graduate, undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;and
high school students who participate in this work will be uniquely trained and
will be&lt;br/&gt;prepared as unique interdisciplinary research scientists.
Three graduate students (two at New&lt;br/&gt;York University and one at the
University of South Florida) will receive graduate training&lt;br/&gt;through
this award. They will meet with each other, and become familiar with the
thinking and&lt;br/&gt;methodologies of their opposite colleagues in the other
university. In addition, we will include&lt;br/&gt;an undergraduate in the
project, to gain experience in combining computer science with
DNA&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology. We aim to include a high school student in the
parts of the work for which&lt;br/&gt;they are eligible (e.g., computation and
experiments not entailing the use of radiation).&lt;br/&gt;Besides their own
nanotechnological and mathematical disciplines, the PI and the co-PI
are&lt;br/&gt;prominent members of the DNA-based computation community. Both
facets of this commu-&lt;br/&gt;nity recognize that it is converging with
structural DNA nanotechnology. In recognition of&lt;br/&gt;this
interdisciplinary phenomenon, the PI and the co-PI are involved in founding (as
president&lt;br/&gt;and treasurer, respectively) the \International Society for
Nanoscale Science, Computation and&lt;br/&gt;Engineering" with a goal to
facilitate communication among the members of the
participating&lt;br/&gt;communities, and to recognize and promote the careers of
the younger members, by offering&lt;br/&gt;them recognition and a forum for
their ideas.