* 0431929
* U.S.-India Planning Visit: Tectonic and Metallogenic History of the Central Indian Tectonic Zone and Bordering Terranes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Holly Stein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 05/31/2005
* USD 10,280.00

0431929 Stein

Description: This award supports a two-week, field-based planning visit for US
PI Holly Stein and co-PI Judith Hannah of Colorado State University (CSU) to
build collaborations with Indian geologists including Dr. Santanu Bhowmik of the
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. The title of the research is
"Tectonic and Metallogenic History of the Central Indian Tectonic Zone and
Bordering Terranes." Combining US expertise in geochronology with Indian
knowledge of field relationships will enable them to address major questions in
tectonics and metallogenesis. With their Indian colleagues, they will visit
several already identified localities in order to (1) assess exposures and
accessibility to improve planning of the larger project; (2) assess the current
knowledge and understanding of the field relationships; (3) collect samples for
preliminary analyses that can guide future field work; and (4) solidify plans
for a multi-year collaborative research project. Following this, the
investigators will submit a full proposal to NSF's Petrology & Geochemistry
Program, which is expected to yield important information on the growth of
continents and the position of various Indian terranes in plate tectonic
reconstructions.

Scope: This award includes support for one CSU graduate student, which will also
be a training opportunity in state-of-the-art analytical techniques, an
immersion in complex tectonics, and an introduction to the unique geology and
culture of India. New concepts and broadened understanding of the regional
tectonics acquired by both PIs and student will find there way into the
classroom. The collaboration with Indian geoscientists is expected to build
long-lasting research relationships with mutually beneficial interactions. This
project will help sustain a shared research facility at CSU, which during the
past six years has supported individuals from industry, academia, and government
agencies. This award will enable the inclusion of India's geosciences community,
which currently lacks comparable facilities and expertise.