* 0431243
* Workshop:    Future of Modeling in Composites Molding Processe;: June 9-10, 2004; Washington, DC
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Douglas Smith, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 04/30/2005
* USD 18,125.00

The objective of this workshop is to establish a vision for the use of modeling
in composite molding manufacturing processes, identify current barriers that
must be overcome to realize this vision, and provide a research focus for
overcoming these barriers. The approach is to hold a workshop with participants
from industry, government laboratories and academia, that is co-sponsored by the
National Science Foundation, the US Department of Energy, and the American
Plastics Council to address issues related to the modeling of injection molded
short and long fiber composites, liquid molding, compression molding,
thermoplastic liquid molding, and injection-compression molding. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Polymer composites are widely used in a variety of industries
including Aerospace and Automotive because they provide outstanding strength and
stiffness to weight ratios. To fully realize the benefits of polymer composites
in modern engineering components and systems, it is imperative that modeling
methods be developed and applied at every step in the design process. This
seminar addresses the role of modeling and computer simulations that are used in
the design of polymer composite products and the manufacturing methods used in
their production. As a result of improved modeling approaches, design cycles
will be shortened which will reduce costs and allow for faster responses to
changes in the marketplace. New applications will emerge. Advanced modeling
strategies will help address environmental concerns by providing more efficient
designs that use less energy in production, and provide opportunities to better
accommodate product requirements over the entire life cycle, including materials
processing, production, use and disposal.&lt;br/&gt;