* 0431599
* Workshop on Performance and Design of Fiber Reinforced Polymer Composites at Very Cold Temperatures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Judy Liu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 05/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

Fiber-Reinforced Polymer (FRP) composites, used in various applications and
environments, are often chosen over conventional materials for their durability.
In cold temperatures, especially, designers expect longer lifetimes and lower
maintenance for FRP composites as compared to conventional materials. However,
the performance of FRP composites can be adversely affected by environment. For
applications in civil infrastructure, for example, stiffness and strength
degradation can be aggravated by deposits from road-salts in addition to
moisture induced swelling and drying from freeze-thaw. The implications of such
effects for long-term performance and design must be well understood for
successful implementation of FRP composites at very cold temperatures. The
proposed objectives are: 1. Define the state of the art with regards to behavior
and prediction of performance of FRP composites at very cold temperatures 2.
Identify gaps in the knowledge base regarding behavior and prediction 3.
Stimulate ideas for research and collaboration based on the existing knowledge
base of FRP composites and other materials at very cold temperatures 4. Draft an
integrated research plan for performance and design of FRP composites at very
cold temperatures The intellectual merit of the proposed workshop lies in the
bringing together of researchers with diverse expertise and the integration of
knowledge in different topic areas to advance the state of the art. The study of
the performance and design of FRP composites at very cold temperatures spans
materials engineering, manufacturing, predictive modeling, and reliability-based
measures for incorporation into design procedures. The PI has a good plan to
identify the right people. In the area of broader impacts, the workshop will
benefit society through improved application of FRP composites at cold
temperatures, where the benefits of FRP over conventional materials can be fully
realized.

