* 0431070
* Computing and Retrieving 3D Archaeological Structures from Subsurface Surveying
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2007
* W. Frederick Limp, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,068,000.00

Today's archaeological excavations are slow and the cost for conservation can
easily exceed the cost of excavation. This project is investigating and
developing methods for the recovery of 3D underground structures from subsurface
non-invasive measurements obtained with ground penetrating radar, magnetometry,
and conductivity sensors. The results will not only provide hints for further
excavation but also 3D models that can be studied as if they were already
excavated. The three fundamental challenges investigated are the inverse problem
of recovering the volumetric material distribution, the segmentation of the
underground volumes, and the reconstruction of the surfaces that comprise
interesting structures. In the recovery of the underground volume, high-fidelity
geophysics models are introduced in their original partial differential equation
form. Partial differential equations from multiple modalities are simultaneously
solved to yield a material distribution volume. In segmentation, a graph
spectral method for estimating graph cuts finds clusters of underground voxels
with tight connections within partitions and loose connections between
partitions. A method based on multi-scale graph cuts significantly accelerates
the process while the grouping properties of the normalized cuts help in
clustering together multiple fragments of the same material. In surface
reconstruction, boundaries obtained from segmentation or from targeted material
search are converted from unorganized voxel clouds to connected surfaces. A
bottom-up approach is introduced that groups neighborhoods into facets whose
amount of overlap guides the triangulation process. The archaeology PIs are
providing prior knowledge on what structures are expected to be found which can
lead the segmentation and the reconstruction steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
geoscience and archaeology PIs lead the effort of data acquisition at the
Tiwanaku site in Bolivia. All original data as well as recovered 3D models will
be made available to the public.&lt;br/&gt;