* 0431886
* Development of a Comprehensive, Fully-Integrated Biological Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Martin Okos, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

This planning grant is to facilitate significant reform on a departmental wide
basis by developing a biological engineering curriculum that effectively
integrates the teaching and learning of engineering principles with biological
sciences. The new curriculum will prepare students for careers in
bioengineering-related areas by integrating the fundamentals of the biological
sciences into the engineering curriculum and applying engineering principles to
biological systems. Integration of teaching and research as well as continuous
faculty development will be the basis of this departmental level reform. This
planning grant will: 1) Develop a curriculum for an integrated biological
engineering undergraduate degree program that wil serve as a national model for
multidisciplinary efforts; 2) Investigate, identify, and integrate modern
learning strategies and pedagogical environments with high-impact on student
learning, recruitment, and retention; 3) ?Investigate, identify, and integrate
high-impact department-wide student experiential learning opportunities, and 4)
Engage departmental faculty in the science of learning and teaching biological
engineering to prepare for successful implementation of the new curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is
focused on linking ongoing research developments in biological engineering to
the teaching of undergraduates. This necessarily flexible and evolving
curriculum will serve as a model for similarly evolving disciplines that bridge
the divide between engineering and science. Through the collaborative efforts of
faculty in the Department of Agricultural an Biological Engineering at Purdue
University and associated stakeholders, they will develop a comprehensive,
fully-integrated biological engineering curriculum through a series of working
sessions that focus on: (1) integration of engineering and biological sciences,
(2) strategies for including experiential learning opportunities, and (3)
incorporation and implementation of modern teaching and learning methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Research advances that enable
quantification and modeling of biological phenomenon are leading to developments
that impact and improve the human condition. Graduates with the abilities
articulated by ABET Criterion 3 a-k, deep understandings of
biochemistry/biology, and an ability to work across the traditional divide
between engineering and science are needed to translate these research advances
to practical use. An undergraduate degree program that can effectively recruit,
retain, and prepare a diverse student population to work and grow in the
evolving field of biological engineering will fill a national need to grow the
technical workforce. &lt;br/&gt;