* 0431982
* Methods in the Exact Sciences of the Ancient and Medieval Periods
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Nathan Sidoli, Sidoli                  Nathan         C
* Fellowship Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2006
* USD 78,000.00

This Postdoctoral Fellowship is to develop the language skills to conduct
research in the methods and practices of the ancient exact sciences of medieval
Arabic. The PI will acquire the historical background to situate the evidence
within the culture of medieval Islam. These skills and knowledge will be applied
in a collaborative project on the mathematical methods of ancient and medieval
astronomy. The scholar host is an expert in the exact sciences of both the
Greco-Roman and medieval Arabic periods, with a strong publishing record in both
areas. The project will investigate different approaches to producing
astronomical knowledge using spherical geometry in Greco-Roman Antiquity. There
were a number of different ways of approaching spherical problems in the ancient
period. It has usually been assumed that there was an historical progression in
ancient spherical methods, moving from the simpler to the more powerful and
complex. In fact the ways in which knowledge was produced in each method are
different and problems can only be solved with a particular approach. All
ancient methods continued to coexist as complementary ways to produce
astronomical knowledge in the Medieval and Early Modern periods. In a number of
cases, the Latin or Arabic translations are our only evidence for a lost Greek
original. In order to apply the techniques of textual studies to these texts, it
will be necessary to situate the translations in their cultural and linguistic
contexts while still reading them as witnesses of much older work. This means
being sensitive to the texts and the editorial changes that have been made to
them.. By using the method of textual comparison, the investigators will be able
to shed light, not only on the form of the original texts, but also on the
conditions of the medieval transmission of these texts. The project will
undertake a study of the texts to develop a characterization of the mathematical
procedures that is situated in the intellectual and cultural context of the
sources. It will then proceed to an exploration of the properties of these
different approaches using more powerful, modern mathematics which will allow
the full range and limitations of the ancient methods to be seen. Finally, it
will show, through balanced reconstruction, how these methods might have been
used in practice. This study will be part of a growing body of recent work that
explores historical science not simply in terms of the theoretical statements it
produced but also with regard to the conditions, problems and practices.
Although there is no evidence that historians have insight into the process of
scientific discovery, by drawing out the practices witnessed in the ancient
texts, this study will furnish a better understanding of the methods that
scientists used to generate their results. This study will contribute to our
understanding of the methods and practices used in the production of ancient and
medieval mathematical astronomy. One of the most exiting aspects of this study
will be following a continuous scientific tradition as it was transmitted
through different cultures and languages. This project will provide an important
case study of the transmission of particular texts, theorems and methods of
mathematical astronomy from Greco-Roman Antiquity into the Arabic, and thence
Latin Middle Ages.

