* 0431051
* Video Coding using a 3-D Motion-Selective Wavelet Transform
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Yao Wang, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The transmission, storage, and related processing of video are important
technical problems in today's society. Progress related to the efficient
representation of video is of increasing importance for personal mobile
electronics and for Internet applications. Video coding algorithms are often
based on motion-compensated predictive coding. The project involves an original
approach for video representation that is based on recent developments in
wavelet theory: recently developed transforms are designed to overcome basic
problems that degrade the performance of the wavelet transform when it is
applied to multidimensional data using the standard separable implementation.

The standard separable 3-D wavelet transform is rarely used for video
compression because it mixes 3-D orientations in its subbands; this artifact
reduces the effectiveness of the separable transform for providing an efficient
representation of video. However, the new 3-D wavelet transform is free of the
mixing artifact and gives a meaningful multi-scale decomposition for video. With
the new transform, it is more likely that the multiresolution frame work, which
has proved very effective for image compression and efficient feature
extraction, can also be effectively applied to video representation. The new
transform isolates motion in different directions in separate subbands, so the
direction of motion can be inferred to some degree from the wavelet
coefficients.