* 0431904
* Management and Operation of the National Astronomy and Inosphere Center (NAIC), Arecibo Observatory (AO) 2005-2010
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2005,09/30/2012
* Donald Campbell, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ralph Gaume
* 09/30/2012
* USD 0.00

ABSTRACT

Cornell University will manage and operate the National Astronomy and Ionosphere
Center (NAIC) under Cooperative Agreement with the National Science Foundation
(NSF) in the period FY2005 - 2009. The first 18 months of this period will be
carried out under extension of the FY2000-2004 cooperative agreement. The NAIC
was formed in 1973 by Cornell and has been operated by Cornell since that time
as a multidisciplinary national center for research in astronomy and aeronomy
supported by the NSF. The cornerstone research instrument of the NAIC is the
305-m diameter Arecibo telescope, the largest radio/radar telescope in the
world. The NAIC seeks to implement as its primary scientific objectives those
consensus recommendations formulated by the astronomical and aeronomical
research communities themselves and articulated in the relevant decadal reports
of the National Research Council. The first NAIC "radio camera", the Arecibo
L-band Feed Array, operated by joint teams of university researchers and NAIC
scientists, will create archival databases for use by all astronomers. NAIC will
continue to operate its highly successful Visitor Center, which attracts more
people annually (120,000) than visit all other NSF astronomy facilities
combined. In 2003, Cornell/NAIC established the Office for the Public
Understanding of Science (OPUS) at the Observatory. The objective of OPUS in the
period of the current award is to become a leader in scientific outreach efforts
to the Hispanic community, a community that is underrepresented in the fields of
mathematics, science and engineering.

