* 0431203
* SEI(GEO):     Scientific Data Operators Optimized for Efficient Distributed Interactive and Batch Analysis of Tera-Scale Geophysical Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Charles Zender, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2008
* USD 594,386.00

Many geophysical simulations and nearly all climate models archive their results
in hundreds to thousands of files spanning gigabytes to terabytes of storage.
Before the geophysicist can interpret these data, it must be reduced to a
manageable size (e.g., by averaging it) and/or transported to a specified
location (e.g., the desktop computer). Currently researchers often copy raw data
over the Internet from multiple locations to commence their data analysis. This
project is developing the Scientific Data Operators (SDO): efficient software
that lets researchers perform typical data reduction and analysis in parallel,
remotely, without wasting time and network bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SDO software combines distributed and shared memory programming, client-server
architecture, and Open Source development techniques. As proof-of-concept, a
distributed analysis of multiple NCAR CCSM IPCC climate assessment simulations
(each is about a terabyte) within and across national boundaries will be
performed. This project also provides support for a graduate student to carry
out dissertation research in distributed climate analysis. Outside climate
modeling and analysis, SDO will have three main impacts: (1) increase the value
of large geophysical datasets by decreasing the time to analyze, discover, and
publish new results; (2) reveal any critical bandwidth, I/O, and client/server
bottlenecks in processing distributed geophysical data; and (3) improve analysis
of growing bioinformatics data sets, especially gene expression data, in ways
similar to the geophysics domain. SDO is free software based on the
internationally successful netCDF Operator (NCO) software. The project results
including this software will be accessible via the project web
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;