* 0431373
* Dissertation Research:  Growing Older in the Information Age: A Symbolic Interactionist Study of Stigma and Online Community in China and the United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Kim Fortun, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant aims to
produce new knowledge about how Internet use contributes to identity formation,
focusing on older Internet users in two cultural contexts: China and the United
States. Specifically, the study focuses on how older people cope with oldness-
associated stigma through the process of "virtual" interaction that takes place
in senior-oriented online communities. A focus on stigma will both foreground
cultural contexts and provide a way to track between people's online and offline
lives. This study has three main objectives: 1) to generate primary empirical
knowledge about older adults' interactions in senior-oriented online
communities, 2) to explore the mutual shaping of older adults' online and
offline worlds, and 3) to compare and contrast older adults' online and offline
interactions in China and the US. These objectives lead to three primary
research questions: 1) How do older adults interact and form identities in
senior-oriented online communities? 2) How do the oldness-related stigma that
older adults face in the physical world and the social interaction that takes
place in the virtual world mutually constitute each other? And 3) How is the
aging experience of older American Internet users different from and similar to
that of older Chinese Internet users? The symbolic interactionist perspective
will provide theoretical and methodological guidance for exploring these
research questions: the three basic premises of symbolic interaction addressed
by Blumer (1969) form the foundation of the study, while Goffman's (1963)
framework for understanding stigma and coping strategies will direct this
project. Matthews's (1979) argument that oldness is a stigma bridges this study
and Goffman's work. Finally, Koufaris's (2001) work on organ transplant
recipients using the Internet to cope with stigmatized identity suggests the
possibilities of older adults using the Internet in similar ways. Because
offline situations play a crucial role in shaping online interactions, this
study chooses to focus on two specific groups of older adults: older Americans
who are members of the SeniorNet online community and currently live in New York
City, and older Chinese who are members of the OldKids online community and
currently live in Shanghai. By matching both the virtual and physical sites of
the two case studies, this study can explore the mutual shaping of online and
offline experiences. Twenty-five members of each of the two groups will be
interviewed to collect data about &lt;br/&gt;their online and offline
experiences. Content analysis of these fifty people's online self- descriptions
and discussion messages will be conducted to provide additional data about their
online interactions and identities. Data analysis will be guided by grounded
theory (Glaser &amp; Strauss, 1967). This study will make important empirical
and theoretical contributions to studies on aging and technology, and on
technology use in different cultures. Specifically, this study will 1) produce
new empirical data about older adults' interaction and identity formation in
online communities, 2) enrich the larger literature on the mutual shaping of
online and offline worlds, and 3) contribute to a better understanding of the
differences and similarities between Chinese and American cultures in the
information age. One broad impact of this study will be to help older adults,
especially those who aren't Internet users, understand how the Internet can be
used to improve their aging experience and quality of life. Learning from their
peers. experiences, older adults can make better use of the resources and
opportunities available on the Internet. The findings of this study can also
shed light on how other stigmatized individuals and groups may employ the
Internet to cope with similar situations. Furthermore, this study points out the
importance of having appropriate, effective social and political interventions
to facilitate older adults' use of the Internet. Therefore, this study can be
valuable to policy makers, social workers, and anyone else who cares about older
adults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;