* 0431481
* U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research: Innovative Technology for Improving Wear Resistance and Fracture Toughness of Austempered Ductile Iron
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ahmed ElSawy, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 21,800.00

0431481&lt;br/&gt;ElSawy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research between Dr. Ahmed El Sawy, Department of
Manufacturing and Industrial Technology, Tennessee Technological University,
Cookeville, Tennessee and Dr. Khaled Abouelela, Metal Casting Department,
Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute (CMRDI), Helwan, Egypt.
They plan to study innovative technology for improving wear resistance and
fracture toughness of austempered ductile iron (ADI) used for automotive
industry by either thermomechanical or two-step austempering processes. The
automotive industry is continuously investigating means for producing long
lasting and cheaper parts to stay competitive in the market place. ADI is used
for manufacturing crankshafts, camshafts and gears. Because of its high
strength, good ductility, good wear resistance and fracture toughness, it is
considered an attractive substitute for wrought or forged steel parts. This work
is aimed to further improve the mechanical properties of the conventional ADI by
applying either thermomechanical process for producing ausformed-austempered
ductile iron (AADI) or using a novel two-step austempering process. The PIs will
investigate both unalloyed as well as alloyed ADI with different amounts of Ni,
Mo and Cu. The relationship between fracture toughness, reduction ratio in
height during the thermomechanical processing and the microstructural variables
such as amount of retained austenite, austenite carbon content, type of formed
bainitic structure and matrix hardness will be determined. At the same time, the
prediction equations of fracture toughness and wear resistance of those ADIs
will be also determined using the finite element
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope and broader impacts: The project will provide
a better understanding of the wear resistance, static and dynamic behaviors of
those ADIs under investigation so we can design and produce long-lasting
automotive parts while reducing costs. The automotive industry is growing also
in Egypt, so adopting such technology will produce affordable cars. Automotive
industry will be contacted and informed for possible participation and
contribution toward the implementation of this phase of the project. The
collaborative arrangement between scientists at TTU and CMRDI will promote
research as well as educational ties between the two institutions, with an
exchange of expertise and knowledge between people at both institutions.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the project at the two
partnering institutions, and the findings will be incorporated in their relevant
courses. Furthermore, the results of this study will be disseminated to the
engineering community through publication in refereed journals and professional
conferences. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;