* 0431031
* Coding and Detection for Next-Generation Recording
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* John Barry, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2008
* USD 375,002.00

This research investigates communications, coding and data security for next-
generation magnetic and optical disk recording systems. Today's magnetic and
optical disk recording systems are remarkable engineering accomplishments not
only in terms of storage capacity, but especially in terms of cost. The
technology inside magnetic hard disk drives integrates magnetics, servo control,
high-speed motors, read-write heads, and signal processing into a remarkably low
cost product. Optical disk systems are the similar - lenses, lasers, servo and
speed control and signal processing for a system where the disk is removable and
must be playable on millions of other standardized players. The low cost nature
of the products place severe constraints on the algorithms that can be
implemented in these systems - and even with this the methods that have been
employed are significant. From an engineering perspective the challenge is to
make these systems practical, high-performing, and cost-effective. This research
addresses these challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators study the
following topics in this work: I) Signal processing and equalization: beyond
partial response, ii) iterative timing recovery: synchronization that exploits
coding, iii) Constrained coding: flipping and sliding, stuffing and
interleaving, iv) new security paradigms for recording systems. The team
consists of two PIs, John Barry and Steven McLaughlin, who have worked in the
area of communications, coding, and signal processing for magnetic and optical
recording for a combined total of more than twenty-five years. The team has made
numerous contributions in this area, particularly in iterative techniques for
coding and timing recovery, constrained coding, and novel M-ary formats for
optical recording. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;