* 0431749
* Investigation of Reactive Intermediates and Inner Phase Reactions Inside Molecular Container Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/31/2003,08/31/2006
* Ralf Warmuth, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2006
* USD 97,638.00

This project has the long term objective to apply molecular container compounds
in areas such as the characterization of reactive intermediates and in
catalysis. Two highly strained cyclic allenes and various intermediates in the
naphthylcarbene rearrangement will be generated and spectroscopically
characterized in the inner phase of hemicarcerands, and their thermochemistry
will be investigated. These species are important to structural theory in
organic chemistry. In addition, a new approach for the stabilization of reactive
intermediates will be developed. This approach involves the covalent bonding of
a precursor molecule on the inside of a hemicarcerand, whereupon generation of a
reactive intermediate from this precursor takes place to the exclusion of other
reactive species. Quenching of the intermediate is thus
prevented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program's Organic Dynamics Program supports the research of Professor
Ralf Warmuth of Kansas State University. Professor Warmuth is pursuing an area
of physical organic chemistry wherein chemical species that are implicated as
intermediates in reaction processes are created and observed. These species are
referred to as reactive intermediates, and are normally so short-lived that
direct observation is difficult. By forming these intermediates in a protective
shell, Professor Warmuth will be able to extend the lifetimes of these elusive
entities, making their observation more feasible.