* 0431128
* SEI: Mining Solar Images to Support Astrophysics Research
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,09/30/2005
* Joan Schmelz, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2005
* USD 200,000.00

The Coronal Heating Problem is the longest standing unsolved mystery in
astrophysics. Measurements of the temperature distribution along the loop length
can be used to support or eliminate various classes of coronal temperature
models. The temperature analysis of coronal loops is a state-of-the-art
astronomy. In order to make progress, scientific analysis requires a data set of
10 (phase A) and then 100 (Phase B) loops observed by the Extreme UV Imaging
Telescope (EIT) aboard the NASA/European Space Agency spacecraft called SOHO
(Solar and Heliospheric Observatory). The combination of EIT, TRACE, and SXT
information provides a powerful data set that will yield unprecedented detail on
the plasma parameters of a variety of coronal loop structures. The biggest
obstacle to completing this project is putting the data set together. EIT has
taken over 300,000 images during its 6-year (and counting) mission. The search
for interesting images (with coronal loops) is by far the most time consuming
aspect of this project. . Currently, this process is performed manually, and is
therefore extremely tedious, and hinders the progress of science in this field.
The next generation "EIT" called MAGRITE, scheduled for launch in a few years on
NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory, should be able to take 300,000 images in
about four days and will need state of the art techniques to sift through the
massive data to support scientific discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
contribution to solar image mining has the potential to accelerate scientific
discovery in solar physics, and other applications that rely on massive image
databases. Research that advances state of the art in solar physics will have a
significant impact because of the following reasons: (i) the climate connection:
the sun is a source of light and heat for life on Earth. Scientists strive to
understand how it works, why it changes, and how these changes influence the
Earth, (ii) space weather: The sun is the source of the solar wind. Disturbances
in the solar wind shake the Earth's magnetic field and pump energy into the
radiation belts, and can change the orbits of satellites, shorten mission
lifetimes, cause power surges and outages on Earth, and hence need to be
predicted. (iii) The sun as a physical laboratory: the sun produces its energy
by nuclear fusion, a process that scientists have strived for decades to
reproduce by involving hot plasmas in strong magnetic fields. Much of solar
astronomy involves observing and understanding plasmas under similar conditions.
Students are actively engaged in the research program.&lt;br/&gt;