* 0431642
* Portraying Success Among URM Engineering Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Teri Murphy, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2010
* USD 1,716,732.00

The University of Oklahoma (OU) attracts a substantial population of students
from under-represented minority (URM) populations, including an unusually high
proportion of Native American students (7%). As is common across the country, OU
as a whole, and the College of Engineering (COE) in particular, have achieved
differential levels of success in graduating students from these populations.
This project will study these patterns, focusing on the questions (1) What
systemic factors contribute to the success of URM students in engineering at
large, predominantly white universities? and (2) What systemic factors
contribute to differential success between URM populations? An external advisory
board will inform the collection and analysis of data, as well as the
interpretation and dissemination of results.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Given
the context, this research is building on and expanding prior research in very
specific ways. First, research and interventions have routinely either focused
on only one population or addressed URMs as a unit without taking into account
differential needs and perspectives among the populations. Second, much of the
scholarship related to URM participation in STEM fields has focused on factors
related to loss from the pipeline. However, although engineering graduation
rates are not as high as desired, OU has achieved atypical levels of success
with URM populations. Thus, this group is in an unusual position both to
disaggregate similarities and differences among populations and to identify
factors related to success as well as those systemic factors that need
improvement. A student's opportunities, options, and choices are affected by a
complex web of factors. We have sorted our target factors into the following
overlapping categories: (1) race/ethnicity; (2) attributes of engineering as a
field; (3) student's background; (4) attributes of academic communities; (5)
attributes of personal support structures and responsibilities; (6) attributes
of student communities; and (7) student's future. In addition to examining
patterns in quantitative data, qualitative data will be longitudinal and open-
ended from interviews with students, faculty, advisors, and program directors,
as well as observations of student group activities and student communities.
These open-ended data allow investigation of the student experience in a
holistic way, guided by factor categories distilled from the literature and the
expertise of the research team. This team has experience with this model from
work related to a grant from the NSF Research on Gender in Science and
Engineering program.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This proposal is submitted
through the OU-based K20+ Center for Educational and Community Renewal. The team
is multidisciplinary (e.g., engineering, education, STEM education research, and
African and African-American studies) and systemic (e.g., personnel include the
Director of Engineering Education ). The research is contributing to the
knowledge about increasing URM persistence in STEM undergraduate majors and will
inform intervention efforts and future research directions. We will disseminate
to faculty, administrators, policy makers, and parents by way of sessions and
workshops at conferences, journal articles, campus-wide teaching seminars and
other instructional development initiatives, the K20+ Center network, and
appropriate websites.&lt;br/&gt;