* 0431425
* EMSI: Chemical and Biological Interactions at Environmental Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2004,05/31/2011
* Alfred Spormann, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 05/31/2011
* USD 6,158,000.00

This Institute will create fundamental molecular-level understanding of
environmental interfaces and the important chemical and biological processes
that occur at these interfaces. The Institute's efforts will focus on
understanding the structure of water at the surfaces of common metal oxides, the
interaction of water with these solids, the effect of hydration on the structure
of solid surfaces, the nature of the electrical double layer at solid-water
interfaces, the sorption of heavy metal and metalloid ions onto solid surfaces,
and how microbial biofilms influence all of these features or processes.
Accurate models of the processes occurring at these interfaces are key to
understanding solute-substrate interactions. The multidisciplinary team will use
a combination of state-of-the-art in situ synchrotron radiation-based
spectroscopy and scattering, computational chemistry, and molecular genomic
methods to examine the interaction of water and selected metal and metalloid
contaminant ions with environmentally important solid substrates with and
without microbial biofilm coatings in simplified model systems. In addition,
parallel molecular-level studies of more complex natural systems containing
contaminant species, such as arsenic and lead, as well as bacteria will be
carried out, building on these fundamental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physicochemical and microbiological processes
taking place at environmental interfaces influence many natural processes, such
as the weathering of earth materials and the formation of solils, as well as the
transport and fate of environmental contaminants. A team of scientists and
engineers has been assembled to develop and apply new experimental and
computational techniques to studies of environmental interfaces. The Institute
includes chemists, geochemists, microbiologists, physicists, and soil chemists
to ensure that the basic research will also inform more applied research. Some
of the important applications of this research include studies that will lead to
predictions of the transport behavior and potential bioavailability of heavy
metal contaminants in natural aquatic systems and environmental remediation of
toxic metals. A cohort of talented and diverse graduate and undergraduate
students and post-docs will be trained to work on these complex problems in an
interdisciplinary setting. The researchers will also help train middle and high
school science teachers in summer institutes on environmental science and will
interact with science writers to disseminate their discoveries to the larger
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental Molecular Science Institute (EMSI)
awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of university, industrial, and/or
national laboratory scientists working on problems aimed at increasing
fundamental understanding of natural processes and processes resulting from
human activities in the environment at the molecular level. The emphasis in
these awards is on collaborative research among teams with complementary
research interests and the creation of broad educational experiences for
students. The Stanford EMSI team is a partnership among eight faculty at
Stanford University, Princeton University, and the University of Alaska-
Fairbanks (funded by the National Science Foundation Divisions of Chemistry and
Earth Sciences), three researchers drawn from Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory and the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (funded by the
Department of Energy Division of Environmental Remediation Sciences), and one
researcher from the National Institute of Standards and Technology. Additional
collaborators include a researcher from the U.S. Geological Survey, researchers
from several French universities, and four industrial partners (Corning, Inc.,
DuPont, Skeletal Kinetics, and Zyomyx). The NSF EMSI award incorporates a
Collaborative Research in Environmental Molecular Science award,
CHE-0089215.&lt;br/&gt;