* 0431486
* A Technology Development Project for the Large-N/Small-D SKA Concept
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2007,09/30/2012
* William Welch, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard Barvainis
* 09/30/2012
* USD 9,730,000.00

SKA TDP ABSTRACT

This award will be used to undertake a Technology Development Program (TDP) for
the Square Kilometer Array (SKA). The SKA is a global program to design and
build a new generation radio telescope to operate at meter to centimeter
wavelengths. The SKA will be an aperture synthesis facility wherein signals from
separated antennas are combined digitally to simulate a telescope having a
diameter equal to the largest antenna separation, planned to be more than 3000
km. It will operate over the frequency range from roughly 100 MHz to 10-25 GHz.
The SKA will have a collecting area of order one million square meters, a
sensitivity 50 times higher than the Very Large Array, and an instantaneous
field of view of at least 1 square degree. It will be a powerful survey
telescope with the capability to follow up individual objects with high angular
and time resolution.

The SKA TDP will examine the technical feasibility and costs of the so-called
Large-N/Small-D concept (LNSD, where N is number of antennas and D is the
diameter of each). Activities within the TDP will tap areas of expertise in the
U.S. and also complement work done outside the U.S. Some of the work will
comprise unique contributions to the SKA project, while others will be achieved
via collaborations within the context of international working groups. The TDP
will complement a systems design and costing effort carried out as a Preparatory
Study under the European Commission?s Framework Programme 7.