* 0431484
* New Mexico Analysis Seminars
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Tiziana Giorgi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2006
* USD 15,000.00

DMS 431484&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of New
Mexico&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: New Mexico Analysis
Seminars&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Maria C Pereyra et
al&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Department
of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of New Mexico will continue the
New Mexico Analysis Seminar, an annual conference in Analysis. This proposal
will cover the program from 2004 through 2006.&lt;br/&gt;Six successful New
Mexico Analysis Seminars have been held in Albuquerque and Las Cruces over the
last six years. After successful conferences funded by local sources,
the&lt;br/&gt;last three conferences have been sponsored by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;We
have reached a stage where outside funding is necessary to sustain the growth
and quality of the seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
conference will be held simultaneously with an AMS meeting in Albuquerque in
October 2004. The main speakers are P. Bauman and L. Capogna. The second
conference will be joint with&lt;br/&gt;a CBMS-NSF conference to be held Las
Cruces in May 2005, and have as centerpiece the lectures of T. Tao. In Spring
2006 we will return to our regular schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large
portion of the funds will be used to pay for the travel expenses of the
participants attending the conferences, and for the lecturers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seminar has provided an invigorating but not
intimidating atmosphere for young researchers. It has helped foster interactions
among mathematicians in the area and beyond. Participating graduate students
have been encouraged to pursue studies in areas related to analysis.
The&lt;br/&gt;network of Southwestern analysts has grown as a result
of&lt;br/&gt;these annual meetings. One of the main objectives is, and has been,
to provide graduate students&lt;br/&gt;with exposure to the forefronts of
research in analysis, and to make the&lt;br/&gt;seminar a vehicle for them to
present their work.&lt;br/&gt;The organizers are deeply committed to encourage
graduate students, female, and minority participation in the mathematical
sciences in future seminars.&lt;br/&gt;The list of past and future main speakers
as well as the topics of the short talks demonstrate the vitality of Analysis
taken in a broad sense and the&lt;br/&gt;determination of the organizers to make
this conference a forum for the presentation of the latest significant results
in the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;