* 0431827
* Collaborative Research: Informal Networks and Economic Development
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Kaivan Munshi, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2007
* USD 161,602.00

The economics literature indicates the existence of enforcement problems in any
mutual assistance arrangement. However, there is little empirical evidence on
the consequences of such problems on economic development. This research will
study the effects of informal networks on economic development and the effects
of economic development on networks.

This research project will model and quantify the role of informal networks in
developing economies using two unique data sets describing household behavior
across and within sub-caste groups in urban and rural India over the past three
decades. Specifically, particular, the research will examine how labor-market
networks shape schooling decisions in Mumbai, India where the returns to English
language schooling have risen substantially due to the Indian economic reforms
of the 1990's, and how rural network performance and viability, have been
affected by the economic growth induced by the Indian green revolution. The
research will identify (i) the extent to which networks reduce imperfections in
credit, insurance and labor markets and change the dynamics of economic
development; (ii) factors that break down networks thus and jeopardize social
insurance; and (iii) constraints imposed by networks on economic mobility and
technology adoption.

This research will use sub-caste data to construct the boundaries of networks
using geo-coded household and village data to better assess the spatial impacts
of local events. Sub-caste data enables the identification of network effects in
a much more precise way than in prior work. Sub-caste membership also permits
the investigation of performance differences among networks in different
markets, including labor and credit markets. The research also studies the costs
of networks--- restrictions on interactions between individual members of
different networks