* 0431135
* SEI: Virtual Screening Algorithms for Bioactive Compounds Based on Frequent Substructures
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* George Karypis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2009
* USD 405,498.00

AWARD ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for the
development of effective and efficient algorithms to analyze large chemical
compound databases and identify the compounds that are the most probable for
displaying the desired drug-like behavior. These virtual screening algorithms
are based on a substructure-based classification framework that utilizes (i)
highly efficient frequent subgraph discovery algorithms that mine the chemical
compounds to discover all the substructures (topological or geometric) that are
critical for the classification task, (ii) sophisticated feature selection and
generation algorithms that combine multiple criteria to identify and synthesize
a set of substructure-based features that simultaneously simplify the
representation of the original compounds while retaining and exposing their key
features, and (iii) kernel-based approaches that take into account the
relationships between these substructures at different levels of granularity and
complexity. The research is integrated with an educational plan that focuses on
initiating undergraduate and graduate students to the various computational and
data analysis aspects of virtual screening, machine learning, and data mining
through courses, summer institutes, and research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this project
will lead to advances in the drug development process by developing
computationally efficient and accurate classification algorithms that can be
used to replace or supplement biological-assay-based high-throughput screening
(HTS) techniques and by producing a general purpose chemical compound
classification software toolkit that will contain high-quality implementations
of the various algorithms that will be developed and made available to the
public. The combination of existing HTS-based approaches with these virtual
screening methods will allow a move away from purely random-based testing,
toward more meaningful and directed iterative rapid-feedback searches of subsets
and focused libraries.&lt;br/&gt;