* 0431030
* Algorithmic Studies in Applied Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Esther Arkin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2008
* USD 254,997.00

There is a driving need to process geometric data efficiently in many
applications, including manufacturing, computer-aided design, graphics and
visualization, robotics, air traffic management, and cartography. This project
applies the methodologies of computational geometry to design, analyze,
implement, and test efficient algorithms for such problems. In addition to
development of fundamental advances in geometric algorithms, an important goal
is dissemination of implemented algorithms to application domains, while
assisting practitioners in formulating precise instances of their problems for
algorithmic investigation. The intellectual merit of the project lies in the
development of novel algorithmic solutions for several fundamental problems in
geometry. Many of the problems are posed in terms of optimization criteria;
solutions to these problems are given in the form of algorithms for exact
optimization, approximation algorithms, and experimental comparisons. New
algorithmic techniques and extensions to existing methods are developed, while
newly formulated algorithmic questions arising in application domains are
precisely posed for study by the community of algorithmic engineers. The project
has broader impact in the targeted application areas, including manufacturing,
virtual environments, homeland security, robotics, geographic information
systems, military logistics, and air traffic management. The project
incorporates a tightly-integrated educational mission, through courses,
seminars, and training of both graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus areas include geometric
optimization and networks (optimal network design, optimal constrained route
planning, facility location, terrain simplification, map generalization in GIS,
clustering); virtual prototyping, manufacturing, and computer-aided design
(milling/process planning, virtual prototyping and maintenance, generative
design tools, geometric modeling, high-speed rendering methods, visibility
computation, surface parameterization and texture mapping); sensor networks and
swarm robotics (sensor deployment, robotic dispersion, geometric map extraction,
ad hoc networking for stationary or mobile sensors); and air traffic management
(conflict prediction and resolution, congestion and uncertainty modeling,
routing of aircraft flows in the presence of dynamic and uncertain weather
conditions, and optimal redesign of the National Airspace System).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;