* 0431959
* U.S.-Pakistan Workshop:  29th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs:  Islamabad, Pakistan, June/July, 2004
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Talat Rahman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 20,000.00

0431959&lt;br/&gt;Rahman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This proposal is to
support participation by US scientists in the 29th International Nathiagali
Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs in Islamabad, Pakistan in June-
July 2004. The Pakistani organizer is Professor Riazuddin, Director, National
Center for Physics, Quaid-Azam University, Islamabad. The request by Dr. Talaat
Rahman, Department of Physics, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas is to
cover participation during a two-week workshop. The first week covers VLSI
design and manufacturing, network security and grid technology. The second week
deals with synchrotron radiation, advanced light source, sesame project and
laser physics. The topics in the Nathiagali Summer Colleges are current and
geared towards the contemporary needs of developing countries. It is an
excellent opportunity for scientists from the advanced countries to take their
knowledge base and ideas for exchange, development, and application in other
communities. At least three junior US scientists will be supported in this
project. Dr Riazuddin, the co-organizer of the session on Condensed Matter
Physics at the Summer College, is the director of the National Center for
Physics at the Quaid-e-Azam University in Islamabad, Pakistan. It is likely that
US scientists coming to the College would be attracted to the Center. This may
transfer initial exchanges of ideas at the College into long-term
collaborations. The College attracts speakers from several western countries,
and it has high visibility in Pakistan. Past NSF support in few of the College's
28 years, has produced good results. Publication of the proceedings of the
College is planned. The requested funds are for travel support of US based
scientists who will lecture at the summer school. Subsistence costs at the
conference are borne by the Pakistani hosts, as well as all costs for
participants from Pakistan and from neighboring
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The summer school has a direct impact on
bringing students in Pakistan, and from a number of developing countries in the
region, up-to-date on current research in nanostructure science and engineering.
The participants are mostly recent Ph.D.'s who are interested in establishing
long-term collaborations, which would allow them to remain active in their
fields of research. This is a good place for finding dedicated graduate
students, and the PI and others have in the past recruited graduate students
through contacts at these Summer Colleges. The school also affords an
opportunity to create research collaboration between the international
scientists and their US counterparts, and to encourage opportunities for
students to spend time in the laboratories of the US researchers. Several
examples of successful outcomes along these lines are highlighted in the
proposal. &lt;br/&gt;