* 0431824
* Redefining Biological Engineering with an Integrated Research and Cooperative based Undergraduate Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* David Britt, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2006
* USD 99,999.00

This planning grant is reforming the Biological Engineering curriculum at Utah
State University, by improved integration of core courses, enhancement in
information delivery through digital learning materials, an applied learning
environment on campus, an integral co-operative research/design experience, and
outreach, mentoring, and tracking efforts to enhance diversity and retention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focal points and proposed activities are: (1)
Biological engineering is an evolving&lt;br/&gt;discipline that needs to be
reevaluated to coherently bridge the subcomponents stemming
from&lt;br/&gt;agricultural and biomedical engineering as well as encompass
emerging bio-technologies. (2) Topics presented in the freshman year are
forgotten by the senior year unless revisited, adapted by the student in the
context of a more advanced concept, and then reapplied; (3) Interactive digital
materials are effective learning tools permitting campus time to be devoted to
solving problems, participating in team design projects, using advanced
instrumentation, and designing and performing experiments under expert guidance;
(4) A cooperative experience builds student confidence, fosters team effort and
provides invaluable real-world training while fostering collaborations,
networking, and growth of research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs contend that biological engineering is an evolving
discipline and that it needs to be evaluated and implemented to coherently
bridge the divergent areas of medicine, agriculture, and biotechnology. The
project would look at means to implement interactive, digital materials to
improve the learning process. The co-op experience would "round out" the
undergraduate student with real world training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models for integration and for applied
learning both have the potential for application in many other programs. The
proposal is specifically aimed at improving the learning process and fostering
diversity. The program has already seen an increase in female enrollment and
diversity of ethnicity. Additional diversification and a general strengthening
of the incoming credentials of the students should also result from the proposed
changes. &lt;br/&gt;