* 0431552
* Recruiting, Retaining, and Graduating  Appalachian and Minority Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Majors ( AMSTEMM)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2005,09/30/2010
* Robert Tannenbaum, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,998,996.00

The University of Kentucky Appalachian and Minority Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics Majors (UK AMSTEMM) program recruits, retains, and
graduates STEM majors through a number of related activities. The recruitment
phase includes providing and coordinating high school mathematics support,
summer science camps on-campus, visits to schools, teacher support, programs for
parents, and Saturday events, such as career advising. UK AMSTEMM provides
fellowships for participating in mentored research experiences and serving as
peer mentors, to allow students to afford UK. There is a concerted effort to
persuade first-year students, especially women, enrolled in special sections of
pre-calculus courses to redirect their choices of majors to STEM disciplines.
The retention phase includes dedicated professional advising; faculty mentoring;
intensive summer mathematics courses; increased support for the Math Excel
program for pre-calculus students; special first year, place-based, Discovery
Seminars; mentored research experiences; a peer mentoring program; and bi-weekly
research colloquia. The graduation phase, intended to ensure that majors make
regular progress toward their degrees and graduate "on time," includes
participation in biweekly research colloquia; professional advising; peer
mentoring; mentored research experiences; and place-based courses in the various
STEM disciplines - courses that are interesting, challenging, and relevant to
the students' lives and home communities. The success of such innovative
techniques as involving parents extensively in pre-college recruiting and
orientation; offering intensive pre-college mathematics testing, counseling, and
courses; and providing place-based Discovery Seminars, enrichment seminars, and
STEM courses provides a model for other efforts to increase STEM enrollments.