* 0431332
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Aguateca Grieta Archaeological Project: Contextualizing the Use of Sacred Landscape in the Political History of Aguateca, Peten, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Karl Taube, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 11,915.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Karl A. Taube, Reiko Ishihara will investigate the
role of the prominent grieta (chasm) at the major Late Classic Maya center of
Aguateca, Peten, Guatemala. The grieta runs through the center of the site,
measuring approximately 800 m long, 50 - 60 m deep, and 5 - 15 m wide. The
central location of the grieta, the incorporation of the grieta in the place
name hieroglyph, and the presence of architectural modifications within the
grieta suggest the importance of this landmark at Aguateca. As Dos Pilas's twin
dynasty, Aguateca was occupied for a relatively short period of time during the
mid-Late Classic (ca. A.D. 700 - 830) at a time of regional political
instability. It has been posited that the location for Aguateca was selected for
its defensively advantageous topographic features including the grieta (Inomata
1995). Ishihara's archaeological excavations in the subterranean karst feature
will determine the function of the chasm, and its usage will be contextualized
in the well documented political history of Aguateca. The study will be among
the first to test the sacred landscape model, which suggests that sites and
buildings were constructed in close association with caves (Brady 1997). As a
cave feature, if the grieta was an integral element in the sacred landscape,
material remains from ritual activities are expected to be uncovered because
rituals are frequently conducted at sacred landmarks. However, if the grieta
served non-religious, practical purposes, then evidence of non-ritual activities
such as of warfare or household midden deposits will be found.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focusing on cave features in Mesoamerica,
particularly at major political centers, is important anthropologically because
it examines the intersection of religion and the socio-political dimensions of
society. It is now clear that caves were places of ritual significance, but how
cave use figured into the politics and social lives of the ancient Maya people
remains obscured. For landscape studies, this research will contribute to the
recent theoretical discussions on the socio-symbolic dimensions of landscapes as
well as on landscapes as dynamic facets of culture. This dissertation project
will move the young discipline of Mesoamerican cave archaeology beyond
simplistic and static notions of caves as a passive background for (ritual)
activities to be performed. Understanding the nature of grieta usage combined
with the contextualization of the uses within the culture history will enable a
more robust reconstruction of the social and political lives of the ancient
inhabitants at Aguateca. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides addressing scientific
questions, the project will provide an opportunity for both the author and
Guatemalan archaeology students to be trained in the field methods of cave
archaeology, an as yet underrepresented area of study. Additionally, working as
project excavators, the local Q'eqchi Maya people will learn of their culture
history and the scientific significance of archaeological sites. This knowledge
is hoped to contribute to the ongoing development of tourism in the Petexbatun
region, and to instigate interest in developing archaeo-tourism at cave sites
including the Aguateca grieta. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;