* 0431756
* Implementation Grant: Enhancing Diversity in the Undergraduate Mechanical Engineering Population Through Curricular Change
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Ilene Busch-Vishniac, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2009
* USD 999,962.00

Johns Hopkins University will lead a consortium of engineering schools to change
the core mechanical engineering curriculum to make engineering more attractive
to a diverse community. The overriding goal is to reconstruct undergraduate
engineering curricula so that engineering is able to attract and retain a
larger, more diverse population while maintaining or enhancing its standards for
essential skills and knowledge. The hypothesis is that engineering will attract
and retain a more diverse set of students if the curriculum has: greater
linkages between the fundamentals and applications and between technical and
nontechnical topics, more teaming experiences, shorter critical path lengths,
more focus on the impact of engineering on the human experience, and a general
atmosphere of inclusivity rather than exclusivity. All of the partnering
institutions have committed to running the pilot curriculum and to participating
in the reform process. There are 8 partnering academic institutions in this
project: California State University at Los Angeles, The University of
Washington, Michigan State University, Tuskegee University, Howard University,
Smith College, Stevens Institute of Technology, and Johns Hopkins University.
All of these schools have a significant history of educational research and
innovation, and all are committed to participating in the entire project,
including piloting new modules and courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus in
this project is on process, i.e. on creating a rigorous process for curriculum
revision that makes programs more attractive to a diverse community. The process
involves the following steps: creating a comprehensive database of topics
currently included in mechanical engineering curricula (already well under way);
reviewing the topic list to eliminate material no longer relevant and adding
material which is needed in the future; associating with each topic the
prerequisites for understanding, the applications to which it applies, and
nontechnical material which could be linked; building a curriculum map from the
database and stated objectives of minimizing critical path length, integrating
across technical topics and across technical and nontechnical topics,
introducing more focus on applications and the social imperatives for
engineering, introducing more teaming experiences, and transitioning to a more
inclusive environment; piloting of new courses or course modules to test the
hypothesis that the new curriculum will attract and retain a more diverse
community of students. This will be accompanied by rigorous assessment and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;