* 0431257
* Novel Matrix Problems in Modern Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* Inderjit Dhillon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lenore M. Mullin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 230,000.00

Matrix computations are ubiquitous in scientific and engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The existence of high-quality algorithms and resulting
software packages, such as&lt;br/&gt;LAPACK and MATLAB, greatly alleviates the
burden on scientists and engineers, allowing&lt;br/&gt;them to devote their
energy to the particular application at hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
is addressed towards identifying and solving some novel and fundamental
matrix&lt;br/&gt;problems that arise in modern applications. The last decade
has&lt;br/&gt;seen significant advances in communications technology and
infrastructure;&lt;br/&gt;prime examples are the world-wide web, wireless
computing and sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;These modern applications lead to a
vast variety of interesting problems --- these range&lt;br/&gt;from complex
design constructions, data warehousing and retrieval problems, to the need for
&lt;br/&gt;intelligent analysis of huge amounts of data. As a response to these
needs,&lt;br/&gt;many new matrix problems arise that need to be solved robustly
and efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the most challenging problems in
the analyses of large data matrices are the&lt;br/&gt;related problems of
clustering, co-clustering (simultaneous clustering&lt;br/&gt;of rows and
columns), and matrix approximations. In many applications, the data&lt;br/&gt;is
not Gaussian, and hence traditional techniques, such as singular
value&lt;br/&gt;decomposition (SVD) and classical Euclidean k-means are often
inadequate.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project formulates new matrix approximation
problems related to&lt;br/&gt;co-clustering: these formulations appeal to a
generalized maximum entropy principle&lt;br/&gt;to search for structured matrix
approximations that arise naturally for an important&lt;br/&gt;class of
statistical distributions, known as exponential families. The aim of
the&lt;br/&gt;project is to develop the theory as well as robust, numerical
software for these&lt;br/&gt;matrix computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another
important class of problems contains varied inverse problems: given&lt;br/&gt;a
set of desirable properties, construct a data matrix that satisfies these
properties.&lt;br/&gt;Such inverse problems arise in diverse applications, such
as the design of&lt;br/&gt;kernel similarity matrices for statistical learning
and the design of Gram matrices&lt;br/&gt;with low cross-correlations for
wireless communications. The plan is to&lt;br/&gt;use alternate projection
schemes, and numerical optimization to solve such design&lt;br/&gt;problems. The
outcome of the project would be a unified framework for these
inverse&lt;br/&gt;problems, including modeling, algorithms and
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that there will be two broad
research impacts of the proposed project.&lt;br/&gt;The first contribution would
be to applied mathematics and computer science&lt;br/&gt;--- the formulation and
proposed solutions of the novel matrix problems that&lt;br/&gt;arise naturally
in applications. It is hoped that the proposed work will vitalize
the&lt;br/&gt;search for better algorithms, and further deepen the connections
between applied mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and engineering. The second contribution
would be to the applications themselves. Posing particular&lt;br/&gt;application
tasks in terms of well-defined matrix problems should lead to
faster&lt;br/&gt;and more reliable methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will support the graduate education of 2 or 3 students. These students will be
trained in the&lt;br/&gt;multidisciplinary areas of computational linear
algebra, data mining, statistical pattern recognition and &lt;br/&gt;wireless
computing. Specialized courses in all these areas are available in the Computer
Science,&lt;br/&gt;Applied Mathematics and Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering
departments at UT Austin.&lt;br/&gt;Such a broad education will fill the need
for substantial academic and industrial demand in
these&lt;br/&gt;multidisciplinary areas for educated personnel.&lt;br/&gt;The
project will also support research experience for one undergraduate, and a
conscious effort&lt;br/&gt;will be made to recruit women and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;Results of the project will be published in the linear
algebra, data-mining, and information theory&lt;br/&gt;literatures, contributing
to each of these areas as well as their cross-fertilization.&lt;br/&gt;Data and
software developed under the project will be shared with the scientific
community&lt;br/&gt;via a public web site.&lt;br/&gt;