* 0431137
* Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Swahili Urbanization and Food Production: Paleoethnobotanical Perspectives from Pemba Island, Tanzania AD 800-1600
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Gayle Fritz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 11,835.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Gayle J. Fritz, Sarah Walshaw will collect and
analyze data on ancient Swahili plant food production and consumption derived
from archaeological excavations on Pemba Island, Tanzania. Charred plant remains
offer the most direct information about ancient diets as well as the activities
associated with plant processing: harvesting, threshing, winnowing, storage, and
cooking. Working with an NSF-funded project led by Dr. Adria LaViolette, Ms.
Walshaw will collect charred plant material from five archaeological sites on
Pemba that represent the transition (AD 800-1600) from small village settlements
to densely populated communities. She will also collect modern reference
specimens to aid in the identification of archaeological plant remains, and
conduct surveys among Swahili subsistence farmers to determine how crops such as
millet, sorghum, and rice may have been processed in the past.

Centralized control of food production accompanied the rise of cities in many
regions of the world, with city administrators controlling the processing,
storage, and redistribution of grains. Much of our knowledge about urban food
production derives from studies of hierarchically organized cities. The more
egalitarian societies of sub-Saharan Africa, therefore, offer a comparative
perspective on urban food production. Walshaw will investigate the role of plant
food production in Swahili urbanization to determine whether plant production
remained a predominantly rural, domestic activity, or whether specialized
domains of production outside the control of the household developed in cities.
This research offers a window into the lives of the Swahili rural majority
during urbanization, which may reveal a considerably different view than the
Arab-dominated model drawn from ethnohistory and the archaeology of wealthy
urban communities.

This research represents one of the few comprehensive studies of plant food
production from sub-Saharan Africa, and will contribute significantly to our
understanding of relatively egalitarian food production systems in general, and
Swahili plant use in particular. Additionally, collections of East African
plants are significantly lacking, therefore the modern plant samples collected
during this study are essential to future research. This study will assist in
graduate student training both here and abroad. Walshaw will instruct Tanzanian
archaeology students and faculty in the recovery and analysis of archaeological
plant remains, an underdeveloped aspect of the current university curriculum.
She will also join Dr. LaViolette and additional team members in presenting
archaeological data to the communities surrounding the field sites, including a
local secondary school.

Finally, in documenting the ancient Swahili plant food production system,
Walshaw will discover how indigenous resources were used prior to the
introduction of the Asian (rice, coconut, banana, mango) and New World (corn,
cassava) crops that form the staples of African diets today. Indigenous food
resources are generally underutilized in Africa, and increased reliance upon
local resources may improve a critically limiting food base. For example, finger
millet, a traditional East African crop, has the potential to be a critical
weaning food that could reduce infant mortality, yet finger millet is scarcely
grown today. This study may help us understand why African crops declined in use
and how they might be useful today.