* 0431177
* Advanced Coding for Multidimensional Channels
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2008
* Kenneth Zeger, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 12/31/2008
* USD 512,000.00

This project studies the theory of multidimensional&lt;br/&gt;channels and
develop effective coding techniques for such&lt;br/&gt;channels. The coding
techniques investigated are of three&lt;br/&gt;types: error-correction channel
coding, constrained coding,&lt;br/&gt;and joint source-channel coding. Emphasis
is placed on&lt;br/&gt;applications to two-dimensional magnetic and
optical&lt;br/&gt;recording as well as three-dimensional
holographic&lt;br/&gt;recording. These are the storage devices of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation involves code design, theoretical
analysis,&lt;br/&gt; and computer simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
topic areas investigated for multidimensional&lt;br/&gt;channels
are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Interleaving techniques in two and three
dimensions&lt;br/&gt; Multidimensional codes correcting cluster errors
&lt;br/&gt; Constrained coding and defect avoidance
for&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional media - Progressive source coding
for&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional channels - Index assignment
for&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional channels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multidimensional
storage devices require a completely new&lt;br/&gt;theory and new technical
breakthroughs, since most of the&lt;br/&gt;existing theory for error-correcting
codes, constrained&lt;br/&gt;codes, and source-channel codes was developed in
the context&lt;br/&gt;of one-dimensional applications. The problems
associated&lt;br/&gt;with multidimensional channels are usually much
more&lt;br/&gt;challenging than their one-dimensional
counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, interesting technical problems
arise due to&lt;br/&gt;the spatially dependent nature of errors and constraints
in&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional recording media. New error-correcting
codes&lt;br/&gt;and interleaving techniques are needed to
effectively&lt;br/&gt;protect data stored on such media. The study of
constrained&lt;br/&gt;coding for multidimensional channels is still in its
infancy&lt;br/&gt;, and needs substantial further research to blossom into
a&lt;br/&gt;theory. Joint source-channel coding techniques are
needed&lt;br/&gt;to maximize the recovered source fidelity for images
and&lt;br/&gt;video stored on multidimensional devices.&lt;br/&gt;