* 0431792
* Developing a Modern Computer Engineering Curriculum Focusing on Embedded Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* David Jackson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This project is planning to reform and modernize the curriculum and
instructional pedagogies of the computer engineering program in the Electrical
and Computer Engineering Department of The University of Alabama by
incorporating a focus on embedded systems throughout the curriculum. The project
will develop, evaluate, and disseminate syllabi, associated instructional
materials, and an administrative plan for creating and maintaining a curriculum
incorporating an integrated embedded systems theme. Development of this
curriculum is based on concepts introduced at numerous prestigious institutions
already heavily involved in embedded systems education. The curriculum will rely
on a unique integration of an embedded systems theme throughout the reformed
courses, systematic introduction of state-of-the-art toolsets for embedded
systems, focused classroom and laboratory exercises replacing legacy materials
in the curriculum, and new educational pedagogies to enhance the learning
experience and increase the retention and graduation rates of our
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The objectives, outcomes,
rationale, and plans are based on 1) published work describing the need for an
increased emphasis on embedded systems, 2) other successful educational programs
in this area, and 3) new pedagogies (e.g. teaming) in engineering education. The
investigators have extensive experience both in digital systems education and
research and in engineering curriculum development. The evaluation plan is
multifaceted with both formative and summative processes and includes input from
students, other embedded systems educators from several prestigious
universities, and industrial representatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACT: The project will develop and disseminate a substantial amount of
instructional material on embedded systems, an important, emerging educational
area. It also will provide documentation on the design and use of an
administration and coordination plan for the reformed curriculum that is
directly applicable to other disciplines. A partnership with the University of
Alabama's Multicultural Engineering Program promotes student recruiting,
retention and mentoring of historically underrepresented groups. The
dissemination plan outlines specific strategies for involving a group of
interested faculty at other institutions and for promoting the ideas and
materials through a website, and conference and journal publications.
&lt;br/&gt;