* 0431924
* VIE: Vertical Integration of Computer, Electrical, and Mechanical Engineering Education (Planning Grant)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Donald Flugrad, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2006
* USD 99,986.00

The Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Mechanical
Engineering in collaboration with educational colleagues is planning to develop
new and reformulated curricula in computer, electrical, and mechanical
engineering. The project is titled Vertical Integration of Computer, Electrical
and Mechanical Engineering Education, or VIE, which is symbolic, as the word vie
means to invite, challenge, strive, compete. This project will invite and
challenge a number of constituencies to work together to improve student
learning through integrated programs and experiences. The fundamental premise of
the proposed project is integration: curriculum integration, integration of
research and teaching, integration of interdisciplinary information, and
integration through community. This project proposes the learning stream model
with multifaceted educational objectives, including: curriculum integration
through the learning stream model, application of the learning stream model to
inquiry-based learning, integrated information resources to support
interdisciplinary learning streams, and extension of the learning stream model
to precollege engineering education. The goal of VIE is to create a connected
learning environment, in which college students see connections across courses
and disciplines, pre-college students see connections to engineering,
undergraduates see connections to research and practice, and students and
teachers at all levels benefit from the interaction and mentoring that takes
place in the process of discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The VIE project introduces the novel concept of a learning
stream and defines the learning stream model for an engineering program. The
learning stream model naturally bridges research and inquiry with teaching,
through problem-based learning. A component of this project will apply a new
resource model to develop an integrated set of educational resources for a
learning stream. This facilitates interdisciplinary learning streams. In
addition to connecting students across courses in a learning stream, the VIE
project proposes an outreach component to connect graduate, undergraduate,
precollege students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The model
itself is expected to be a reference for any engineering program. The goal of
re-shaping the curriculum is to better prepare engineering students and
graduates to learn and apply knowledge. As a result, it will serve many sectors
having a stake in the quality of engineering graduates. The model is designed to
close the knowledge gaps between courses. The model can be extended to enhance
educational opportunities for all students, including precollege, women, and
minority students. The model will help faculty teach differently, and it will
help students learn differently. It has the potential to change the social
fabric of the academic environment.&lt;br/&gt;