* 0431987
* 2004 Physical Metallurgy Gordon Conference; Plymouth, NH
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Tresa Pollock, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 05/31/2005
* USD 7,000.00

This grant supports the 2004 Physical Metallurgy Gordon Research Conference on
"Property Prediction: The Challenge of Scales". The meeting will be held on July
25-30th at the Holderness School in Plymouth, New Hampshire. The goal of this
conference is to provide a forum for active discussion of recent scientific
advances in the area of material property prediction with emphasis on montonic
and cyclic properties of complex materials at various length scales. In recent
years there have been dramatic advances in experimental, theoretical and
computational aspects of property prediction. This meeting highlights these
advances and identifies key directions for future research in this field. The
agenda has been organized around several critical topics including the Design-
Materials Interface, Characterization of Structures Across Scales, Deformation
Structures, Connecting Dislocations and the Continuum, Novel Techniques for
Property Measurement, Time- and Rate-Dependent Deformation, and Variability,
Probabilistics and Life Prediction. Since the 2000 Physical Metallurgy
Conference highlighted advances in process modeling, one session will be devoted
to the linkage between these two classes of models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF funds support conference fees and travel expenses for graduate students and
post-doctoral researchers attending the conference. Each of the student
candidates will present a poster on their research. Diversity is a primary
consideration in the selection of the student/postdoctoral candidates. The
speakers and chairs represent a diverse group of experts from leading
institutions around the world. The meeting is composed of approximately 100-130
researchers from academia, national laboratories and industry.