* 0431327
* Using a Functional Genomics Approach to Study ROI Metabolism in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Ron Mittler, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 02/28/2009
* USD 514,441.00

Ever since the introduction of oxygen (O2) into our atmosphere by photosynthetic
organisms, about two billion years ago, reactive oxygen intermediates (ROI) have
been the unwelcome companions of life. In contrast to oxygen, these partially
reduced or activated derivatives of O2 are highly reactive and toxic and can
lead to the oxidative destruction of cells. In humans ROI play a key role in
processes such as aging and cancer and in different degenerative diseases. In
plants and crops ROI are the main cause of injury and yield loss during stresses
such as drought, heat shock, cold and salinity. In spite of their toxicity,
recent studies suggested that ROI regulate many different processes in plants
including stress-response, development and growth. How this conflict is resolved
in cells is largely unknown. Nonetheless, it is clear that the level of ROI in
cells needs to be tightly regulated. Our goal is to identify and characterize
the different cellular mechanisms that control ROI accumulation in plants. We
propose a unique approach of using mutants, deficient in key ROI-detoxifying
enzymes, to induce the accumulation of ROI in specific cellular compartments. We
hypothesize that mutants with suppressed capability to remove ROI will
accumulate ROI and activate their ROI-response mechanisms. The study of gene
expression in these mutants will therefore enable us to identify and
characterize some of the key regulatory genes that control ROI accumulation in
plants. Moreover, our approach will enable us to simplify the complex
interactions that exist between ROI and many different cellular pathways, and to
isolate and characterize different genes directly involved in regulating ROI
metabolism in plants. Based on our preliminary results we hypothesize that
members of the zinc-finger gene family play a central role in regulating ROI
metabolism in plants. We will determine how they control ROI metabolism and how
they fit into the hierarchy of the ROI-response genes. Arabidopsis mutants with
suppressed capability to scavenge ROI will be used to induce an internal ROI
stress in plants under controlled conditions (using a time-course design).
Molecular analysis coupled with physiological and biochemical measurements will
be used to identify regulatory genes activated in cells upon ROI accumulation.
Transgenic plants expressing zinc-finger proteins and other ROI-regulatory genes
will be screened for their tolerance to oxidative stress on agar plates. The
function of specific genes, identified by our screen, will be determined in
transgenic plants and mutants. A genetic screen to identify ROI-sensors will be
developed. Data, methods, and biological material will be made available to the
public as soon as they are confirmed. Up to 20 undergraduate students, including
minorities, will be recruited into the project and introduced to modern research
techniques in plant biology. An online course for undergraduate students will be
developed to share knowledge and enhance awareness to ROI and the important role
they play in plants and other organisms. A high school teaching kit that
includes a video presentation and several basic experiments demonstrating the
importance of ROI to plant protection will be developed. Public access to the
project will be ensured through a website specifically developed for the
project. The ROI-tolerant plants, the database of ROI-associated genes and the
flow-chart of ROI response (developed during the course of this study), could be
used by many different research groups and scientists to determine to what
extent and in what manner ROI are involved in the biological process/pathway
they are studying. They would serve as a valuable resource and enhance our
overall understanding of ROI function in plants during normal metabolism, as
well as during periods of environmental stress.