* 0431705
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Economic Development of a Specialized Coastal Community at Chengue, the Tairona Area, Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert D. Drennan, Alejandro Dever will carry out
surface survey and test excavations at the Tairona site of Chengue in the
Tairona National Natural and Archaeological Park on the Caribbean coast of
Colombia. The earliest villages in the region appeared ca. 300 A.D. Very fast
socio-economic growth between 600- 800 A.D.led to the colonization of the Sierra
Nevada's (the dominant mountain range in the region) steep slopes in the
archaeological equivalent of a flashpoint. Chengue is notable because it was
among the first village to be formed with an economy that was most likely based
on a specialized mode of production. It is also interesting because there is
evidence that it was formed during a very fast developmental period between 600
and 800 A.D. The archaeological remains at Chengue have not been studied in
detail, but superficial observations and collection of remains suggest that
approximately 100 households were present. The most noticeable remains consist
of stone house foundations, water reservoirs and small scale public architecture
including small stone fortifications and paved roads.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research project focuses on the individual households within this large
archaeological village and attempts to explain why very fast socio-economic
changes occured. General anthropological processes such as economic
specialization, trade, urbanization and social inequality cannot be understood
without documenting how the everyday needs and choices of individual families
and their communities contribute to and are affected by such processes. This
project examines the community of Chengue from a household perspective, focusing
on comparing the patterns of activities performed by individual households
throughout the community. This should lead to an understanding of the social
mechanisms that were dominant during the formation of this village. This
reconstruction seeks to determine if villages such as Chengue were formed by
individual families colonizing zones that were less advantageous from an
agricultural point of view, in this case to exploit highly localized salt and
marine resources. An alternative hypothesis is that Chengue is a the "colony" of
a larger chiefdom that sought to control the salted fish production for the
purpose of aggrandizing chiefs residing elsewhere. This alternative would
suggest that the very fast growth of this society during the 600- 800 period was
preceded and caused primarily by institutionalized political systems not
individual entrepreneurial families.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will have
several broader impacts.. It will be an essential element in the training of the
doctoral candidate. It will also contribute to the enhancement of the level of
public understanding of science by collaborating with anthropologists and
museologists involved in the construction of a Tairona National Museum. This
museum is a Colombian government sponsored enterprise that will commence in late
2004. The project will provide information about the domestic and community life
of the Tairona to the museum; talks will also be given to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;