* 0431968
* A Proposal for Holding the Twelfth-to-Fourteenth NSF Materials Chemistry Workshop
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Peter Dorhout, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 06/30/2009
* USD 129,884.00

This award, which is jointly funded by the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials
Research, supports a series of Materials Chemistry Workshops, which are to be
organized by Dr. Peter K. Dorhout at Colorado State University. Participants in
these workshops, which will be held in the autumns of 2004 through 2006. will be
drawn from applicants from all aspects of the field of materials chemistry with
peer-reviewed selection. Approximately 30 participants will attend each
workshop, which are designed to bring together scientists with common materials
chemistry interests from diverse backgrounds including inorganic, organic,
physical, biological, polymer and analytical chemistry as well as other science
and engineering disciplines. The workshops provide a focus for the
technologically critical field of materials chemistry from both educational and
research points of view. In addition, the workshops promote dialogue and
collaboration between industry, government and academic scientists in a forum
that identifies fundamental and technological problems and stimulates their
investigation. The intellectual merit of these workshops derives from the
networks that organically develop between the participants during the informal
and vivid discussions inherent to these workshops as breaking science is
presented and new collaborative research efforts are explored. Faculty from
Predominantly Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) can connect with felow
researchers in larger universities, industry and national laboratories to learn
of new research and new opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The atmosphere of
these materials chemistry workshops will continue to be conducive to discussion
and dissemination of ideas via the following means: (i) The broadest possible
solicitation for applicants, aimed at all sectors of the materials chemistry
community with special attention to encouraging industrial, government,
minority, women, and young materials chemists to apply. (ii) Selection of
participants based on merit-based criteria designed to produce a diverse and
interactive group of participants. (iii) Adherence to a presentation format that
promotes discussion of ideas and discourages formal presentation of past
research results. Within these guidelines, the workshops provide for informal,
provocative and stimulating discussions of new directions in materials
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;