* 0431330
* AToL: Collaborative Research on Ant Phylogeny: A Comprehensive Evolutionary Tree for the World's Premier Social Organisms
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2011
* Philip Ward, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 09/30/2011
* USD 1,555,139.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;EF 0431330&lt;br/&gt;Philip Ward, University of California at
Davis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Originating in the Cretaceous Period and
outliving the dinosaurs, ants are one of the greatest success stories in the
history of life on Planet Earth. Numbering approximately 20,000 species, ants
dominate many terrestrial environments and in some habitats they constitute 15
to 20% of the total weight of all animals combined. Perhaps the major factor
contributing to the ubiquity and importance of ants is their complex,
cooperative societies. Ants are involved in intimate biological interactions
with countless other organisms, and exhibit many remarkable behaviors, including
agriculture of fungi, harvesting of seeds, herding and "milking" of other
insects, cooperative hunting in packs, slave-making, and communal nest weaving.
The parallels between these behaviors in ants and those found in humans have
inspired public and scientific curiosity alike. Human understanding of ants
suffers, unfortunately, from a lack of scientific research on ant history and
genetics. This research project will remedy this problem by reconstructing the
history of ants, from the Age of Dinosaurs to the present, using evidence both
from ant anatomy and ant DNA. Techniques unavailable to previous generations of
ant researchers, such as PCR amplification and DNA sequencing of genes, will be
used to gather molecular data. Some of these data will come from newly
discovered genes, which will also yield broad insights about the genetics of
other animals. These data will be analyzed using state-of-the-art computing
algorithms and hardware in order to reconstruct the "family tree" of all major
lineages of ants. Dates for major events in the history of ants will be inferred
by combining fossil evidence with molecular dating techniques. These results
will be integrated with the large body of pre-existing data on ant ecology and
behavior, in order to cast new light on ant biology and to suggest new pathways
for future investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a
substantial impact on both science and society. This work will involve
university and museum faculty, postdoctoral researchers, graduate and
undergraduate students, and technical staff who will interact during all stages
of the project with an international team of scientific collaborators.
&lt;br/&gt;The study of ant biology occupies a central role in a diverse number
of disciplines including ecology, conservation biology, molecular biology and
genetics, chemical communication, biodiversity studies, and artificial
intelligence research. As just one example, ant diversity has become a leading
indicator of habitat quality in conservation biology, so a better understanding
of the history and genetics of ants will increase our ability to make informed
conservation decisions. The information generated by this project will be
disseminated through scientific publications, as well as through a book geared
towards a more general audience. The scientific results from this project also
will be presented in user-friendly internet interfaces on the World-Wide Web,
which will be made available to all interested members of the scientific
community and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;