* 0431821
* Improving the Undergraduate IEOR Programs at Columbia University
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Guillermo Gallego, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2005
* USD 99,999.00

The Industrial Engineering and Operations research (IEOR) department at
Columbia University is reshaping its undergraduate curricula to better serve the
needs of undergraduates seeking to enter the marketplace and to better serve
undergraduates seeking to pursue a research career. Two major components of this
planning grant are the redesign of the Engineering Management Science curriculum
and the introduction of an undergraduate level Financial Engineering program. A
critical part of these courses is the use of service learning projects as part
of their curriculum. These projects are being identified with the help of an
existing community service organization on campus engaged in serving Hispanic
and African American populations. Service learning projects are being carried
out by teams consisting of one or two senior students and a few freshmen
students. Senior students have the opportunity to apply what they have learned
and exercise leadership skills, while freshman students learn to work with
heterogeneous teams and benefit from the knowledge and experience of the older
students.

The proposed activity addresses a range of important areas for improvement
including curriculum improvement with respect to both content (finance,
management, research) and pedagogical innovation (service learning, real-world
problem focused, active learning). The overall benefits of the project would be
to improve students' preparation for their future roles in society, to increase
the diversity of those roles and to increase participation rates of
underrepresented groups in the education.

