* 0431644
* SGER: Modeling River Nitrogen Export to Coastal Zones in the Community Climate System Model (CCSM)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Cynthia Nevison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 10/31/2004
* USD 25,000.00

Increased nitrogen (N) delivery to coastal areas is one of the major
consequences of human perturbation to the nitrogen cycle, and has important
impacts on coastal productivity and trace gas emissions. Motivated by this
observation, this research is a first effort to model river nutrient transport
in the Community Climate System Model (CCSM). Leached N fluxes from the DAYCENT
model, which serves as the basis for the soil agricultural biogeochemistry model
that eventually will be developed within the CCSM Land Model (CLM), will be
coupled to the CLM River Transport Model (RTM). (DAYCENT is the daily time step
version of the Century Model, a soil organic matter model that simulates daily
trace gas fluxes and soil water dynamics). Modeled river N fluxes will be
compared to observational databases and to simple empirical estimates of N
export derived from statistical correlations. Modeled N export fluxes to coastal
areas will be used to evaluate coastal N budgets, through comparison to modeled
and measured atmospheric N inputs and to estimated natural coastal nitrification
rates. The broader impacts of the proposed study include the development of a
framework for the simulation of river solute transport in the CCSM, which will
contribute to the more complete representation of the global N cycle in the CCSM
and will provide important boundary conditions for the coupling of the CLM with
regional coastal models.