* 0431962
* Workforce-Ready:     Undergraduate Engineering Education for Materials Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Pierre Deymier, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2006
* USD 99,999.00

The Materials Science and Engineering department at University of Arizona is
developing a variety of curricular reforms promoting an integrated, experience-
based approach to learning, while forging links between the educational
experience and career-related experiences. The focus of this grant is to plan
the creation of three interrelated programs, the Experiential Learning
Laboratory, the Materials Engineering Clinic, and the Community and Materials
Partnership. The Community and Materials Partnership will create and coordinate
service learning opportunities for all engineering students, collaborating with
such organizations as the Arizona State Museum, the University of Arizona
Science Center, the Tucson Children's Museum, the Engineering Ambassador
program, and the Engineering Academy. Participation in this program will
illustrate how engineers can give back to the community, and awaken and
reinforce civic responsibility in our students. The emphasis is on recruiting
and retaining under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is
advancing the quality of the University of Arizona's Department of Material
Science and Engineering. This is an intellectually and technically challenging
field of study growing in importance to U.S. industry. The career training and
service learning components appear well suited to specific local and regional
needs. Other engineering departments should see heuristic value in this
initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;