* 0431088
* Communication over Dispersive Wireless Channels:    Theory and Methods Based on Physical Principles
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Venugopal Veeravalli, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of the wireless revolution is to provide ubiquitous tetherless
connectivity and access to information. The last decade has seen great progress
towards this goal with cellular phones and wireless LAN cards now being
commonplace. In particular, space-time processing, spurred by the use of
multiple antenna arrays, has emerged as a key enabler of wireless technology.
Notwithstanding recent advances in wireless communications research and
technology, the state-of-the-art is far from realizing the capacity of wireless
networks because of significant gaps in our fundamental understanding of the
shared physical wireless channel. The key challenges posed by the wireless
channel are due to its dispersive nature in time, frequency and space resulting
from physical signal propagation over multiple spatially distributed paths. This
motivates the central questions at the heart of this project: What are the key
factors that govern reliable communication over dispersive wireless channels?
What are the fundamental limits on communication over dispersive wireless
channels? What are the key principles that guide practical system design? We
will leverage a novel framework based on a virtual representation of physical
wireless channels to address these multi-faceted questions. The virtual
representation is a powerful deconstructing tool for unraveling the rich
structure underlying dispersive wireless channels. As we demonstrate in this
proposal, the insights afforded by the virtual representation framework have
deep and wide ranging implications in the design and analysis of wireless
communication systems. Within this framework, our proposed research program has
three broad integrated thrusts: