* 0432038
* Nano: Error-Resilient DNA Tiling Assemblies
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* John Reif, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2007
* USD 306,000.00

The self-assembly process for bottom-up construction of nanostructures is
of&lt;br/&gt;fundamental importance to the emerging discipline of Nanoscience.
For example,&lt;br/&gt;the self-assembly of DNA tile nanostructures into 2D
lattices can be used to&lt;br/&gt;manufacture patterned nanostructures from
smaller unit nanostructures&lt;br/&gt;components known as DNA tiles on which
other molecules such as metallic&lt;br/&gt;particles and proteins can be
affixed, and DNA tiling lattices can be used to&lt;br/&gt;perform parallel
universal computation. However, self-assemblies at the&lt;br/&gt;molecular scale
are prone to a quite high rate of error, ranging from&lt;br/&gt;approximately
between 0.5% to 5%, and the key barrier to large-scale&lt;br/&gt;experimental
implementation of DNA tiling is this significant error rate in the self-
assembly&lt;br/&gt;process. The problem of tiling errors is particularly
critical for DNA&lt;br/&gt;lattices that use computational tilings to produce
complex patterns, The limitation&lt;br/&gt;and/or elimination of these errors in
self-assembly is perhaps the single most&lt;br/&gt;important major challenge to
nanostructure self-assembly. The goals of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed research are to
develop methods for error-resilient self-assembly; to&lt;br/&gt;analyze these by
probabilistic, kinetic analysis and computer simulation; and
to&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate these error-resilient self-assembly methods by a series
of laboratory&lt;br/&gt;experiments. Research will be done in the context of DNA
tiling assemblies. Prior&lt;br/&gt;work by Winfree provided a method to decrease
tiling self-assembly errors&lt;br/&gt;without decreasing the intrinsic error
rate of assembling a single tile, however, his&lt;br/&gt;technique resulted in a
final assembled structure that is four times the size of the&lt;br/&gt;original
one. This research team at Duke University has developed
compact&lt;br/&gt;error-resilient tiling methods that do not increase the size
of the tiling assembly.&lt;br/&gt;They will test their new error-resilient
tiling methods that use overlay redundancy&lt;br/&gt;such that a single pad
mismatch between a tile and its immediate neighbor forces&lt;br/&gt;one or more
further pad mismatches between adjacent tiles in the neighborhood&lt;br/&gt;of
this tile. The research will use a combination of theoretical and
experimental&lt;br/&gt;methods. Theoretical probabilistic kinetic analysis and
empirical studies of the&lt;br/&gt;computer simulation of tilings will first be
used to validate these error-resilient&lt;br/&gt;overlay redundancy tiling
methods; the analysis will allow prediction of the&lt;br/&gt;reduced error rate
and verify the speed of the assembly is not reduced. Following&lt;br/&gt;this,
actual experimental demonstrations will be made using DNA tiles,
The&lt;br/&gt;overall goal is to demonstrate the feasibility of error-free
assemblies of thousands&lt;br/&gt;of tiles.