* 0432141
* Dissertation Research:  For Spanish, Press Two  --  Investigating the Mediation of Racial and Linguistic Diversity Via Language Interface Technology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Elizabeth Krause, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2006
* USD 8,290.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant investigates
how alternate language interfaces to English affect struggles for linguistic
diversity, racial equality, and cultural continuity via language in the U. S.
Specifically, the study examines how technologies providing a Spanish language
option help to construct standards for what constitutes appropriate "Spanish"
and a "typical Spanish speaker," and it explores how "built-in" ideological
constructions in these technologies play out in the contested domains of
language choice and ethno-racial identification. With respect to the U.S. Latino
population and its relationship to what we will refer to as "Spanish language
interface technology," or "Spanish LIT," this study will help to clarify what
assumptions regarding language and users are embedded in its design, what weight
developers of LIT give to linguistic diversity and racial diversity as design
criteria, how accessible Spanish LIT is to Latinos, how frequently this
technology is used by this group, how Latinos themselves view this technology,
and how Latinos use Spanish LIT in ways that differ from what was originally
envisioned by its manufacturers. These objectives are approached through a New
England regional study that traces the flow of LIT between sites of "production"
and "reception." To better understand the production of LIT, interviews will be
conducted with technical writers and other key "internal translators" of
corporate culture at major LIT companies. These set the stage for the
possibility of a more in-depth corporate ethnography of a particular target
company whose LIT products will be slated to be integrated into the "reception"
sites of the study. A major site of reception will be situated as a research
site in a predominantly Latino city in Western Massachusetts: Holyoke, MA. Here
the study will examine how urban Latino users of the targeted LIT tend to
accept, modify, resist, and transform the technoscientific ideological
inscriptions embodied in the design of the targeted technologies. Leveraging
experience from a preliminary study, this urban site will be &lt;br/&gt;explored
through the development and implementation of a video-taped community workshop
on Latino linguistic diversity and technology issues led by the co-PI. A
supporting study investigates Latino residents in a nearby, small, middle class,
university-based community, Amherst MA; this group has been found often to be
uniquely challenged to negotiate the ideological segregation distancing the
other two sites. After &lt;br/&gt;initial interviews, this part of the research
will develop a curriculum for a participatory action-inspired workshop on
linguistic diversity and technology issues addressing the specific needs of
families in this suburban community. Beneficial links will be fostered between
all three sites via exchanges of expertise and material resources, taking
advantage of the unique resources each site offers. To assess the way a typical
"Spanish speaker" identity is constructed, the surrogate speakers represented in
the software interface of some LIT products will be examined for the presence of
visual tropes and linguistic standards. For example, the privileged Spanish
speaker often appears as stereotypically Andalusian. A discourse-centered data
analysis will be used throughout to gauge micro- and macro-linguistic features
and attitudes toward language. Linguistic diversity will be assessed via the
occurrence of standard and non-standard dialects of Spanish and English for real
and "virtual" speakers. To understand the effects of race, the study will also
examine the presence of "mock" speech and other instances of covert racializing
discourses. Attention to accent or perception thereof will be a constant. This
project will strengthen the relatively scarce literature in STS on race, racism,
and language ideology. The project will augment the work of scholars working in
the areas of language revitalization and Latino Studies by offering a close
examination of how technologies and culture are co-constructed. The study will
also contribute to a methodology for grounding multi-sited research
theoretically and in practical terms via an identity-based and region-bound
approach. This investigation furthermore will contribute to the theoretical
concept of "culturally situated design" (Eglash, 2001) &lt;br/&gt;specifically
with respect to the placing of linguistic and ethnoracial diversity as design
criteria. The study advances a synergistic teaching model in which each research
site can receive important feedback based on investigations in the other two.
Concrete results will be provided in the form of company reports, two curriculum
models, and a community web site, all reflecting lessons learned in the study.
The study directly involves the participation of underrepresented Latinos of
different income and educational levels. The study fosters exchanges of people
and ideas where computer professionals, students, parents, and community
volunteers cross geographic, ethno-racial, and linguistic borders by
contributing to classes, presentations, and other activities at the different
sites. The results of the study can also help to inform debates about the impact
of LIT on national educational standards, international multilingual
technological standards, and global markets for language interface technologies.
In addition, the study can substantially contribute to ongoing and passionate
debates surrounding bilingual education, Black English, English-Only
legislation, and language revitalization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;