* 0432894
* The Dynamics of Rules in Commons Dilemmas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Marco Janssen, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 01/31/2006
* USD 594,516.00

The Dynamics of Rules in Commons Dilemmas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various social
sciences have contributed to understanding how humans make decisions in a given
rule set of experimental games, such as social dilemmas, coordination, and
bargaining. However, the rules of the games are not fixed in real-life settings.
No systematic studies have been performed on the question of how humans are able
to change the rules in commons dilemmas. From field studies it is well known
that people invest significant effort in crafting new rules. This project will
study what causes individuals to invest in rule development, and which cognitive
processes explain the ability of humans to craft new rules.&lt;br/&gt; The main
research plan consists of three components: laboratory experiments, experiments
in the field, and agent-based models. A series of laboratory experiments will be
conducted to analyze the effect of the option to change the rules of the game on
the level of cooperation and the consequences of communication and options to
migrate between groups. The processes by which individuals learn as they try to
optimize the rule set for a specific game will be explored. The field
experiments are aimed to study the role of experience in the ability to craft
rules. A number of communities in Colombia and Southeast Asia that have a
dominant resource use of fisheries, forest, or irrigation will participate. In
these role games, groups of resource users will be asked to craft rules for a
hypothetical common-pool resource, resembling the key problems of fisheries,
forests, or irrigation. The capacity of the groups to craft rules for resources
they are familiar with, and some with which they are not familiar will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt; The agent-based models will be based on the
experimental data and will explore the mathematical properties of co-evolution
of strategies and rules. These models will focus on identifying components of
the learning processes, information exchange, and structure of the game that
affect the ability of the system to co-evolve to a cooperative equilibrium.
Based on the experiments in the laboratory and the field, a number of web-based
educational tools will be developed, to allow students to experiment with rule-
crafting in commons dilemmas.&lt;br/&gt; This project will contribute to the
methodological development of agent-based models by combining laboratory and
field experiments and to the empirical testing of alternative behavioral models.
It may have a broad impact in political science and ecosystem governance by
deriving an understanding of what factors affect the ability of resource users
to change institutional rules effectively. The project will strengthen the
collaboration on experimental research and agent-based modeling between Asia,
Latin American and the USA. The web-based educational tools developed will be
freely available to students and instructors all over the world.&lt;br/&gt; This
project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2004 NSF-wide competition
on Human and Social Dynamics (HSD). The Directorate for Computer and Information
Sciences and Engineering and the Office of International Science and Engineering
are also contributing to support of this project. Coordinated management of the
HSD competition and the portfolio of HSD awards involves all NSF directorates
and offices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;