* 0432156
* Final Cause and the Individual: the Problem of Organic Generation in the Early Modern Period
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,08/31/2007
* Karen Detlefsen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 85,381.00

In the seventeenth century, the theory of organic generation by preformation
emerged and gained currency among a large number of natural philosophers and
natural historians. Preformation is the theory that, at Creation, God pre-formed
every organism that would ever live, encasing generation within generation in
the reproductive organs of the first member of each species. For
preformationists, what we witness as and call generation is merely the becoming
visible of what was previously invisible. The motivation most often cited for
the re-emergence of this doctrine in the mid-seventeenth century is the fact
that early seventeenth-century mechanism, specifically the idea of inherently
inert matter externally moved in accordance with a few simple laws, could not
explain the generation of complex organic forms of specific kinds. Thus, we must
rely upon an external designer up to the task of creating such beings. The PI
will conduct research in theories of individuation and the concept of teleology
in order to establish that some natural philosophers (Malebranche and Leibniz
will be the focus of this research) endorse preformation theory to account for
material individuation, because the model of a functioning, self-sufficient
organism provides an ideal model of a material individual. These two natural
philosophers pursue this route in reaction against shortcomings found in
Descartes' metaphysics of individuals as well as his theory of organic
generation. In order to expand upon research, the PI will conduct research on
the theory and history of teleology, on Leibniz's texts that deal with
generation, individuation, and teleology, and on the role of teleology in the
generation theories and the theories of individual unity found in Descartes and
Malebranche. Intellectual Merit: The project will show the importance of
understanding organic generation for gaining a deeper understanding of early
modern metaphysics, it will offer a sustained investigation of an under-
appreciated motivation for why seventeenth-century natural philosophers endorsed
the preformation theory (and consequently, offering a richer understanding of
the complexity found in preformationism), it will expand our understanding of
the importance of the sciences of life in understanding early modern natural
philosophy, and it will add a new dimension to recent studies in the role of
teleology in early modern natural philosophy. Broader Impacts: The project will
(a) provide a richer historical background to a study of the eighteenth-century
debate about generation between Albrecht von Haller and Caspar Friedrich Wolff
which is part of the PI's broader research plan, (b) it will provide background
to the issues of teleology, generation, individuation, and mechanism which will
enrichen the PI's secondary research which focuses on the natural philosophies
of early modern women philosophers (and, indirectly, will set the foundations
for a study of teleology in the human world so as to enrichen the PI's research
into those women's moral and political philosophies); and (c) it will continue
to contribute to the PI's innovations in teaching, bringing an investigation of
the work of seventeenth-century naturalists to bear on our studies of early
modern philosophers.