* 0432094
* BIC: Collaborative Research: Rational Design of Synthetic Gene Networks using Formal Analysis of Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ron Weiss, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2007
* USD 173,499.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The nascent field of synthetic biology is focused
on creating small synthetic genetic networks&lt;br/&gt;inserting them into
living cells in order to "program" cellular behavior. Recent prototypes
include&lt;br/&gt;a toggle switch, an oscillator, logic gates, concentration
band detectors, and even a pulse&lt;br/&gt;generator. Synthetic gene networks
are foreseen to have tremendous applications in&lt;br/&gt;biotechnology,
medicine, and defense related areas. Such engineered biological devices
will&lt;br/&gt;engage in simple computations and cell-cell communications to
diagnose diseases, repair tissues,&lt;br/&gt;detect and clean up environmental
pollutants, and manufacture biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;The main challenge in
synthetic biology is creating and tuning gene networks to
desired&lt;br/&gt;specifications. There is currently no formal mechanism to
guarantee the behavior of these systems&lt;br/&gt;and to tune their parameters
a-priori to satisfy desired performances. The existing tools for
formal&lt;br/&gt;analysis cannot handle genetic networks successfully due to
nonlinearities, uncertainties, scarce&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of kinetic and
regulatory parameters, and measurements corrupted by noise.
However,&lt;br/&gt;the adoption of synthetic gene networks in critical
applications such as tissue engineering requires&lt;br/&gt;that these systems
meet strict safety guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we propose a hybrid
systems approach to forward engineer and analyze synthetic&lt;br/&gt;genetic
networks. In this framework, interval-based specifications translate to
reachability&lt;br/&gt;analysis and safety verification, which are the central
problems of formal analysis. By exploiting&lt;br/&gt;the particular
nonlinearities induced by chemical reactions and cooperative regulations, we
first&lt;br/&gt;reduce these infinite dimensional problems to finite searches on
graphs by constructing discrete&lt;br/&gt;abstractions, and then map them to
parameter value intervals. This procedure will allow for&lt;br/&gt;analysis
under parameter uncertainty and will provide a provably correct methodology to
tune the&lt;br/&gt;parameters to achieve desired interval-based properties. We
will validate our approach with two&lt;br/&gt;experimental systems. We will
improve the steady state digital response of a transcriptional&lt;br/&gt;cascade
and use the optimized cascades to build more robust toggle switches. We will
also use&lt;br/&gt;formal analysis to fine-tune the dynamic behavior of a pulse
generator that incorporates cell-cell&lt;br/&gt;communication and a feed-forward
motif.