* 0432202
* Magnetic World: Consensus, Separation, and Re-connection in Disciplinary Transformations of Geomagnetism in the 20th Century
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2007
* Gregory Good, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2007
* USD 145,076.00

Geomagnetism, one of the earliest geophysical sciences to be widely practiced,
saw its first successful developments in the 19th century. From 1830 to 1900,
proliferation and professionalization of observational programs and data
reduction characterized the field. After 1900, geomagnetic researchers increased
their activity as they adopted theories by C. F. Gauss and J. C. Maxwell and
developed means to bridge the gulf between these theories and masses of data of
global phenomena. This project examines three main streams in 20th-century
geomagnetic research: investigations of processes deep inside the Earth that
produce the main geomagnetic field, examinations of crustal magnetism, and
research into processes on the edge of space, where Earth's magnetic field
interacts with the interplanetary environment. This investigation places these
research streams in the historical context of disciplinary specialization and
transformation. This process provides the historiographic interest of this
study. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In the early 20th century, geomagnetic
researchers thought of their domain as all of Earth's magnetic and electric
phenomena. Researchers at private institutions, government bureaus, and
universities variously developed mathematical tools and magnetic instruments
based on new technologies, undertook magnetic field surveys or worked in
magnetic observatories or physics laboratories, or traced out new physical
theories. They investigated secular variation, rock magnetism, and upper
atmospheric electrical currents. But by mid-century, most researchers narrowed
their gaze to just one problem area. This specialization contributed to a period
of dramatic developments in the latter half of the century: geodynamo theory,
paleomagnetic evidence of plate tectonics, computer modeling of magnetic
reversals, and discovery of the solar wind and polar (magnetic) substorms. This
project, however, poses disciplinary specialization as a research question: To
what extent did these research areas become independent of each other?
Significant continuities in instrumentation, theory, and analytical methods
persisted much longer than a simple model of specialization suggests. This
project compares how scientists in each of these subfields conducted their
research and how they defined their communities. Building on extensive archival
research for earlier periods, this project focuses mainly on 20th-century
geomagnetic researchers. Recent research is to be documented through
publications, attending scientific conferences, and discussions with researchers
to delineate the boundaries and interactions of research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Outcomes include articles, but the final
products are a book on the history of geomagnetic research from 1800 to 2000 and
an educational web-site. This project may contribute to a re-evaluation of
change in the traditionally recognized scientific disciplines, it may allow a
more complex understanding of the inter-field scientific research that is
becoming ever more common, and it may raise the possibility of providing
historical contexts for policy development in such sciences. The project will
also integrate teaching with research through the use of a research assistant. A
web site will be developed to make the results available for other educational
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;