* 0432113
* Dissertation Research:  Of Birds and Bees: Karl von Frisch, Konrad Lorenz and the Science of Animals
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Angela Creager, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 7,600.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant treats the
history of animal behavior studies. In particular, the project examines how
scientists viewed animals in German-speaking Europe from the 1920s to 1970s by
focusing on two of the period's most important voices on the subject. Nobel
Laureates Karl von Frisch and Konrad Lorenz. Von Frisch attained international
acclaim for his discovery of the honeybee dances as a means to communicate the
direction and distance of food sources to hive mates, while Lorenz was one of
the founders of ethology . the European approach that sought evolutionary
explanations of instinctive behavior. The student has completed most of her
archival work on von Frisch and is currently researching Lorenz holdings in
Berlin. With funds from this grant, she will travel to Gottingen to conduct
research on the production and distribution of their many films. She will also
return to Europe in the fall (2004) to complete the remainder of her research on
von Frisch and Lorenz in Munich and Vienna, respectively. The project will
examine how these two researchers navigated the animal-human boundary and how
they handled problems of anthropomorphism in their science as well as their
popular works. Much was at stake, for questions about animals cut to the core of
what it meant to be human . an issue that became especially pressing in the
period surrounding World War Two. Thus, the project seeks to answer the
following two questions: How were animals viewed scientifically? And how did
scientists teach the public to view animals? Because the dissertation's arc is
largely chronological, the project will also address how these views changed
over the roughly fifty-year period in question. While the disciplinary history
of ethology has been well documented, no in-depth examination of von Frisch's
work or of Lorenz's popular writings and its relation to his scientific work
exists. The study will also contribute to the history of twentieth-century
biology, which has tended to emphasize the development of genetics and molecular
biology at the expensive of other approaches, such as animal behavior studies.
By addressing both scientific and popular works, her project pays particular
attention to the relationship between science and society as seen through the
lens of animal behavior studies. In addition to published popular and scientific
writings, the project draws on von Frisch's and Lorenz's correspondence,
diaries, laboratory notebooks, lecture notes, and film. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;