* 0432011
* Request for Kokes Awards for the 19th North American Catalysis Society Meeting; May 21-28, 2005; Philadelphia, PA
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 08/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

The 19th North American Meeting of the Catalysis Society will be held May 21-28,
2005 in Philadelphia. These meetings of the Catalysis Society are held
biannually and are recognized as premier events for catalysis researchers in
North America and throughout the world. Symposium topics will include recent
advances in many areas of catalysis such as: petroleum, environmental, chemical,
fuel cells and fuel processing, and emerging catalytic technology. Keynote
speakers will provide overviews in these areas. The objective of this proposal
is to maximize meeting attendance by graduate students by defraying the costs of
participation. With co-funding from other sources, support for about 80 students
will be provided. The overall technical impact of the Catalysis Society meetings
is high due to the wide interest in current topics in catalysis and reaction
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the conference include
the exchange of scientific information among the 800-1000 faculty, governmental
laboratory scientists, postdoctoral students, and graduate students who are
expected to attend. This grant will enable a diverse group of students to
attend, including women and minorities from varied geographical locations in the
United States. The poster presentations (over 300) and informal interactions
permit students to gain a much broader perspective of catalysis research. Career
development of these young investigators will be significantly enhanced by
participation in the meeting. &lt;br/&gt;