* 0432029
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Middle Pleistocene Landscape Archaeology Project in the Kapthurin Formation, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Sally McBrearty, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,994.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Sally McBrearty, Cara Roure will excavate three
Middle Pleistocene archaeological sites in the Kapthurin Formation, Kenya, in
order to document land use patterns and subsistence behavior of Middle
Pleistocene hominids, specifically H. rhodesiensis. The Kapthurin Formation,
west of Lake Baringo in the Kenya Rift Valley, consists of a succession of
artifact- and fossil-rich sedimentary members that span most of the Middle
Pleistocene. The formation contains many documented archaeological and fossil
localities, some of which have yielded fossil remains of H. rhodesiensis,
considered the direct precursor to modern H. sapiens. This project focuses on
the interval associated with the hominid fossils, from 543 to ka. Detailed
paleoenvironmental reconstruction of the basin during this interval has
identified a range of contemporaneous microhabitats around a saline lake, a
fresh water spring and a riverine system. A site from each of these
environmental types will be excavated to supply a sample of behavior across
varied habitats. GIS will provide an integrated format within which
archaeological data can be related to environmental and spatial variability to
create a model of ranging and land use patterns for H. rhodesiensis. Patterns
identified in the data will then be compared to those documented for Early
Pleistocene hominids and modern foragers in Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has multiple levels of significance for archaeology and evolutionary
anthropology. The understanding of the origins of modern H. sapiens' behavioral
adaptation is of key importance. This adaptation is most easily recognized as
the evolution of the cognitive capacity for symbolic behavior. A current debate
now focuses on the origins of such behavior. A long held view is that this
capacity appeared suddenly and late as a "behavioral revolution," long after the
origin of anatomically modern H. sapiens. Challenging this, a new hypothesis
poses that the modern behavioral adaptation arose gradually but much earlier, in
the Middle Pleistocene of Africa. This project is unique in its documentation of
land use patterns of African later Middle Pleistocene hominids and will
contribute to understanding of origin and evolution of our species. The results
will be directly applicable to the ongoing debate regarding the origins of
behavioral adaptation of modern H. sapiens in the African Middle
Pleistocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of this research
emphasizes the need for collaboration between many specialties including
geology, archaeology, paleontology, GIS, and museum studies. Roure's project is
being run in close collaboration with the National Museums of Kenya and will
employ museum staff. Roure will be providing field training for Kenyan
excavators, and two junior graduate students from the University of Connecticut.
Outreach includes working with students at Rectory School (USA) and Loberer
Primary School, located in the study area to better understand prehistory and
evolution (through classes and textbooks). Results of this project will be
applicable to dissemination in academic journals over several disciplines
including archaeology, evolutionary anthropology, and geology. However, this
work will also impact both undergraduate and secondary education as there is an
intense interest in the origins of our species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;