* 0432229
* Movement of Planing Surfaces on Highly Compressible Soft Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Sheldon Weinbaum, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 06/30/2009
* USD 240,176.00

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0432229&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: SHELDON
WEINBAUM&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: CUNY CITY
COLLEGE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MOVEMENT OF PLANING SURFACES ON HIGHLY
COMPRESSIBLE SOFT POROUS MEDIA &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is for a
combined experimental and theoretical investigation on enhancing the lubricating
pressures on planar lifting surfaces by having them glide over highly
compressible soft porous media. Using concepts illustrated by the motion of a
red cell moving through a tightly fitting capillary, it was shown by the PI that
the drag force due to sliding friction can also be dramatically reduced if the
elastic restoring force of the solid phase is small compared to the lift force
generated by the transiently trapped fluid.&lt;br/&gt;Employing these insights,
this grant explores a new concept for a future generation train which rides on a
track with mechanical properties akin to goose down. Two different designs for
the top porous surface of the track and the underside of the train car will be
examined to determine which provides a superior sliding interface. The
laboratory scale train-track model will be fully instrumented to measure the
transient pressures developed in the soft porous track bed, the slope of the
underside of the train car (the planing surface) as a function of its velocity
and the forces and accelerations on the moving train car. A simplified
theoretical model is also developed to predict the performance characteristics
of the laboratory model and its full scale design. The research has exceptional
potential for broad impact by integrating research and education into the
curriculum. It has already piqued the interest of graduate and undergraduate
students in both the mechanical and biomedical engineering departments. A 2004
paper published by the PI in Physical Evaluation Letters has also been covered
by Science, Nature and nearly 60 other publications world-wide. The Discovery
Channel has contacted the PIs for a demonstration of the concept and may produce
a segment for the general public. The program and the novel experimental
facility that is to be constructed will also be used as part of a summer
enrichment program for high school students interested in science and
engineering. The proposed research will also provide opportunities to
outstanding undergraduates, particularly women and minorities. &lt;br/&gt;