* 0432232
* Storm-Scale Predictability
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2004,09/30/2008
* Steven Mullen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 09/30/2008
* USD 287,125.00

As computer power continues to increase, the grid spacing of numerical weather
prediction models correspondingly will decrease to the point that cloud-
resolving models will be run on a real-time basis. However, whereas large-scale
predictability issues have been studied extensively, very little work has
explored the nature of storm-scale predictability. The main objective of this
research is to ascertain the length of time for which useful forecasts of
various features of the atmosphere at these scales can be expected. These
features range from the exact timing, location, mode, and intensity of storms to
the nature of the environment (instability, shear, etc.) in which storms may
form. The predictability limits for these features will be estimated from large
ensemble runs. As a preliminary step the ensembles will be launched from an
idealized, horizontally homogeneous control run so that storms may be isolated
and the storm environment closely controlled to determine the impact of
environmental characteristics on storm predictability. Following that,
horizontally nonhomogeneous numerical simulations will also be performed as the
interaction between storms and inhomogeneities in the storm environment are
likely to affect predictability. All experiments will be performed using the
perfect model assumption so that the results will not be limited by the current
skill of high-resolution numerical models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
experiments will provide an upper bound on storm-scale predictability. Knowledge
of the inherent predictability limits at these storms is important for directing
future research toward physically tractable problems and for instructing
forecasters on how to interpret the output of high-resolution numerical models.