* 0432368
* Center for Subtropical and Tropical Oceans and Human Health Research in the Marine Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Larry Brand, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2010
* USD 3,444,971.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;OCE-0432368&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-NIEHS Research Center
of Excellence in Oceans and Human Health at the University of
Miami&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade, there has been increasing
recognition that the ocean and the ocean-land interface are the sources of
organisms and chemicals that can profoundly affect human health. The incidence
of harmful algal blooms (HABs) that contaminate the food web or become
aerosolized and cause respiratory disease, for example, seem to be increasing in
coastal waters worldwide. Coupled with the increasing degradation of coastal
waters is the fact human populations inhabiting coastal areas are growing
rapidly via migration and reproduction; these two coincident characteristics
have resulted in new public awareness and concern for the coastal marine
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support for this Center, researchers at
the University of Miami will concentrate attention on HAB-related research in
the subtropical and tropical oceans adjacent or near Florida. In order to create
an environment of inquiry in which oceanographic investigators and biomedical
scientists are engaged in fully collaborative research, each research project at
the Center will have two principal investigators, an oceanographer and a
biomedical researcher. Overall, the University of Miami's Center for Subtropical
and Tropical Oceans and Human Health Research in the Marine Sciences (CSTORMS)
will include three Research Projects and three Core Facilities. The three
Research Projects, known as Recreational Microbes (Assessment of Microbial
Indicators for Monitoring Recreational Water Quality in Marine Subtropical and
Tropical Environments), Toxic HABs (Toxic Algae: a General Phenomenon in
Subtropical and Tropical Coastal Waters and Open Ocean Environments?), and HAB
Functional Genomics (Functional Genomics of a Subtropical Harmful Algal Bloom
Species: Karenia brevis Davis) are the subject of this NSF proposal. The three
Facilities Cores, known as Genomics, Remote Sensing and Toxic Algal Culture,
will support the research projects and are funded by
NIEHS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recreational Microbes will investigate the present
use of microbial indicators of human health effects in subtropical recreational
marine waters, incorporating ongoing modeling of the physical oceanographic
environment with the addition of characteristics of microbes causing or
indicating public health problems on beaches. This collaboration of
environmental engineers, remote sensing oceanographers, microbiologists,
physical oceanographic modelers and epidemiologists hope to discover basic,
predictive indicators of coastal contamination, including residence times and
transport pathways of microbes. Toxic HABs will expand existing research into
Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) being conducted by the NIEHS Marine and Freshwater
Biomedical Sciences Center and the NIEHS-funded Florida International University
(FIU)-University of Miami (UM) ARCH Program to study population dynamics of
phytoplankton species at low concentrations. Many species of dinoflagellates,
cyanobacteria and other algae produce toxins that are not presently noticed by
humans because those species are not dense enough to produce harmful quantities
of toxins or because they are in areas of the ocean where humans are not exposed
to the toxins. To better understand the molecular mechanisms and population
dynamics that produce toxins, HAB Functional Genomics will investigate mRNA
expression in Karenia brevis populations in bloom and non-bloom conditions in
the field, quantify patterns of gene expression in K. brevis cultures exposed to
different environmental conditions, and use genetic markers to describe
population divergence among blooms in the field. An Administrative Office will
encourage integrated interdisciplinary and inter-institutional collaboration
through an outreach and education, and will be supported by Internal and
External Advisory Committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader
goals of CSTORMS are to foster innovative interdisciplinary scientific research
of importance to human health, and to train scientists in the biological and
oceanographic sciences concerning issues affecting the subtropical and tropical
oceans, and their associated human populations. To accomplish its research
program in subtropical/tropical oceans and human health, CSTORMS will
collaborate with interdisciplinary scientists at Florida International
University (FIU) (Miami, FL), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) (Atlanta, GA), the Miami Dade County Dept of Health (Miami, FL), the
University of Florida (Gainesville, FL), and other institutions, as well as
other Oceans and Human Health Centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;