* 0432297
* Support for International Conference on Autonomic Computing (ICAC 2004) &amp; International Workshop on Challenges of Large Applications in Distributed Environments (CLADE 2004)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Salim Hariri, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 09/30/2005
* USD 10,000.00

The proliferation of Internet technologies, services and devices, have made the
current networked system designs, and management tools, incapable of designing
reliable, secure network systems and services. In fact, we have reached a level
of complexity, heterogeneity, and dynamism that our information infrastructure
is becoming unmanageable and insecure. Furthermore, current design techniques
and software tools that control and manage the information infrastructure are
incapable of handling its complexity, heterogeneity, uncertainty, and security
requirements. Autonomic computing research will enable the design of the next of
the next generation of networked systems and services that are capable of
managing and controlling themselves, and can anticipate their workloads and
automatically adjust the configurations of their resources to meet the new
loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICAC workshop will be focused on the research
issues and challenges facing the development of autonomic computing systems. The
goal of the CLADE workshop is to encourage innovation by addressing the complex
issues that arise in large-scale applications of distributed computation and to
promote the development of innovative applications that effectively use
distributed resources and adapt to a wide range of heterogeneity and dynamics in
space and time. This includes development, deployment, management and
evaluations of large scale applications in science, engineering, medicine,
business, economics, education, and other disciplines, on Grids and other
distributed heterogeneous and dynamic computing environments.&lt;br/&gt;