* 0432144
* Dissertation Research:  One Hundred Years of Malaria: a History of Malaria and its Control in Twentieth Century Colombia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Nancy Stepan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 12,000.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant that
examines the history of malaria and efforts to control it in twentieth century
Colombia. Funds from the grant will support travel, room and board expenses, as
well as some expenses for equipment. Through archival research in three cities
in Colombia, and the archives of the World Health Organization, the Pan American
Health Organization, the National Archives and Records Administration and the
National Library of Medicine, and oral history interviews with participants in
malaria control in Colombia, the researcher will analyze the way in which the
spread of the disease and its control have been shaped by factors beyond
biology, such as an evolving economy, settlement of the agricultural frontier,
political upheaval, rural warfare and migratory movements. This dissertation
emphasizes the local dimensions of international disease control projects, and
especially the reinterpretation of strategies that took place as the
implementation of international programs proceeded in a country-specific
context. This research contributes to the recent surge of studies that aim to
uncover the various strategies that have been followed in the past to deal with
malaria, in which Latin America is underrepresented, and Colombia almost
entirely overlooked. A critical, historical examination of past malaria control
efforts in a major country in Latin America, against a background of the
internationalization of anti-malaria public health that occurred in the
twentieth century, will help inform current public health debates about how to
deal with the continuing burden of malaria in the twenty-first century. This
research contributes to the study of the culture and politics of international
health, revealing assumptions about development as well as the ideological
underpinnings of modernization and civilization of .third world. countries. It
is also part of the larger history of tropical medicine, and of the new critical
studies of science and medicine in relation to imperialism, in which Latin
America has been remarkably absent. This research will also contribute to the
field of environmental history, and more particularly, to the links between
environmental history and the history of public health. Results from this
research will be made available in Colombia through the creation of a website
that can be used as an educational resource.

