* 0432151
* BIC:  Genetically-Engineered Bacteriorhodopsin Proteins for Holographic Associative Memories
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,04/30/2006
* Robert Birge, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 04/30/2006
* USD 237,000.00

The increasing demands of modern computation require innovative solutions to
data storage and processing. Conventional architectures are often limited not by
processor speed, but by the ability to efficiently handle large amounts of data.
Optical architectures for these applications promise potential gains in speed,
data throughput, &amp; storage density. In addition, an entirely new class of
materials has emerged that is expected to provide practical solutions to these
demanding applications; these materials include not only conventional optical
&amp; holographic materials, but also of those of biological origin.
Bacteriorhodopsin (BR) was among the first proteins to attract attention as a
viable component in molecular electronics &amp; nanotechnology. In the native
organism, Halobacterium salinarum, the protein acts as a photosynthetic sunlight
to chemical energy transducer. Through billions of years of evolution, nature
has produced a protein that is remarkably rugged and responds quickly and
efficiently to light. The protein's unique properties make it an appealing
candidate for a number of devices that use light to record or process
information, including holography and optical computer memory
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite bacteriorhodopsin's unique properties, it
still lacks the efficiency necessary for commercialization. Fortunately,
advanced techniques in molecular biology can be used to optimize the protein for
specific device architectures. Through techniques such as random mutagenesis,
semi-random mutagenesis, and directed evolution, researchers can custom-tailor
protein properties in ways never before possible. The use of directed evolution
techniques to produce BR variants for optical recording materials will result in
reusable holographic media that require no processing or fixing, and are capable
of real-time operation. The goal of this research effort is to develop a new
class of fully write-read-erasable dynamic holographic recording media based on
genetically-engineered bacteriorhodopsin variants. Each new material will be
evaluated to determine which is the most efficient, with respect to a number of
standard holographic benchmarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The targeted application
we hope to develop is a bacteriorhodopsin-based holographic associative memory,
which simulates the way the human brain works. Associative memory architectures
are not new, but their utility has been limited by the absence of materials that
facilitate highly efficient implementation (i.e., the lack of truly reusable
media). Associative memories allow computers to identify objects and concepts
faster and more efficiently- applications include any technology that requires
autonomous general-pattern recognition and/or fast &amp; efficient large-scale
database search capabilities. Information processing techniques such as data
mining, data reduction, and large-scale complex database searches will be
enhanced through the successful development of these architectures. Furthermore,
this technology has the potential to play a critical role in the development of
artificial intelligence (AI)-successful implementation of AI architectures will
require a fast &amp; efficient large-scale database search capability.
Incorporation of dynamic write-read-erase materials into pre-existing
associative architectures will introduce a level of flexibility not previously
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To summarize, the proposed effort uses advanced
molecular biological techniques to produce genetically-engineered
bacteriorhodopsin (BR) proteins for holographic associative memories. The
technical merit &amp; broader impacts of this technology must therefore be
considered at multiple levels, including (1) development of novel holographic
materials &amp; (2) the ramifications of viable associative memories. The former
will impact any holographic technology that will benefit from a real-time
reusable media (e.g., optical memory &amp; non-destructive testing
architectures), while the latter will facilitate any technology that will
benefit from the ability to utilize fast &amp; efficient large scale database
capabilities (e.g., artificial intelligence, proteomics, and the human genome
project). Perhaps the most basic impact of this technology will be the
demonstration of random mutagenesis and directed evolution as viable techniques
for the production of custom-tailored proteins to be used in a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;