* 0432089
* QnTM:     Quantum Control of Coherence in Nanoelectronic Quantum Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Pritiraj Mohanty, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 07/31/2007
* USD 255,000.00

Quantum computation holds tremendous potential as the next generation
technology. Similar to the binary bits in classical computation, information can
be stored in two-state quantum bits or qubits, which can entangle with each
other to provide possibilities of quantum parallelism and quantum computation.
The qubit manifests quantum superposition, which enables it to remain in
multiple states at the same time, allowing an infinite set of possibilities for
storing information. Furthermore, quantum parallelism makes it possible to
process information at an astoundingly high speed with more efficient "quantum"
algorithms. However, the main obstacle towards the practical realization of
quantum bit systems is the loss of coherence or decoherence. Due to its coupling
to the environmental noise, the quantum bit loses is coherence or its ability to
form quantum superposition states, which results in the loss of quantum
information. Therefore, it is essential to develop techniques for controlling
coherence of to minimize the effect of environmental coupling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a comprehensive effort for
developing control techniques to engineer the coupling between the quantum
system and the environment, and increase the coherence time to maintain quantum
superposition states for a longer period of time. The specific goal of this
project is to devise methods for controlling quantum coherence in the electron
wave function in nanoelectronic devices. The experiments will involve ultra-fast
picosecond pulses and pulse trains for designing suitable environment for the
electron to control, and perhaps, to reverse the effect of decoherence. The
successful realization of these experiments will allow multiple quantum gate
operations within the enhanced coherence time, which is necessary for quantum
computation. As an enabling technology, coherence control in solid-state-based
quantum systems will be a revolutionary advance towards the ultimate goal of
realizing practical quantum computers. This project will have significant impact
on the students, who will benefit from their training in the cutting-edge
technologies of nanoscience and their exposure to advanced concepts in quantum
information science. Both the training and the research will enable these young
researchers to be part of the nation's next-generation workforce in
nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;