* 0432262
* Austronesian societies: reading social structure from the genome
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Tatiana Karafet, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2007
* USD 681,934.00

Intellectual merit:&lt;br/&gt;In recent years it has become evident that genetic
data can provide evidence about aspects of human social behavior. But so far
there have been few studies on this topic. One reason for this neglect is that
there are nonlinear relationships among the various behavioral factors that can
influence patterns of relatedness, such as marriage rules, migration, language
drift and historical changes in modes of production. This Human and Social
Dynamics project will attempt to systematically analyze the relative magnitude
of these parameters and to assess their effects. While most current research
focuses on genetic structure at the population level, this project will use non-
coding genetic markers to study the emergence of patterns of relatedness among
individuals within communities. Results from previous research show that a
change in mode of production (from tribal horticulture to irrigated rice
production) leaves clear traces in the genetic patterns of small Balinese
communities. This project will look for comparable genetic signatures in
neighboring populations. The aim is to gain a better understanding of the major
variables that affect patterns of relatedness among human groups. A second goal
is to explore whether patterns of relatedness are correlated with people's
willingness to cooperate with various categories of persons (such as males and
females, kin and nonkin, within and between groups). In this way the researchers
hope to gain a better understanding of the historical development of human
social structures and their possible consequences for sociality. To address
these questions, the project will collect DNA from communities in Indonesia and
the Pacific where good archaeological data on the age and relatedness of
settlements exists which can be used to test assumptions about migrations and
population histories based on genetics. Statistical analysis of the genetic data
will be supplemented with computer simulations because standard population
genetics models assume that the dynamics have reached equilibrium, an
unwarrantable assumption for the short time spans of concern here. The project's
SAIL agent-based modeling platform will be enhanced to explore the effects of
behavioral parameters affecting genetic population structure, in particular the
ways in which patterns of relatedness unfold over time spans in the range of
100-10,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project
will result in the creation of new analytical tools, both statistical and
computational, to investigate genetic population structure at the fine-grained
level of resolution provided by microsatellites. It will also provide a
computational framework for integrating genetic analysis with models of language
evolution, and make all of these tools publicly available. These tools will open
new possibilities for the empirical study of fundamental anthropological
questions. The broader impacts of the project will also include training for
undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in a wide array of
theoretical and experimental skills. The project will utilize three existing
IGERT programs at Arizona, the Santa Fe Institute REU summer program, and the
Minority Access to Research Careers (MARC) program to identify and support
under-represented minorities in laboratory research and summer schools. In
addition, a video about the project will be produced by a leading British film-
maker. &lt;br/&gt;