* 0432370
* Development of a Compact, Tunable, Pulsed Laser System for Mid - Infrared Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Hanna Reisler, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 380,000.00

Professors Andrey F. Vilesov and Hanna Reisler of the University of Southern
California are funded by the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities:
Instrument Development (CRIF-ID) program to develop a pulsed, continuously
tunable laser source for molecular spectroscopy in the mid-infrared (4-12
micrometer) region. The design is based on stimulated backward Raman scattering
(SRS) in solid para-hydrogen at T = 4 K. The project is exploring solid para-
hydrogen as a new medium for SRS generation and optimizing and extending its
performance for laser generation. The mid-infrared spectral region allows access
to characteristic vibrations of organic molecules such as carbonyl and cyano
groups, as well as to C-C skeletal modes. The laser system is being tested in
experiments ranging from spectroscopy and dynamics of free radicals in
supersonic molecular beams to spectroscopy in helium
droplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vibrational modes accessible in the mid-
infrared spectral region are routinely used in analytical and spectroscopic
applications. The availability of a user-friendly, mid-infrared laser source
will impact diverse research fields in the physical and chemical sciences and
enable basic experiments that lead to advances in areas such as communications,
chemical sensors and chemical reaction control. &lt;br/&gt;