* 0432314
* U.S.-Bangladesh Cooperative Research:  Biochemical Characterization of Carbofuran Hydroxylase
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2011
* G. Rasul Chaudhry, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2011
* USD 64,000.00

0432314 Chaudhry

Description: This project supports collaborative research between Dr. Rasul
Chaudhry, Department of Biological Sciences, Oakland University, Oakland,
Michigan and Dr. Narayan Roy, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Rajshahi, Bangladesh. They plan to study certain enzymes that
degrade pesticides. The PIs have studied microbial degradation of carbamates and
isolated microorganisms that can degrade these chemicals. Microorganisms either
hydrolyze or oxidize the chemicals. Hydrolytic processes are less efficient and
partially degrade pesticides, whereas oxidation reactions involved in
degradation of carbamates are efficient, but more complex. The goal of the study
is to determine the molecular mechanism of microbial oxidation of carbofuran.
Using a variety of biochemical and molecular biology techniques, the PIs will
test the following hypotheses: 1. A mixed function oxygenase, carbofuran
hydroxylase, catalyzes the reaction of carbofuran to 4-hydroxycarbofuran. 2. A
cytochrome P-450 or another unknown cofactor is involved in the electron
transport circuit from NADPH to molecular oxygen. The following four specific
aims will be pursued: 1. Purify the enzyme complex responsible for hydroxylation
of carbofuran, 2. Characterize the purified enzyme, 3. Determine the components
of the hydroxylase and their interactions responsible for catalyzing the
reaction, and 4. Investigate the diversity of pesticide-degrading
microorganisms. A combined expertise of the collaborating investigators, a
biochemist and a molecular biologist will help solve the novel mechanism of
induction and functioning of the hydroxylase complex that is key to the
effective inactivation of carbofuran in the environment.

Scope and broader impact: Pesticides such as carbofuran are the major group of
chemicals that are used in large amounts for improving productivity and quality
of crops. While these chemicals are vital to agriculture, human exposure to
these pesticides through consumption of foods or drinking water has been
suggested to play a key role in the early onset of neurological diseases, old
age diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, immunological and reproductive
disorders as well as an increase in the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. This study
will substantiate and extend our understanding of microbial metabolic diversity.
It will also help develop new strategies for their safe and effective use as
well as disposal.