* 0432478
* SGER: Magnetic Resonance Velocimetry and Thermometry for Study of Complex Turbulent Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* John Eaton, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 12/31/2006
* USD 104,910.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0432478&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATORS: JOHN EATON&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: STANFORD UNIVERSITY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic Resonance Velocimetry and Thermometry for Study
of Complex Turbulent Flows&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to develop a
velocity measurement technique known as Magnetic Resonance Velocimetry (MRV)
that can provide unprecedented access to detailed information in technologically
and naturally occurring complex flows, and also to evaluate the potential for
making temperature measurements. MRV uses standard medical magnetic resonance
imaging systems and the 4D phase-contrast imaging technique to provide
spatially-resolved, three-component velocity measurements. Mean velocity
measurements can be acquired at millions of spatial points in less than one
hour. The approach involves performing experiments that will resolve open
questions about the use of 3D and 4D MRV sequences in turbulent flows and to
assess the potential for using similar sequences for the measurement of the
temperature in flowing fluids. If the research shows that properly optimized MRV
can be used accurately for a wide range of turbulence parameters, this would
lead to great contributions in understanding complex flows. Development of MRV
will have a broad impact in the scientific, engineering, and medical fields. MRV
combined with rapid prototyping offers a new paradigm for engineering design of
internal flow systems. The rapid turnaround time from concept to full-field
measurements means that design in the future will be based on full flow field
information instead of approximate analysis or flow visualization. In the
medical arena, the quantitative assessment of measurement uncertainty will help
to move MRV into the realm of accepted clinical practice. With the improvements
in turbulent flow measurements and the addition of temperature measurement, the
range of applications will expand significantly. In the scientific arena, MRV
and MR thermometry offer unprecedented measurement capability for complex
internal flows encountered in both engineered and natural systems. Training of
graduate and undergraduate students in these advanced multidisciplinary
measurement techniques represents a significant educational
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;