* 0432025
* BIC:    Cellular Inspired Garbage Collection:    Ubiquitin System and Memory Management
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* R. Vijay Kumar, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 07/31/2006
* USD 131,000.00

Garbage collection is a crucial component of many modern computer programming
languages. Garbage collection frees programmers from the burden of explicit
memory management, and is necessary for the independence of functional data
objects in object-oriented programming paradigms. Unfortunately, traditional
garbage collection algorithms are not ideally suited for concurrent operation in
real-time embedded systems. On the other hand, cellular systems must also be
able to identify and reclaim proteins that are no longer being used or are
damaged or incomplete. The selective destruction and recycling of proteins is
accomplished by the ubiquitin system in the cell. Proteins to be selectively
destroyed are first identified and tagged with ubiquitin through a series of
enzymatic reactions. These proteins are then degraded in the proteosome, and
their constituent amino acids are recycled for the construction of new
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;We propose using hybrid systems to model the enzymatic
pathways in the ubiquitin system to gain insight into their computational
properties. Our modeling and simulation efforts will describe how the ubiquitin
conjugation ligases and the proteosome interact to selectively recognize the
appropriate protein substrates. Our results on the ubiquitin system will help
motivate new garbage recognition algorithms for memory management in computer
systems. These algorithms will be based upon the hierarchical composition of
classifiers that recognize characteristic features of the objects in
memory.&lt;br/&gt;The educational goals of this proposal are closely tied to our
research agenda. We hope to introduce students as well as other researchers to
the importance of viewing biomolecular sytems as computational systems. The
ubiquitin system will serve as a teaching illustration for students in seminars
and future workshops, as well as for the public community through our
collaboration with the Franklin Institute, the university's AMP summer program,
and our annual Robotics for Girls workshop. Other educational activities will
serve to inform and open dialogue between researchers in the engineering,
biological sciences, and medical communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;