* 0432493
* US-Sweden Planning Visit on Nanostructured Thin Films and Applications to Data Storage Industry
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Esteban Broitman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/2005
* USD 4,550.00

0432493&lt;br/&gt;Broitman&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially support Dr.
Esteban D. Broitman (from Carnegie Mellon University, PA) to visit Dr. Lars
Hultman, Director of the Thin Film Division, Department of Physics and
Measurements Technology at Linkoping University (Sweden). The objective of the
visit is to carry out experiments and submit a cooperative research proposal on
nanostructured carbon nitride thin films. The proposed research program is
intended to provide the scientific underpinning that is needed to support the
development of new protective overcoats for the data storage industry. Linkoping
University has offered to share the expenses by providing the tickets for the
trip from Pittsburgh (USA) to Linkoping (Sweden).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research program explores some of the fundamental scientific issues
that must be understood in order to propose the use of nanostructured fullerene-
like carbon nitride (fl-CNX) films as overcoats for disks. This new class of
material, discovered by Dr. Hultman's group, consists of sp2-coordinated basal
planes that are buckled from the incorporation of pentagons and cross-linked at
sp3-hybridized C sites, both of which are caused by structural incorporation of
nitrogen. The orientation, radius of curvature of the basal planes, and the
degree of crosslinking between them defines the unique structure and mechanical
properties of the material. The current research program is a university-
industry collaboration that will develop the physico-chemical understanding of
the properties of lubricant films deposited on fl-CNX overcoats. The adsorption
of fluorinated ethers and alcohols with fl-CNX films will be studied in order to
understand the bonding of perfluoropolyalkylether (PFPE) lubricants with fl-CNX
surfaces. Finally, the surface chemistry and surface properties of PFPE
lubricants themselves will be studied on fl-CNX
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the proposed project extends quite
broadly beyond the development of a fundamental understanding of the science
underlying use of fl-CNX overcoats. The proposed research will have a direct
impact on the technology itself and the PI's connections with the data storage
industry will enable the results of the work to be directly disseminated to the
scientists and engineers within the data storage industry who will transfer this
technology to the commercial sector. The successful development of this overcoat
will help the U.S. data storage industry to maintain its leadership position in
an extremely competitive sector.&lt;br/&gt;