* 0432063
* CompBio: Gene Interactions as a Model for Network Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Herman Dierick, Neurosciences Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 550,000.00

The extensive interactivity among genes that is now being revealed suggests that
there is considerable flexibility in the genome's capacity for responding
effectively to diverse conditions. In a model gene network, centering on a
temperature-sensitive mutation in the Syntaxin1A gene affecting synaptic
transmission in Drosophila, a high degree of flexibility has been observed and
the interactions underlying the various states of the network will now be
analyzed. The phenotypic space of the network's functionality will be explored
and the patterns of gene expression associated with various different genotypes
and system outputs assayed. Functional clustering analysis, a measure based on
the mutual information in the system, will be applied to these data to construct
testable models and predictions of gene interaction. The outcome of this
research offers possibilities for new kinds of network strategies and
architectures.&lt;br/&gt; The overall goal of the work is to test the idea that
gene networks operate by the same fundamental principles as neuronal networks,
of which degeneracy is one of the key characteristics. The gene network
surrounding Syntaxin will be analyzed by synthesizing various allele
combinations, dividing them into groups with quantitatively similar phenotypes,
and comparing the gene expression patterns within and between groups. A
particular focus will be those genotypes that produce similar scores, as a
window into the various network configurations that are capable of producing
similar outputs (i.e., system degeneracy). From this analysis, models will be
generated and predictions made of which (and how many) gene combinations
stabilize the phenotype, and these will be tested by constructing and analyzing
further mutant combinations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Aim 1: Perform bi-directional
selection on a population of flies in which all of these alleles (Syx1A3-69and
EPs) are randomly segregating to derive strains with extreme sensitivity or
resistance to paralysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Aim 2: Perform array analyses on
a subset of phenotypic groups of genotypes from EP and Df analyses, as well as
on the selected and control strains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Aim 3: Apply
functional clustering based on phenotype and array results, and make predictions
on phenotypes of novel combinations. Test novel combinations phenotypically, and
molecularly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene networks are likely to share common
organizational and operational principles with neuronal networks, and with
biological networks in general, despite their very different modes and kinetics
of internal communication and connection. This proposal addresses the issue
directly, by taking a representative gene network and analyzing it with tools
developed and validated for neuronal networks. &lt;br/&gt;The experiments
outlined above constitute a new approach to the question of whether there are
fundamental underlying principles of biological network operation which, if
discerned, would have wide-ranging implications for the design and
implementation of artifical networks constructed for applications as diverse as
computing, engineered adaptive devices, and communications.&lt;br/&gt;