* 0432359
* U.S.-Argentina Planning Visit:  Features in the Grammar of Human Language
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* David Embick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/2005
* USD 8,040.00

0432359&lt;br/&gt;Embick&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Argentina
award will support Dr. David Embick of the University of Pennsylvania, along
with a graduate student, for a planning visit to Buenos Aires, Argentina. They
will work with Dr. Adreina Adelstein, Universidad Nacional de General Sarmiento,
Dr. Guiomar E. Ciapuscio, Universidad de Buenos Aires, and Dr. Marcela A.
Depiante, Universidad Nacional del Comahue, in Argentina, on the initiation and
organization of joint research on theoretical linguistics, concentrating on the
nature of the features found in human language. Both the PI and the Argentines
are conducting research on the nature of the features relevant to computations
in syntax, morphology, and semantics. During the visit, the PI will work with
his counterparts to develop (1) a shared set of theoretical background
assumptions in the context of which further research can be pursued jointly, and
(2) a precise set of initial research questions to be examined, along with (3) a
proposed division of labor for initial investigation of these questions. In
addition, the PI will investigate the possibility that language acquisition
studies of children acquiring a first language can be incorporated into the
research program along with the theoretical methodologies to be employed. The
final project will further our knowledge of the nature of the features found in
the grammar of human language, and the architecture of the grammar of human
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;