* 0432278
* Chapman Conference on Solar Energetic Plasmas and Particles; Turku, Finland; August 2-6, 2004
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* A. F. Spilhaus, Jr., American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 06/30/2005
* USD 15,750.00

Chapman Conferences are topical meetings sponsored by the American Geophysical
Union (AGU) and are designed to promote opportunities not normally available
through the format of larger meetings. In this proposal, funds are requested
from the National Science Foundation for travel expenses of some graduate
students, young scientists, invited speakers, and others who need support to
participate in the Chapman Conference on Solar Energetic Plasmas and Particles,
to be held in Turku, Finland during the period August 2-6, 2004.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the discovery of solar energetic particles (SEPs)
nearly six decades ago, tremendous progress has been made in understanding them
in recent years, thanks to the vast array of space and ground based instruments
observing SEPs (and related solar and interplanetary disturbances, such as
shocks, coronal mass ejections (CMEs), and eruptive flares). The solar,
interplanetary, and heliospheric communities have been able to synthesize
imaging and time-series data to obtain a detailed picture of the origin,
composition, and propagation of SEPs, as well as their geospace impact. Because
of their impact on global space-based and ground-based technologies, SEPs have
assumed new importance among the international Space Weather and Living With A
Star (LWS) communities, which are actively studying
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Chapman conference will help synergize and
coordinate international efforts in SEP-related research and observations, and
thus further the scientific goals of the NSF's National Space Weather Program
and Solar Terrestrial Research Program.