* 0432267
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:The Impact of the Spanish Colonial Regime on Maya Household Production at Lamanai, Belize during the Late Postclassic to Colonial Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Scott Fedick, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2006
* USD 7,560.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Scott Fedick, Darcy Wiewall will analyze data
gathered during her archaeological excavations at the Maya site of Lamanai in
Northern Belize. Lamanai is notable for having produced the first fruitful
information on Maya/Spanish interaction in the southern Maya lowlands. In the
Late Postclassic period the community was a small, but flourishing political and
economic polity in the central Maya lowlands. Circa 1546, Lamanai was
incorporated into the Spanish colonial encomienda system, which required
individual households to pay specified amounts of traditional and non-
traditional goods. Wiewall's excavations focused on recovery of multiple lines
of data that will assess the extent to which household organization, production,
and consumption strategies and their corresponding gender relations of
production shifted between the Late Postclassic (A.D. 1450-1546) and Spanish
Colonial Periods (A.D. 1546-1650). (132).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how
the impact of Spanish state formation altered Maya commoner households one can
reconstruct household socio-economic activities through application of the house
lot model. The house lot is composed of the dwelling, associated buildings and
the immediate surrounding area where household activities were carried out and
were traces of material and organic by-products of those activities remain. As a
household under goes change, specific behaviors or activities may be abandoned
or initiated, or the proportions of different activities may change relative to
others. Documenting changes in house lot configurations and activities (food
preparation, craftwork, gardening, etc.) across space will contribute to
understanding the range of activities in which people participated and the
decisions they made about labor and resource allocations. Likewise, through
comparing individual household groups we gain insight into social organization
(gender, age, class, ethnicity) and economic and political organization.
(143)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines four house lots and compares
the activities performed within this space. A set of archaeological correlates
were developed to distinguish a Late Postclassic from a Colonial house lot and
thereby the extent of changes in household organization, production, and
consumption strategies. Because many productive activities that differentiate
households socio-economically from one another take place in areas adjacent to
the dwelling this project was geared toward recovery and analysis of non-
observable remains accessible through soil chemistry (phosphate) and
paleoethnobotanical samples. (82)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a
broader impact by enhancing the level of public understanding of science both in
Belize and the United States. Public outreach associated with the project has
focused on the community of Indian Church, located adjacent to Lamanai. The Co-
PI has implemented a program for local women to receive training and skills as
archaeological laboratory assistants. This training will prepare them for future
employment with other archaeologists and other researchers conducting
investigations in the area. These new skills will open up opportunities for
employment with the Belize Institute of Archaeology. Outreach also includes
tours of the site and laboratory facilities for the local community and
submission of field reports to the community library. The research findings will
be disseminated through class lecture, local archaeology interest groups,
professional meetings, and scholarly publications. Furthermore, the award will
assist in graduate student training. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;