* 0432535
* US-Africa Planning Visit: Undergraduate Engineering Research in Ghana and Kenya
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Toby Cumberbatch, Cooper Union
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 12/31/2004
* USD 3,624.00

0432535&lt;br/&gt;Cumberbatch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this planning visit the PI
will lay the groundwork for future undergraduate engineering research projects
in Ghana and Kenya. American undergraduate engineering students are usually
exposed to engineering research and design experiences that draw upon the strong
infrastructure of a developed, industrialized nation. Consistent power supply,
abundant fuel, and the ready availability of replacement parts and skilled
labor, for example, are often a given. The PI intends to offer students
engineering research experiences in Ghana and Kenya, where personal
resourcefulness, the ability to observe, infer, and deduce, and the ability to
apply scientific fundamentals will be challenged and developed. The purpose of
this planning trip is to identify African collaborators and particular
engineering challenges appropriate for future undergraduate research projects;
examples might include identifying design features of African structures that
contribute to their ability to maintain a constant internal temperature, or
identifying effective and decentralized methods for generating electrical power.
In such projects students would enhance their education by deconstructing
accepted engineering solutions into their core functions. In the course of
reconstructing these functions using limited resources, the undergraduates would
learn to respond to a set of engineering demands and specifications that are
unique to the harsh environments found in the developing world. Students will be
encouraged to adopt a minimalist approach to their design using fundamental
physics, chemistry and mathematics as their tools, introducing and reinforcing
the concept of sustainable engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this
planning visit the PI will develop a program that will not only improve
students' engineering skills via exposure to a new engineering milieu, but will
also provide experience within a social and economic environment where
individuals and societies have far fewer resources than in the developed world.
Under such conditions, ecological and environmental awareness will likely take
on a new importance as students consider engineered solutions in this context.
Furthermore, the program being planned will give students the opportunity to
work with African collaborators, from whom they can learn both about the culture
of their host countries, as well as about a greater repertoire of responses to
diverse engineering demands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;