* 0432171
* Neural Information Processing for Multichannel Intra-Cortical Recordings
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Eric Perreault, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 08/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

Recent advances in electric technology make it possible to obtain recordings
from multiple cortical neurons. This ability opens a number of possibilities for
expanding the understanding of cortical function by allowing the aggregate
behavior of neural populations to examine during complex tasks. This project is
to develop the computational techniques necessary for efficiently processing
data collected from multichannel electrode arrays and to use these techniques
for studying the role primary motor cortex in the control animal movement.
Systems identification techniques will be used to examine neural information
processing. Algorithm development will focus on efficient linear nonparametric
multiple-input, single-output techniques for quantifying the transfer of
information between neural activity and physiological processes. The algorithm
process will then be extended to incorporate nonlinear phenomena such as
threshold nonlinearities inherent to neural integration. These techniques will
be used to examine it sensory information linked volitional movements influences
the plasticity of primary more cortex during performance of skilled motor tasks.
If a link is demonstrated this may provide a path for enhancing acquisition of
motor skills for a range of tasks.