* 0432509
* Molecular Simulation of Disordered Materials Under Stress
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Daniel Lacks, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2004
* USD 67,996.00

0080191 Lacks This is a theoretical research grant in which molecular
simulations will be used to investigate the effects of stress on disordered
systems. The novelty of the research is the use of the energy landscape as a
framework for carrying out the simulations and analyzing the results. The use of
energy landscapes will lead to new insights regarding these effects and allow
long-time phenomena to be addressed.

The investigations will focus on several phenomena involving disordered systems
under stress. Specifically, these are (1) the transport properties of flowing
fluids; (2) fracture in glassy materials; (3) shock-induced reaction dynamics in
energetic materials; (4) amorphous-amorphous phase transitions; and, (5) the
effects of stress on aging in glasses. Although these phenomena may appear to be
unrelated, this research aims to show that they may be different manifestations
of similar stress-induced changes in the underlying energy landscapes.

The following physical picture is proposed to explain the effects of stress on
disordered systems: The strains resulting from stress lead to changes in the
potential energy landscape - of particular importance are changes in local
energy gradients and curvatures, heights of energy barriers, and relative
energies of different local energy minima. These changes in the energy landscape
alter the system dynamics, which in turn modifies the system properties. Short-
time changes in the dynamics, associated with perturbations of the atomic
trajectories, are due to changes in local aspects of the energy landscape (e.g.,
local gradients and curvatures, and barrier heights). Long-time changes of the
dynamics, associated with viscoelastic processes, are due to changes in nonlocal
aspects of the energy landscape (e.g., relative energies of diffferent regions
of the landscape).

The investigation will consist of calculations that map out the effects of
strain on the potential energy landscape, along with simulations that probe the
system dynamics. These dynamics simulations will include non-equilibrium
molecular and Brownian dynamics simulations to address short-time dynamics, and
rare-event methods to address long-time dynamics. %%% This is a theoretical
research grant in which molecular simulations will be used to investigate the
effects of stress on disordered systems. The novelty of the research is the use
of the energy landscape as a framework for carrying out the simulations and
analyzing the results. The use of energy landscapes will lead to new insights
regarding these effects and allow long-time phenomena to be addressed.

The investigations will focus on several phenomena involving disordered systems
under stress. Specifically, these are (1) the transport properties of flowing
fluids; (2) fracture in glassy materials; (3) shock-induced reaction dynamics in
energetic materials; (4) amorphous-amorphous phase transitions; and, (5) the
effects of stress on aging in glasses. Although these phenomena may appear to be
unrelated, this research aims to show that they may be different manifestations
of similar stress-induced changes in the underlying energy landscapes. ***

