* 0432190
* BIC:    Evolving Signal Processing Circuits from Biological Reaction Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Herbert Sauro, Keck Graduate Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 01/31/2008
* USD 261,720.00

The aim of this project is to understand how biological organisms process
signals and how such an understanding might impinge on the future development of
man-made devices. We normally associate computation with man-made devices,
particularly the ubiquitous digital computer or the lesser-known analog
computer. However there are computational devices much closer to home. All
biological organisms are exposed almost continuously to a huge variety of
environmental changes and shocks. In order to survive such changes, living
organisms have evolved sensor proteins located on the outer surface of the
organism which can detect all manner of environmental changes. These sensor
proteins are in turn connected to so-called signaling networks composed of
interacting proteins inside the cell. These signaling networks are responsible
to making an appropriate decision based on all the sensory inputs. What is not
well understood at this stage is the type of decision processing that is carried
out by these networks. In man made devices we employ a variety of techniques
from digital computers to analog devices to control our machines. Over the last
fifty years or so, the design of sophisticated man-made control devices has
matured to the extent that almost all devices now have some kind of control
systems built into them. The reason why we are so good at designing artificial
control systems is that we have a thorough grasp of the underlying theoretical
principles of control. The primary technology that we used to build control
devices is based on electronics. Walk into any book store and one will find
books on electronic design. In relation to biological control systems we do not
have the equivalent of an electronics design handbook. As a result we understand
very little about how biological control systems work, how they carry out
decisions and what the underlying principles of biological control are. Our
approach is to evolve on digital computers, artificial biological signaling
networks. Depending on what task the network is designed to perform, we evolve
networks which will come closest to achieving this objective. Examples include
evolving a network which can be robust to sudden changes in the environment, or
conversely evolving networks which can quickly respond to environmental changes.
In addition other objectives will include common signal processing techniques
employed in electronics, for example we might evolve a network that can
oscillate or a network that can carry out some arithmetic. By these means we
will generate biological like networks which will have the capacity to carry out
all the common electronic signal processing tasks. The end results will be a
large library of networks. From this library we will then reverse engineer the
networks to understand how they accomplish their evolved tasks. Finally we will
compare these networks to real biological networks to see if we can find
equivalent 'designs'. The ultimate goal is to write the 'electronics' design
manual of biological signaling control networks. The work we propose in this
application impinges on many areas of science. It combines work from molecular
biology, computer science, control theory, evolutionary algorithms, signal
processing and electrical circuit theory. The engineering sciences will benefit
from this work by being able to examine examples of signal processing carried
out at the molecular level and the biological sciences will benefit by an
understanding of the underlying control principles of real biological networks.
In addition, molecular based circuitry has to deal with noise (which is dealt
with extensively in the engineering sciences), this work may have an important
bearing on the implementation of nanotechnology based control systems.