* 0432710
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Folsom Adaptive Systems in the Upper Gunnison Basin, Colorado
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* David Meltzer, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 8,103.00

Under the supervision of Dr. David J. Meltzer, Brian Andrews will analyze data
gathered from five Folsom period sites located in the Gunnison Basin. The Folsom
period dates from approximately 10,800 to 10,000 years ago, and is most often
characterized by relatively small groups of highly mobile bison hunting peoples.
This characterization is based on decades of work that focused on large bison
kill sites in the Great Plains. Recent work in several areas of the Rocky
Mountains, including the Gunnison Basin, suggest that not all groups of Folsom
people may have practiced this highly mobile lifestyle. This project will seek
to understand the differences between Folsom behavior seen between the
traditional Plains setting and the mountainous Gunnison Basin. Were Folsom
people as highly mobile in the mountains, or did they stay in one place for
longer periods of time? Did they focus on hunting bison and other large game in
the Basin, or did their diet consist of a wider variety of foods? Did they spend
all year living in the Basin, or did they move in and out seasonally? Analysis
of Folsom sites in the Basin will help answer these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the research will focus on the artifacts
recovered from the Mountaineer site, located atop a high mesa. This site is much
larger than typical Folsom occurrances, and was likely occupied on multiple
occasions. Evidence of a structure suggests that it may have been occupied for
much longer periods at a time than were other Folsom sites. Stone artifacts
suggest that a wide range of activities took place during occupation, including
food and hide processing and tool manufacture. It also appears that the site was
used to monitor the movement of game in the valley below. Other sites that will
be examined are much smaller than Mountaineer, and likely represent the
activities of smaller groups of people performing specific tasks, such as
hunting animals, gathering plants, or acquiring raw materials used to make stone
tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of the project is to describe how
Folsom groups lived in the sometimes harsh climate of the Gunnison Basin at the
end of the Ice Age in North America. This research will provide a more complete
understanding of the variability present in an archaeological 'culture' that
covered much of western North America, and will offer general insight into how
people adapted in multiple ways to different and challenging climatic and
environmental settings. The involvement of undergraduate, junior high and high
school students, and local amateur archaeologist groups in the excavation and
analysis of the Mountaineer site ensures that the insight gained and lessons
learned of prehistoric human adaptation to dramatically different conditions
than at present will be shared with a wide audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;