* 0432143
* Collaborative Research:  Intrinsically Motivated Learning in Artificial Agents
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Andrew Barto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

Collaborative Research: Intrinsically Motivated Learning in Artificial Agents
Project Summary Humans are unendingly curious; we spontaneously explore and
manipulate our surroundings to see what we can make them do; we obtain enjoyment
from making discoveries and for making things happen. We often engage in these
activities for their own sakes rather than as steps toward solving practical
problems. Psychologists call these intrinsically motivated behaviors because
rewards are intrinsic in these activities instead of being due to the
satisfaction of more primary biological needs. But what we learn during
intrinsically motivated behavior is essential for our development as competent
autonomous entities able to efficiently solve a wide range of practical problems
as they arise. This project's objective is to develop a computational model of
intrinsically motivated learning that will allow artificial agents to construct
and extend hierarchies of reusable skills that are needed for competent
autonomy. This project builds on existing research in machine learning, recent
advances in the neuroscience of brain reward systems, and classical and
contemporary psychological theories of motivation. At the core of the model are
recent theoretical and algorithmic advances in computational reinforcement
learning, specifically, new concepts related to skills and new learning
algorithms for learning with skill hierarchies. The project develops a
mathematical framework, implements the model in a series of simulated agents,
and demonstrates the advances this will make possible in a series of
increasingly complex environments. Intellectual Merit-Machine learning methods
have become much more powerful in recent years. Despite these advances and their
utility, today's learning algorithms fall far short of the possibilities for
machine learning. They are typically applied to single, isolated problems for
each of which they have to be hand-tuned and for which training data sets have
to be carefully prepared. They do not have the generative capacity required to
significantly extend their abilities beyond initially built-in representations.
They do not address many of the reasons that learning is so useful in allowing
animals to cope with new problems as they arise over extended periods of time.
Success in this project will provide a fundamental advance in machine learning
and move the field in a new direction. Although computational study related to
intrinsic motivation is not entirely new, it is currently underdeveloped and
does not take advantage of the highly relevant recent advances in the field of
computational reinforcement learning and in the neuroscience of brain reward and
motivation systems. Furthermore, computational studies do not take advantage of
psychological theories of play, curiosity, surprise, and other factors involved
in intrinsically motivated learning. This project addresses these shortcoming by
taking an explicitly interdisciplinary approach. Broader Impacts-The new methods
promise to improve our ability to control the behavior of complex systems in
ways that will benefit society. Machine learning algorithms have been
instrumental in a wide variety of applications in such areas as bioinformatics,
manufacturing, communications, robotics, and security systems. It is important
strategically, economically, and intellectually to increase the power of machine
learning technologies as rapidly as possible. This project attempts to address
some of these challenges. This project will strengthen interdisciplinary ties
between the machine learning community of computer science and various
disciplines devoted to the study of human cognitive development and education.
The specific methods of concern in the proposed research have not yet been
integrated. There has been very little cross-fertilization between the
psychological study of intrinsic motivation and machine learning. The proposed
research will remedy this situation, thereby helping to create an avenue of
communication that can foster future developments in both fields. The project
has the potential to contribute to our understanding of general principles
underlying human cognitive development, with implications for education, where
enhancing intrinsic motivation is a key factor. The educational component of the
project focuses on graduate education through its training of graduate students.
This includes the offering interdisciplinary graduate-level seminars at both U.
of Massachusetts and U. of Michigan, to be taught by the PIs on the topic of
intrinsically motivated learning. In its recruitment of graduate students, the
project will take advantage of the role that U. Massachusetts plays as the lead
institution in the NSF funded Northeast Alliance, which supports and mentors
underrepresented minority students interested in academic careers in a science,
mathematics, or engineering discipline. At U. of Michigan special effort will be
made to recruit and involve undergraduates in student projects leading to summer
projects funded by the Marian Sarah Parker Scholars Program, which targets
female undergraduates and provides funds for summer research opportunities.