* 0432186
* QnTM:     Quantum Information Processing in Single Crystal Solids with NMR
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Leonard Mueller, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 07/31/2007
* USD 312,000.00

In the last decade, quantum computing and quantum information processing (QIP)
have attracted significant interest due to the promise of more efficient
algorithms for solving classically hard problems such as data searching and
factorization. The latter is particularly relevant from the standpoint of
national security as many data encryption schemes remain secure based on the
difficulty of factoring large integer keys. Currently, we do not know how to
build a quantum computer that is large enough that the promises of increased
computational power can be realized. Of the many physical systems under
development for potential use as quantum processors, nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) is the furthest advanced. NMR exploits atomic nuclei that exist in spin
states of "up" and "down". These spin states can be manipulated using pulsed
magnetic fields to produce quantum logic gates and implement quantum algorithms.
To date, several types of manipulations and algorithms have been demonstrated
for spin bearing molecules in solution using liquid-state NMR. There are
significant benefits, however, to performing QIP in static single crystal
solids. In particular, the speed of a quantum algorithm can be increased by 2-3
orders of magnitude by taking advantage of interactions between nuclear spins
that are inherently larger in solids. As well, single crystal solids are
compatible with low temperatures, which can substantially increase sensitivity
and address fundamental questions of state initialization and scalability.
Indeed, because of increased speed, potentially larger processors, and better
sensitivity, solid-state NMR has been tapped for next-generation QIP. Recently
our group was the first to report experiments on a three-qubit NMR quantum
information processor, using a static single-crystal of isotopically labeled
glycine (H215N13CH213COOH) (Journal of Chemical Physics 119(3), 1643-1649
(2003)). Under this research program, we propose to develop new materials and
methods for next-generation single crystal solid-state NMR QIP, seeking to
extend the size and power of quantum processors and mapping out important
physical parameters that define this technology. In the process, a number of
graduate, postdoctoral, and undergraduate students will be trained in state-of-
the techniques of both chemistry and physics, enabling a strong technological
base to support the future needs of both industrial and government research
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;