* 0432322
* SGER: Proteomics-level Structural Biology of Transmembrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Constance Jeffery, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 12/31/2005
* USD 92,657.00

Intellectual Merit: Many vital cellular activities, including ion transport,
cell-cell communication, vesicle transport, maintenance of cellular structure,
and host-pathogen interactions, involve proteins that are embedded in the cell
membrane. Transmembrane (TM) proteins make up over 25% of known proteins and are
the targets for the majority of pharmaceuticals in use today. The improper
folding and/or activity of TM proteins can cause severe malfunction in normal
cellular processes. In spite of the vast importance of TM proteins, there is far
less known about their structures and molecular mechanisms than for soluble
proteins. The presence of hydrophobic sequences can make it difficult to express
and isolate large amounts of these proteins and makes them refractory to many
biochemical and structural methods. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research
(SGER) project addresses the general question: Why do recombinant protein
expression methods result in the overexpression and correct membrane
localization of some TM proteins but not others? More specifically, is there a
general physical barrier to high levels of TM protein expression, or is the
problem due more to regulation of individual proteins? Do changing growth
conditions improve TM protein expression and membrane localization? A systematic
proteomics approach is being used to test the expression and membrane
localization of 30 transmembrane proteins with a variety of characteristics and
under a variety of growth conditions. Research aims include: (A) Selecting 30
target proteins from a model bacterial system that varies in the number of
predicted transmembrane helices, function, and other characteristics and (B)
Constructing expression vectors encoding each target protein to determine which
protein characteristics affect protein expression and which protein
characteristics affect protein localization to membranes. This SGER project is
being performed with 30 proteins to test the proof of concept and then,
depending upon the results, a standard proposal will follow with a larger number
of proteins. The successful completion of this project is potentially high
impact because it addresses the need for improved methods for obtaining
sufficient amounts of TM proteins for studies of structure and molecular
mechanisms. Although this first project addresses specific questions about
transmembrane protein expression, use of the set of 30 genes in a common set of
vectors also lays the groundwork for future larger systematic studies to develop
improved expression methods for TM proteins, as well as solubilization,
purification, and characterization of this important class of
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impact of this SGER project
includes training and mentoring students in the lab and teaching and outreach by
the PI. UIC is an urban university whose student makeup reflects the community,
including many students who are from families with modest incomes, many students
who are the first in their families to go to college, and students from under-
represented groups. Planned and continuing activities include: training and
mentoring a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students from the
biology, physics, and bioengineering programs by providing experience in use of
bioinformatics software, recombinant DNA techniques, protein biochemistry, and
other important techniques; revising and updating undergraduate and graduate
lecture courses through new lectures, bringing the PI's background in protein
structure and function to the biology department; developing a novel semester-
long section for freshmen with new teaching materials and hands-on experiences
that helps encourage students to consider a career in science. Additional
outreach and teaching activities planned include judging science fairs at
(predominantly minority) local K-12 schools and guest seminars at the ACA summer
school.&lt;br/&gt;