* 0432070
* BIC:  Collaborative Research: Rational Design of Synthetic Gene Networks using Formal Analysis of Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Calin Belta, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 01/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

The nascent field of synthetic biology is focused on creating small synthetic
genetic networks inserting them into living cells in order to "program" cellular
behavior. Recent prototypes include a toggle switch, an oscillator, logic gates,
concentration band detectors, and even a pulse generator. Synthetic gene
networks are foreseen to have tremendous applications in biotechnology,
medicine, and defense related areas. Such engineered biological devices will
engage in simple computations and cell-cell communications to diagnose diseases,
repair tissues, detect and clean up environmental pollutants, and manufacture
biomaterials. The main challenge in synthetic biology is creating and tuning
gene networks to desired specifications. There is currently no formal mechanism
to guarantee the behavior of these systems and to tune their parameters a-priori
to satisfy desired performances. The existing tools for formal analysis cannot
handle genetic networks successfully due to nonlinearities, uncertainties,
scarce knowledge of kinetic and regulatory parameters, and measurements
corrupted by noise. However, the adoption of synthetic gene networks in critical
applications such as tissue engineering requires that these systems meet strict
safety guarantees. In this project, we propose a hybrid systems approach to
forward engineer and analyze synthetic genetic networks. In this framework,
interval-based specifications translate to reachability analysis and safety
verification, which are the central problems of formal analysis. By exploiting
the particular nonlinearities induced by chemical reactions and cooperative
regulations, we first reduce these infinite dimensional problems to finite
searches on graphs by constructing discrete abstractions, and then map them to
parameter value intervals. This procedure will allow for analysis under
parameter uncertainty and will provide a provably correct methodology to tune
the parameters to achieve desired interval-based properties. We will validate
our approach with two experimental systems. We will improve the steady state
digital response of a transcriptional cascade and use the optimized cascades to
build more robust toggle switches. We will also use formal analysis to fine-tune
the dynamic behavior of a pulse generator that incorporates cell-cell
communication and a feed-forward motif.