* 0432193
* NANO:  Controlling Errors in Algorithmic Self-Assembly:  Characterization, Modeling, and Implementation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Erik Winfree, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 07/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

Biological organisms are self-organized chemical systems that carry out
algorithms encoded in the genetic&lt;br/&gt;material, DNA. Biology thus provides
clear proof that autonomous chemical systems can be programmed
to&lt;br/&gt;compute. The ability to program biomolecular systems that control
chemical fabrication and informationprocessing tasks would result in a dramatic
increase in the level of sophistication in bionanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;The
Winfree laboratory has been developing programmable biomolecular systems based
on algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;self-assembly of DNA { a molecular fabrication
technique that acts as a universal constructor that can in&lt;br/&gt;principle
create complex structures by embedding universal computation within the self-
assembly processes, thus guiding the assembly of components based on an
information-processing algorithm implemented by the&lt;br/&gt;molecular tiles.
This experimental and theoretical research has indicated that with current error
rates as high as 10% and seldom lower than 1%, fault-tolerant techniques must be
used when implementing biomolecularcomputing systems. The proposed research will
develop such techniques for algorithmic DNA self-assembly by developing fault-
tolerant tile sets that reduce major types of assembly error: (1) Proofreading
tile sets, which correct errors that occur during normal growth, will be
experimentally demonstrated, with the goal of achieving error rates less than 10