* 0432433
* Semiconductor:  Fab-wide Control and Disruption Management in High Volume Semiconductor Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* S. Joe Qin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 09/30/2008
* USD 250,000.00

The semiconductor industry has advanced from 200mm to 300mm wafers and will
transition to 450mm by 2012 according to the roadmap of the Semiconductor
Industry Association. Along with this transition is the doubling or tripling of
capital expenditure. The aim of this project is to develop new control and
optimization methods to improve the yield and reduce operational cost in
semiconductor manufacturing. This grant provides funding to develop a new
hierarchical control and optimization framework for high volume manufacturing
and a novel disruption management methodology for real-time operations recovery
in an uncertain manufacturing environment. The new hierarchical control
framework makes use of the multilevel measurement available in a modern fab to
achieve on-target manufacturing of electrical properties and geometric
specifications. The real-time disruption management provides real time recovery
to ensure on-time delivery when unexpected tool shutdowns or uncontrollable
disruptions occur. The proposed tasks are tightly coupled in that the disruption
management system is integrated with fab-wide control to provide control-
friendly production schedules and sequences. The proposed methods deal with
complex manufacturing issues with the power of sophisticated nonlinear
optimization theory to help industry make intelligent real time decisions and
control.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project, if successful, will provide a fab-
wide control framework and real time disruption management system to improve
competitiveness of the U.S. semiconductor industry as it is transitioning to
300mm technology and 450mm technology in the foreseeable future. On-target
product quality will be optimally controlled with minimal waste of raw material
and resources. Manufacturing equipment, which is very expensive now, will have
improved utilization and reduced idle time. The fab operations will be less
dependent on the manual operation of the fab personnel and the overall
competitiveness of the U.S. chip manufacturing will be improved. The
intellectual merit of the project is highlighted by the creation of a new
framework and method for semiconductor manufacturing control and operations. The
proposed fab-wide control framework and disruption management will contribute
significantly to the knowledge of operations and control in semiconductor
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;