* 0432013
* CompBio: Special Focus on Information Processing in Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2011
* USD 339,920.00

Increasingly, many aspects of biology can be viewed as involving the processing
of information. Modern&lt;br/&gt;information and computer science have played an
important rolein such major biological accomplishments&lt;br/&gt;as the
sequencing of the human genome. On the other hand, biological ideas can inspire
new concepts and&lt;br/&gt;methods in information science. This project is
motivated by these two observations. Progress in the field&lt;br/&gt;of
biological information processing will require interdisciplinary collaborations
among computer scientists,&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians, physicists, chemists, and
biologists. The project is built around a series of workshops
that&lt;br/&gt;will enhance the interdisciplinary collaborations beginning to
form and introduce outstanding junior people&lt;br/&gt;to problems and topics at
the forefront of research.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The project
will be organized around a series of workshops with four themes: (1) Algorithmic
Approaches&lt;br/&gt;to Biological Information Processing; (2) Computer Science,
Engineering and Biology: Applications and&lt;br/&gt;Analogies; (3) Biological
Circuits and Cellular Signaling; (4) Proteomics. Two of these themes
represent&lt;br/&gt;approaches and two represent areas of application of these
approaches. Under theme 1, planned workshops&lt;br/&gt;are on Detecting and
Processing Regularities in High Throughput Biological Data; Machine Learning
Ap-&lt;br/&gt;proaches for Understanding Gene Regulation; and Computational
Tumor Modeling. Theme 2 workshops will&lt;br/&gt;cover Nanotechnology and
Biology; Control, Communication, and Computing in Biology; and The
Mecha-&lt;br/&gt;nism and Applications of the RNA Interference Process. For
Theme 3, there will be workshops on Strategies&lt;br/&gt;for Reverse Engineering
Biological Circuits; Cell Communication and Information Processing in
Developing&lt;br/&gt;Tissues; Dynamics of Biological Networks; and Evolution of
Gene Regulatory Networks. Theme 4 work-&lt;br/&gt;shops will be on Information
Processing by Protein Structures in Molecular Recognition; Proteome
Network&lt;br/&gt;Evolution; Functional Proteomics of Neurodegenerative
Diseases; and Implications of Mathematical Models&lt;br/&gt;of Infection and
Molecular Modeling of Hepatitis B Virus. We expect that the workshops,
scientific papers&lt;br/&gt;and books coming out of the project will help to
develop the long-term focus of the field, carefully define&lt;br/&gt;problems
and directions in computer science, mathematics, chemistry, andphysics of
specific interest to and&lt;br/&gt;designed in collaboration with biologists,
and lead to new biological concepts that will in uence biological&lt;br/&gt;and
information science research in the future. In short, we expect the project to
in uence the study of&lt;br/&gt;biological information processing for years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The ideas developed in this project
will have impact on a myriad of fields and create cross-
disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;connections. A visitor program will encourage senior and
junior researchers, including students, to participate&lt;br/&gt;in
collaborative research spawned by the workshops. Each workshop will have a fund
for support of graduate&lt;br/&gt;students and postdocs amd workshops will have
a substantial educational component through talks of
a&lt;br/&gt;tutorial/expository nature. The topic lends itself well to
undergraduate research and participating faculty&lt;br/&gt;will coordinate
topics with an undergraduate research program (REU program) already in
existence. To give&lt;br/&gt;the project widespread dissemination, each workshop
will have awebsite with relevant references, problems,&lt;br/&gt;and copies of
presentations that can make it a resource for a large community. The project
should significantly&lt;br/&gt;in uence the careers of a large number of
outstanding junior researchers and it should play an important&lt;br/&gt;role in
the training and development of scientists who are well-prepared to become
leaders in the field of&lt;br/&gt;biological information processing. The project
is expected to have a long-term impact well beyond its four&lt;br/&gt;year
duration since the workshop, visitor, and dissemination components of the
project will allow the ideas&lt;br/&gt;developed to reach hundreds of people
nationwide and worldwide.