* 0432479
* Pacific Research Center for Marine Biomedicine
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Gary Ostrander, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2010
* USD 3,816,943.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0432368&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-NIEHS Research Center of
Excellence in Oceans and Human Health at the University of
Hawaii&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Hawaii Center that will be
supported under this award builds on the institution's research strengths in
oceanography and tropical medicine and its location in the center of the largest
ocean on Earth to create a Pacific Research Center for Marine Biomedicine
(PRCMB). Through the collaboration of an interactive milieu of oceanographers
and medical researchers, the PRCMB will conduct hypothesis-driven,
interdisciplinary research on harmful algal blooms (HAB), water- and vector-
borne diseases, and marine-derived pharmaceuticals and probes, in the thematic
context of tropical coastal waters and small islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HAB
research will focus on the ciguatera problem, which is unique to the tropics.
Specific goals of the research will include (1) a better understanding of the
ecology of Gambierdiscus toxicus, with the expectation of identifying management
strategies for reducing the frequency of outbreaks, (2) the development of
inexpensive, broadly applicable, and rapid methods for testing for the presence
of the ciguatoxin in fish, and (3) the development of methods to measure low
concentrations of the toxin in humans, with the expectation of determining
whether chronic exposure to ciguatoxin may be associated with enigmatic health
conditions, such as chronic fatigue syndrome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
relevant to water-borne pathogens will explore the feasibility of determining
human health risks associated with water contact through the direct detection of
pathogens in two ways: (1) the use of molecular biological methods to determine
the presence, viability, and virulence of a subset of enteric pathogens with the
expectation of developing a practical water quality testing protocol based on
molecular biological methods and (2) the use of marine bivalves as natural
concentrators and sequesters of pathogens with the expectation that the
concentration of certain pathogens in bivalves may prove to be a useful
diagnostic tool in water quality monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The marine
pharmaceutical project will take advantage of recent advances in microbial
isolation and culturing methods and the unique and largely unexplored tropical
microbial flora surrounding the Hawaiian Islands to (1) isolate and culture
marine micro-organisms from tropical coastal and open ocean seas, (2) screen
these organisms for the production of antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals with
potential public health applications, particularly the treatment of
neurodegenerative, cardiovascular, and infectious diseases, and (3) develop
molecular genetic tools for the isolation and expression of relevant
biosynthetic genes and for expression of pathways in host organisms for the
production of marine pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research
programs will be supported by a core microbial culture and characterization
facility that will provide microbial biomass for screening and the isolation of
secondary metabolites, develop new enrichment culture isolation techniques,
provide and maintain analytical facilities (GC/MS and LC/MS/MS) for PRCMB
scientists, and engage faculty from other disciplines in collaborative work with
Center investigators. A Pilot Project Program will carry out exploratory
research that complements major projects or addresses gaps in the scientific
agenda of the PRCMB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the Center
lies in its convergence of the complementary strengths and multidisciplinary
expertise within the University of Hawaii School of Ocean, Earth Sciences and
Technology, the John A. Burns School of Medicine, the College of Natural
Sciences, the Water Resources Research Center, the Pacific Biomedical Research
Center, and the Cancer Research Center of Hawaii, as well as the State of Hawaii
Department of Health, to conduct trans-disciplinary research that will produce
new knowledge about the profound impacts of the ocean on human health. This
newfound knowledge will advance national health and lead to improved strategies
to reduce the burden of human diseases resulting from acute and chronic
exposures to risks in the ocean environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The broader impacts of the Center reflect is tropical, small island
context and the relevance of that theme to Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders.
These ethnic groups have a keen interest in the ocean, and many aspects of the
Center's activities will provide the cultural relevance needed to stimulate
their interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;