* 0432085
* SGER:  Effects of Standards-based Curriculum in Urban Systemic Reform on Student Statewide Standardized Test Achievement
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Phyllis Blumenfeld, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 07/31/2005
* USD 95,177.00

The aim of this joint partnership proposal submitted by the School of Education
at the University of Michigan-Ann Arbor in collaboration with Detroit Public
Schools is to extend the study of the impact of a standards-based curriculum on
student statewide standardized test achievement. Over the past five years,
researchers working with curriculum specialists in Detroit Public schools,
developed five curricular projects based on the Benchmarks for Science Literacy
(AAAS, 1993) and the National Research Council Science Standards. The projects
take 8-10 weeks to complete and are highly specialized in principles and
methods. The project draws on materials that are highly usable to teachers and
students, and are supported by technology and ongoing professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collected by cohorts over the last five
years of implementation at grades 6, 7 and 8 show significant increases in
student achievement (using student participation in one unit as a baseline). On
both pre- and post-test curriculum-specific assessments and the Michigan
Educational Assessment Program tests gains were evident as determined via quasi-
experimental comparisons among students who did or did not participate in the
curricular projects. The results were even higher for at-risk African-American
boys who participated in the project-based
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the initial results from the 5-year
study, the researchers propose to continue this investigation focusing on the
long-term and longitudinal impact of standards-based curriculum on state test
scores. In addition to improving student achievement in Detroit Public Schools,
the results have the potential for impacting STEM education
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;