* 0432616
* Equipment Supplement for the Cariaco Ocean Time Series
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Robert Thunell, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2006
* USD 35,551.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE 0432616&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cariaco
oceanographic time series program collects systematic oceanographic measurements
at 10'30N 64'40'W in order to understand the interrelationships between changes
in climate, hydrography and sediment production and accumulation in Cariaco
Basin. Cariaco is a 1,400-m deep depression on the Venezuelan continental margin
that is openly connected to the surface Atlantic Ocean above a shallow (~140 m)
sill. Because turnover of basin waters is slow (Deuser, 1973), decomposition of
the sinking material leads to permanent anoxia below about 275 m. An excellent
sediment record that is widely used to study Holocene and late Pleistocene
changes in climate is preserved in this natural continental-shelf sediment trap.
In this context, the Cariaco time series provides information on modern
biogeochemical processes that will serve as a basis for accurately interpreting
this sediment archive of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recently
funded continuation of the Cariaco project for an additional five years (2003-
2008) will yield (1) a time series of the variability of the upwelling of
Subtropical Underwater in the Cariaco Basin, including lateral motion, and its
impact on primary productivity and the vertical flux of particulate matter; (2)
the first direct calibration and concurrent cross-reference of various proxies
of sea surface temperature of the Cariaco Basin; (3) clarification of the
relative importance of lateral transport and chemoautotrophy as sources of
particulates, (4) an assessment of whether variability in the particle flux is
driven primarily by local winds or by regional oceanographic processes at the
scale of the Tropical Atlantic, and (5) an evaluation of whether changes in
nutrient availability/limitation result in major ecosystem
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding through this small award, researchers
from the University of South Carolina will purchase of an additional sediment
trap and associated supplies. This sediment trap will be added to our existing
array of four traps and will address the problem of not having a trap at a
shallow enough depth (~150 m) to get an accurate estimate of export flux.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Cariaco time series program has
significant educational impact on students in the US and on students and
scientists in the Caribbean and Latin America. Three PhD students at U.S.
universities have completed their degrees working on the Cariaco Project and
four more are currently involved in this study. The Venezuelan Ministry for
Science and Technology considers CARIACO the most significant oceanographic
research program ever conducted in Venezuela, and uses it as a model program to
provide direction for funding in other disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;