* 0432484
* SEMICONDUCTOR: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Hierarchical Modeling of Yield and Defectivity to Improve Factory Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Christina Mastrangelo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 12/31/2008
* USD 114,777.00

This grant provides funding for developing models to understand the influences
and contributions of sub-process outputs on product performance characteristics,
such as yield, conformance to specifications, defectivity, customer returns, or
other quality measures in a semiconductor manufacturing environment. Modeling
relationships between fabrication processes and post-fabrication assessment is
important. However, high dimensional complex systems, such as this, present a
number of unique challenges in data analysis for understanding. Methodological
approaches will be developed to solve the complex modeling problems that arise
in semiconductor manufacturing by utilizing Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) in
a hierarchical structure. This will be accomplished by first developing the
foundation for integrating data structures that will be subsequently used in
building and evaluating hierarchical models. This research will also extend the
theory of flat, linear models into a hierarchical
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
lead to improvements in operational modeling and hierarchical models.
Characterizing the relationships at the operational level will improve
productivity, identify and validate quality control parameters, and enable
evaluation of competing process models. The results of this research will impact
manufacturing operations in that it will improve the utilization of technical
resources and provide the means to examine the validity and effectiveness of
current operating methods and metrics. Methodological advances will be made in
several areas: advance the state of the art in using data to estimate high-
dimensional systems by means of hierarchical modeling; exploring the interaction
between data manipulation strategies and modeling large and complex
manufacturing systems; and developing high dimensional modeling algorithms in
combination with advances in non?linear statistical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;