* 0432439
* GOALI: Process Control Approaches to Supply Chain Management in Semiconductor Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Karl Kempf, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 09/30/2008
* USD 143,000.00

A vibrant manufacturing sector is vital to the economic health of the United
States, and efficient management of supply chains plays a critical role in this
regard. This grant provides funding to explore how Model Predictive Control
(MPC), an advanced control paradigm originating from the process industries, can
be utilized as a novel approach for tactical decision-making in supply chain
management problems associated with semiconductor manufacturing. The project
involves the unique collaboration of investigators from chemical engineering,
mathematics, and computer science at Arizona State University with a technical
leader from Intel Corporation. The principal topic of research is the
formulation and initial proof-of-concept of Model Predictive Control algorithms
for a novel class of supply chain problems associated with semiconductor
manufacturing that extend beyond chemical process applications and traditional
MPC. To this end, the use of state-of-the-art optimization techniques that
efficiently solve the optimization problems associated with Model Predictive
Control, and the development of a software architecture that can satisfy the
unique computational needs of this class of supply chain problems, will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the Model Predictive Control-
based formulations developed as part of this research will ultimately serve as
integral components in hierarchical, enterprise-wide planning tools that
function on real-time data, support varying levels of information sharing and
centralization, and employ combined feedback-feedforward control action. Broader
impacts of this research include efforts towards developing a body of theory and
technology meaningful not only to semiconductor manufacturing, but to a wide
range of discrete-part manufacturing industries of importance to the national
economy. Ongoing efforts by the PIs to involve minority and undergraduate
students in integrative research and educational activities, as well as the
dissemination of research outcomes to the engineering community at large, will
be further stimulated as a result of this grant.&lt;br/&gt;