* 0432712
* Assessing the Capacity of the U.S. Engineering Research Enterprise
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2006
* Proctor Reid, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 03/31/2006
* USD 290,953.00

The National Academy of Engineering (NAE) will convene a panel of engineering
leaders to conduct a fast-track assessment of (1) the past and potential future
impact of the U.S. engineering research enterprise on the nation's economy,
quality of life, security, and global leadership, and (2) the adequacy of public
and private investment to sustain U.S. preeminence in basic engineering
research. A two-decade decline in the share of federal R&amp;D investment
accounted for by engineering, and the perceived erosion of basic, long-term
engineering research capability in U.S. industry and federal laboratories, pose
serious questions about the long-term health of U.S. engineering research. To
address these concerns, this nine-month initiative will document and evaluate
recent contributions of U.S.-based engineering research to the nation's
interests, assess its potential contribution to emerging national challenges and
opportunities, and outline a national strategy for ensuring that the engineering
research foundations of American global economic, military, scientific, and
technological preeminence remain rock solid in the face of rapid, often
disruptive, societal and global change. An NAE panel will put forward findings,
recommendations, and a national action plan designed to engage all major
constituents of the U.S. engineering enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The findings of this activity will advance
understanding of recent trends and future challenges for engineering research,
the contributions of engineering research (basic engineering research in
particular) to national goals, and the current health of the U.S. basic
engineering research enterprise. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
project's findings and recommendations will inform public sector and private-
sector decision-making regarding the scale and composition of investments in
basic engineering research. Ultimately, the results of the project and actions
they engender should strengthen the U.S. engineering research enterprise and its
contributions to future U.S. economic prosperity, national security, and global
technological leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;