* 0432522
* SGER: Rapid reaction sampling for fungi in smoke from Southeast Asia arriving in the United States
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2005
* Forrest Mims, Geronimo Creek Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2005
* USD 2,000.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) proposal.

Large fires in Southeast Asia have sent plumes of smoke over the Pacific Ocean
and across the United States. This proposal is designed to provide extremely
limited travel funds for a rapid reaction study of this smoke. Of special
interest is whether or not viable fungal spores are found within the smoke.

The discovery of viable fungal spores and bacteria in smoke from distant biomass
fires was made only recently. Smoke from widespread biomass burning in Yucatan
reached South Texas during May 2002 and 2003, and contained significant numbers
of spores and bacteria. Smoke from Central Asian fires sampled on 6 July 2003 at
Mauna Loa Observatory also contained viable fungal spores. Southeastern Asia
smoke events like those of March 2004 provide an important opportunity to
determine if fungal spores are present in smoke that has crossed the entire
Pacific ocean.

Smoke from prescribed fires, agricultural burns and wild fires has become a
significant environmental problem in many regions. Population growth and
dispersal suggest that the number of such fires may increase in coming years.
Thus, a study of smoke events will provide important information about whether
there is transoceanic transport of fungal spores in smoke.

Should fungal spores be found in the smoke proposed to be sampled, it is likely
that other investigators will consider sampling biomass smoke in various
regions. It is also likely that formal papers and popular publications resulting
from this work will permit the public, forest fire fighters and land managers to
become aware of the presence of spores in smoke.