* 0432398
* Research Starter Grant: The Socialization and Academic Achievement Study
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2006
* Pamela Martin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 35,002.00

The purpose of this National Science Foundation (NSF) Social, Behavioral, and
Economic Sciences Minority Post-Doctoral Fellowship Starter Grant is to provide
continued support for the Socialization Psychometric Evaluation Project (SEP,
NSF Postdoctoral Award 010920) that explores how faith communities and other
organizations assist parents in educating and raising their children. This
project has two goals: 1) to confirm the psychometric properties of three racial
socialization scales using a southern community sample, a predominantly white
college sample, and a historically black college sample (the SEP), and 2) to
initiate the first steps of a longitudinal research project designed to link
several community and faith-based institutions in efforts to promote educational
outcomes targeting students of color (the Schools and Faith Communities Project,
SFCP). The racial socialization scales include the African American Church
Scale, the Parental Version of the Racial Socialization Scale, and the
Adolescent Version of the Racial Socialization Scale. The first goal is to
examine and cross validate the psychometric properties of these scales with
three distinct samples as well as assess the criterion-related validation with
psychosocial variables such as destigmatization, discrimination, self-esteem,
and academic achievement for the college samples. Emerging information from the
informal interviews with clergy, key informant interviews, and parent and
adolescent focus groups from the SEP and the SFCP was conceptualized to improve
science and mathematics achievement among elementary students with the specific
goal of enhancing student scores on state and national accountability
examinations. The purpose of this project is to develop and evaluate a
theoretically based after-school intervention targeting African American
students between the ages of 5-10 residing in Raleigh, North Carolina. The SFCP,
a pilot intervention, will be a collaborative effort among two local churches in
Southeastern Raleigh, North Carolina, North Carolina State University (NSCU),
Wake County School District, and several community-based organizations.
Consistent with the interdisciplinary goals and broader impacts of NSF, this
intervention will explore strategies to engage students in inquiry-based science
and mathematics methods aligned with state and national standards. In this
study, the implementation of the after-school intervention will (a) employ
trained undergraduates through service learning under the supervision of
certified teachers to provide advocacy, mentoring and tutoring, (b) increase the
targeted students' exposure to science, mathematics, and computer technology,
(c) engage these students in applied activities through an experiential-based
model, and (d) incorporate culture activities emphasizing the accomplishments of
people of color in science and mathematics related fields. Intellectual Merit:
The intellectual merit of this project integrates undergraduate and graduate
students in a theoretically guided research study in which they will learn
research methodology, data management and verification, and statistical
analyses. In addition, the students involved with the SCFP will enroll in a one-
year service learning course to mentor and tutor elementary students in science,
mathematics, and reading. The service learning curriculum will additionally
incorporate critical pedagogy, communication skills, and inquiry-based
instruction concerning math and science. The undergraduate tutors, recruited
from the sciences and social sciences, will learn communication skills and how
to effectively engage elementary students in inquiry-based science and
mathematics activities. In this project, certified teachers and graduate
students will be a content resource and mentors to the undergraduate students.
Broader Impact: The project will include an interdisciplinary research team
representing students with diverse interests and backgrounds. The partnership
among the community-based organizations, faith communities, public schools, and
NCSU will strengthen efforts to improve educational outcomes among African
American elementary students. The Wake County School District and community-
based organization will gain immediate and future benefit from this partnership
through the implementation of a community wide inquiry-based science and
mathematics after-school program.

