* 0432120
* Dissertation Research: "I contain multitudes": Genetic chimeras and material negotiations of identity
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Michael Lynch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2006
* USD 11,935.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant uses
ethnographic and historical research methods to trace the emergence and
characterization of genetic mosaics and chimeras. Four cases of human genetic
multiciplicity will be compared. In each case, genetically different cell
populations co-exist in a human body, or travel between bodies (calling into
question the very notion of a body). Spontaneous human chimeras result from
tissue exchanged between fraternal twins in utero, or the complete fusion of
embryos early in development. Genetic mosaics result from a single-cell
mutation, which persists in an altered cell line that proliferates in the
organism's body alongside the original cell population. The term microchimerism
describes the persistence of fetal cells and DNA molecules in the maternal body,
and maternal cells in the child's body, both of which persist after pregnancy.
Microchimerism also refers to a condition of an organ recipient in whom donor
cells proliferate and persist. This dissertation uses these four cases of
genetic multiplicity (chimerism, mosaicism, fetal microchimerism and
transplantation microchimerism) to gain empirical, and critical, purchase on the
historical and cultural specificity of the premise that humans are genetically
unique and discrete. In other words, the aim is to focus closely and critically
on the idea that individual identity is necessarily bound to a unique and
singular genome. In contemporary biomedicine and biopolitics, genetics and
identity are becoming increasingly conflated, but the chain from genes to selves
is neither inevitable nor inviolable. Fieldwork for this project explores
clinical and experimental situations in which humans are constructed as
multiple, genetically. Laboratory researchers and technicians concerned with
mosaic and chimeric phenomena sort cells and molecules into discrete categories
of male and female, normal and pathological, maternal and fetal, animal and
human, and self and other. This project examines the thesis that genetic
identity on the microscopic level and human selves on the holistic level are co-
produced and mutually stabilized. Most of the time, the genetic identity of a
few cells (such as in forensic testing and prenatal screening) can be made to
overlap with a self-contained individual. The cases in this study offer an
opportunity to explore circumstances in which genetic heterogeneity disrupts
notions of individuality and identity. Reversing this relationship, the project
also examines whether socio-political notions of individuality and identity are
woven into the practical assignment of genetic identity of cells and molecules
in the laboratory. NSF funds will support fieldwork in the United States, Canada
and the U.K., at laboratories, clinics, conferences and support groups in which
knowledge about genetic mosaics and chimeras is produced, negotiated and
contested. Investigators and technicians in each of the research communities
will be interviewed. Patient activists who challenge the ways in which they are
classified as monstrous, marginal or hybrid also will be interviewed.
Participant ethnographic research will be conducted at several conferences at
which researchers from different communities come together and discuss emergent
technical and medical issues associated with the construction of human genetic
identity and multiplicity. The intellectual impact of this dissertation project
primarily is in the areas of social studies of genetics and identity, empirical
work on biosociality and lay activism, and theoretical criticisms of
essentialist or determinist notions of genetics. As a study of selfhood and
multiplicity identified with the very material of the body and in technical
practice, it supplements theoretical literatures about the self, fragmentation,
and multiplicity. The broader impact and implications of this study have to do
with individuals and groups who contend with biomedical characterizations of
their identities. The coexistence of multiple biological identities in these
individuals may provide institutional and bureaucratic bases for classifying and
excluding persons. Furthermore, microchimerism research suggests that we are all
genetically distributed at some level. This project will make important and
timely contributions to political and technical debates about genetic
identification; debates that both reify the genetic individual and, ironically,
contribute to the proliferation of exceptions.

