* 0432589
* Phylogeny of Orobanchaceae Sensu lato Inferred from Phytochromes and Other Data:  Implications for the Evolution of Parasitism
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Sarah Mathews, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 03/31/2007
* USD 208,188.00

0215780&lt;br/&gt;Mathews and Wolfe&lt;br/&gt; By definition, plants are
autotrophic organisms, capable of producing their own food via photosynthesis.
Plants that become parasites suppress or lose their photosynthetic apparatus and
come to rely on host species for carbon, nitrogen, and water. With a single
exception, parasitism is unique to flowering plants, where parasitic species are
found in at least eleven lineages. The plant family Orobanchaceae is a lineage
of root parasites that includes the completely parasitic (holoparasitic)
broomrapes and the partially parasitic (hemiparasitic) figworts. Within
Orobanchaceae, a single autotrophic lineage apparently gave rise to the
hemiparasites, and holoparasitic species have originated from different
hemiparasitic lineages. Thus, a series of transitions from autotrophism to
hemiparasitism and from hemi- to holoparasitism can be investigated to learn
about the steps underlying this switch in lifestyle. Preliminary evidence
suggests that development of the photosynthetic machinery in these parasites may
be suppressed by upstream genetic regulators of photosynthesis. This would allow
photosynthetic capacity to be suppressed but not lost. To test this model, an
improved hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships within Orobanchaceae is
required. DNA sequence data from nuclear and chloroplast genes sampled from the
majority of genera in the family will be collected and analyzed to resolve their
phylogenetic history. The focus of the nuclear DNA sequencing will be on
phytochrome genes, which encode photoreceptors involved in regulating
photosynthetic gene expression and development . Thus, data collected to address
phylogenetic questions can also be used to test the role of altered phytochrome
photoreceptor function in the development of parasites. Specifically,
phytochrome gene copy number, molecular evolution, and expression in hemi- and
holoparasites and in autotrophic relatives will be assessed to determine whether
phytochrome function is altered.&lt;br/&gt; The capacity to exist without all or
part of the photosynthetic machinery has given rise to parasitic weeds that
significantly impact agriculture and forestry throughout the world, but the
steps whereby plants become parasites remain unknown. Thus, mechanisms for their
control remain underdeveloped. A widely accepted model suggests that gene loss
leads to holoparasitism. But this does not fully explain the retention of intact
photosynthetic genes by some holoparasites, nor does it explain why most
parasitic flowering plants retain photosynthetic capacity. A model involving
suppression but not loss of photosynthesis may better explain the data. These
studies based on sequences from phytochrome genes, supplemented with sequences
from nuclear ribosomal and plastid loci, will improve our understanding of
phylogeny in Orobanchaceae and will provide a sound phylogenetic framework for
testing models for the evolution of parasitism in plants.&lt;br/&gt;