* 0432328
* Adaptive Evolution in the Photoreceptor Phytochrome A and its Role in the Ecological Success of the First Angiosperms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Sarah Mathews, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2006
* USD 273,327.00

The proper processing of light signals is crucial for the success of all
plants. Thus, photoreceptors play a critical role in plant development, serving
as informational molecules that allow plants to determine where they are in
space and time and to synchronize growth and development to a changing light
regime. The control of plant form by ambient light conditions, a process known
as photomorphogenesis, is mediated by phytochromes, which absorb red light and
far-red light, along with distinct blue and ultra-violet absorbing
photoreceptors. Phytochrome evolution in land plants is marked by a series of
gene duplications that have led to independently evolving and functionally
distinct lines. Flowering plants have the highest number of phytochromes and
also are the most successful group of land plants. They total approximately
250,000 species, outnumbering all other plant groups combined, and dominate all
but two of the earth's terrestrial vegetation zones. Their origin was followed
by the decline of plant groups that had dominated since the Triassic, but their
mode of origin and the factors that underlie their spectacular success remain
unknown. This project integrates DNA sequence analyses with physiological
characterization of seedlings from early-diverging flowering plants to test the
hypothesis that evolution in light-sensing mechanisms was important for the
early success of flowering plants. Specifically, it tests the hypothesis that
the evolution of phytochrome A, a phytochrome unique to flowering plants,
enhanced the ability of early angiosperms to survive in dense shade. Sequence
analyses will determine whether functional divergence of phytochrome A occurred
by positive selection or by relaxation of selective constraints, and will
identify sites of functional divergence that distinguish it from its sister
gene, which encodes phytochrome C. Physiological experiments will determine
whether seedlings of early-diverging flowering plant species exhibit the
responses to dense shade that have been characterized in more derived species
such as Arabidopsis, and will determine whether any of these responses are found
in seedlings of related seed plants. Together these analyses will test the
hypothesis that phytochrome A function was an adaptive innovation that helped
flowering plants gain a foothold under the forest canopy once dominated by ferns
and gymnosperms.&lt;br/&gt; Comparative molecular analyses are an efficient
mechanism for evaluating functional diversification in nonmodel species. Thus,
the analyses undertaken in this project will further one goal of plant genomics,
to move beyond model systems toward understanding the molecular basis of
diversity. The sequence database that will be generated will be useful for
determining whether other seed plants might have independently attained complex
but parallel physiological responses to multiple facets of the light
environment. This database also will be useful for identifying sites of
functional specification in genes whose function has been difficult to
characterize using traditional genetics approaches. The function of sites
identified this way can be further tested in mutagenesis experiments. The
physiological experiments in the field and greenhouse will characterize light
optima for seedling regeneration of individual species. Thus, they will provide
insight into how the composition of plant communities might change in response
to ecosystem-wide disturbance or change.&lt;br/&gt;