* 0432121
* QnTM: Quantum Mechanics of Electron and Spin Transport in Single Molecular Nanodevices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Ivan Oleynik, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 07/31/2008
* USD 325,674.00

&lt;br/&gt;Molecular nanoelectronics is a new and highly promising field of
research with tremendous opportunities for fundamental scientific advances as
well as for technological breakthroughs in physical design and realization of
novel computing and information processing. To fully utilize these unique
opportunities for development of a new generation of computational hardware the
fundamental mechanisms of charge and spin transport in single molecules must be
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will further advance the field of
novel nanoscale architectures and system technologies by establishing predictive
capability to model quantum mechanically the electron and spin- transport
properties of single molecule organic devices as well as their relationship to
the atomic and electronic properties. The PI will develop a first-principles
quantum-mechanical theory of electron and spin transport in organic molecules
attached to metallic electrodes and predict from first-principles their current-
voltage characteristics including spin-polarization of the conductance. The
mechanisms and new approaches for control and manipulation of the spin-
polarization of an electron current will be studied. First-principles modeling
of electron and spin transport in specific metal/organic molecule/metal
junctions will be performed to study the chemistry and bonding at the
metal/molecule interface as well as their influence on transport properties.
Knowledge of structure-property relationships between molecular structures and
spin-dependent conductance will provide a unique opportunity to guide future
experiments by suggesting new molecular structures for chemical synthesis and
transport measurements. The project will have an extensive educational impact by
training a graduate student, postdoctoral associate and an undergraduate student
in a technologically important area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;