* 0432234
* Support For International Federation of Automatic Control (IFAC) Symposium on Dynamics and Control of Process Systems (DYCOPS-7); July 5-7, 2004; Cambridge, MA
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2005
* Warren Seider, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2005
* USD 14,200.00

Intellectual Merit The foci of this conference are in the latest research areas
in chemical process dynamics and control. These include new applications of
process control throughout the many industries that involve chemical processes
and products, including biochemical and materials processing; the development of
new sensors; the development of new techniques that integrate process design and
scheduling with control; new methods for performance monitoring; and new methods
for modeling and identification. Like past conferences, DYCOPS-7 is expected to
catalyze the expansion of process dynamics and control applications in the
manufacture of specialty chemicals using batch processes, in biochemical and
biomedical applications, and in improved design strategies to achieve more
controllable processes, among many other areas.

Broad Impact

The DYCOPS-7 symposium should have a broad impact due to three key factors.
First, over 160 outstanding researchers in process dynamics and control will be
participating from a broad array of countries worldwide. The advances reported
by the plenary speakers and individual researchers are intended to significantly
advance the operability and safety of chemical plants, increasing their
productivity and profitability while protecting against the increased threat of
terrorism. Second, the symposium will enable researchers in the United States to
benefit from the experiences of colleagues worldwide, many of whom are involved
in operating world-class chemical plants in developing countries. Third, the
symposium will bring together outstanding young graduate student researchers
from the United States, many of whom will present the results of their research
for the first time at a technical conference. These young researchers should
return to their doctoral research studies with increased motivation and new
ideas based upon interactions with their new colleagues.