* 0432098
* CompBio:     Predicting Protein Folding Pathways and Protein Misfolding
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Mohammed Zaki, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 07/31/2008
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit Protein folding pathway prediction is a very important
problem since protein misfolding has been identified as the cause of several
diseases such as Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, cystic fibrosis, hereditary
emphysema and some cancers. Furthermore, knowledge of pathways for protein
folding can give important insight into the structure of proteins. To make
pathway based approaches to structure prediction a reality, plausible protein
folding pathways need to be modeled and validated. Our novel approach outlined
in this proposal is to start with a folded protein in its final state and learn
how to unfold the protein in an approximately ordered sequence of steps, to its
unfolded state. The reversal of such a sequence then represents a plausible
protein folding pathway. Using the known structure and a fast, graph-based
algorithm for recursive splitting of the structure along its most energetically
labile contacts, we are able to develop a general model for topological
unfolding. We propose to explore the effect on the folding pathway of mutations
that are known to cause (or suppress) misfolding diseases, especially those
associated with amyloid fiber formation. We will calculate the distribution of
folding intermediates and then compare these distributions for natural
mutatations that are known to cause amyloid accumulation in the cell. Broader
Impact This proposal builds on a proven track record of success of the PIs, both
in collaborative research and educational efforts. For instance, Bystroff and
Zaki have team taught NSF Chautauqua Summer Course on New Directions in
Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, held anually at RPI (1999-2004). The PIs have
a track record of advising and promoting research activity in under-represented
groups. For instance, both PIs jointly supervised a Native American M.S.
student, and Zaki has supervised 7 femaleM.S. students. Currently he is
supervising 2 female PhD students. Bystroff currently has three African-American
undergraduate researchers. The proposed work will be made publically available
as a web server, and also open-source software, that predicts the unfolding
pathway. Two full-time graduate students will be trained on this grant.
Undergraduates, including underrepresented groups, will continue to play a large
part in our research efforts. This proposal will support a continuing inter-
disciplinary research team, which has resulted in several joint courses and
publications. Much of the preliminary work described in this proposal is the
fruit of this collaboration. Finally this grant will support one of the nation's
strongest teaching programs in bioinformatics.