* 0432266
* Summer 2004 Workshop on Physics Education and Outreach; Aspen, CO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Elizabeth Simmons, Aspen Center For Physics
* Standard Grant
* Simon P. Rosen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 40,000.00

"Funding request to help organize an Aspen Workshop on Physics Education and
Outreach"

Educational outreach plays an increasing role in the careers of working
physicists: many are already involved in outreach, all are being encouraged by
the federal granting agencies to share the excitement of their research fields
with a broader audience. This workshop will facilitate communication among
established outreach practitioners in different fields of physics and give more
physicists the encouragement and tools they need to become involved. This
workshop will be held during the two-week period June 28 to July 11, 2004 at the
Aspen Center for Physics. The first week will focus on communicating with the
general public and the second week, on involvement with K-12 education.
Scientific participants from the fields of astrophysics, high-energy physics,
and condensed-matter physics will be on-site for concurrent workshops in their
disciplines. The workshop will focus on disseminating best practices and
existing resources in outreach to research-active physicists in a variety of
fields. The emphasis will be to get more physicists involved in educational
outreach. . The funds will be used to pay for the travel and expenses of 10-20
educators who would otherwise not be able to attend.