* 0432296
* QnTM:  Harnessing Quantum Entaglement:  Fundamental Studies, Communication Protocols, and Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Vwani Roychowdhury, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal targets a set of interdisciplinary tasks that directly address the
challenges facing the burgeoning field of quantum information processing (QIP).
In particular, both foundational work aimed at enhancing the understanding of
fundamental underlying concepts, such as quan-tum entanglement, as well as
applied work, such as designing quantum algorithms that would require only tens
of qubits, while still providing better performance than their classical
counter-parts, are targeted. The technical approaches to be adopted in the
proposed work encompass a number of different fields, including quantum
mechanics, quantum information theory and concepts, theory of computation,
combinatorics, and classical electromagnetic fields and related computational
methods. Intellectual Merits: A number of fundamental challenges need to be
overcome before QIP can become a viable computing paradigm. This proposal
addresses several of these challenges in a novel fashion, including: (i) What
kinds of quantum algorithms can one implement in systems comprising tens of
qubits? This is a very important issue facing the field of quantum computation:
a system comprising the thousands of qubits necessary to factorize integers
beyond the capability of existing classical computers is, at best, a long-term
goal. In contrast, a system comprising tens of qubits is a conceivable goal;
however, would there be any quantum algorithm that can be implemented on such a
small scale computer and yet outperform classical algorithms? The proposal
presents a quantum algorithm that can be used to simulate Maxwell's equations to
determine classical electromagnetic mode frequencies of resonant structures,
where the complete mode field distribution is not required. It is estimated that
50 logical qubits would be sufficient to produce useful electromagnetic
simulation results. (ii) Is there life beyond Quantum Key Distribution? The
proposal presents results where the basic tools of quantum cryptography are used
to build a multi-participant protocol which gives the participants the ability
to anonymously announce classical information. This protocol is shown to be
secure against any and all attacks. This is the first ever multi-participant
quantum protocol that uses a truly multipartite quantum entangled state. (iii)
What are examples of nontrivial new quantum algorithms (i.e., other than Shor's
factorization and Gover's search algorithms? The proposal reports results on the
development of efficient quantum algorithms for determining the permanent of
unitary and related matrices using the quantum optical model. A number of such
critical open questions related to QIP are addressed. Broader Impacts: (i)
Undergraduate Interdisciplinary Program: In collaboration with the Cal-ifornia
Nano-science Institute (CNSI) and the Department of Electrical Engineering at
UCLA, we are in the process of developing a nano-science interdepartmental
program. Quantum in-formation processing is a key component of this program and
the NSF grant will be leveraged to support this initiative, and in training
graduate and undergraduate students. (ii) Annual Workshops On Quantum
Information Processing: In collaboration with the NSF Institute of Pure and
Applied Mathematics (IPAM) at UCLA, an interdisciplinary annual workshop on
Quantum Information Processing and Computing will be held. (iii) Providing
Support for Implementation-Oriented DARPA projects on Quantum Computing: Dr.
Roychowdhury is the principal theoretician for a large interdisciplinary
experimental group at UCLA working on de-veloping solid-state based quantum
information processing technology. The experimental effort is currently
supported by grants from DARPA and ARO, and the NSF grant will leverage the
existing program and focus on transferring theoretical results to the
experimental groups. (iv) Outreach and Minority Student Participation: Both IPAM
and CNSI have institutional infras-tructures in place to attract minority and
K12 students, and we plan to engage them and train them through seminars and
free access to our workshops.