* 0432422
* Semiconductor:     Demand Planning and Supply Chain Coordination in the Contract Manufacturing Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* S. David Wu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 09/30/2009
* USD 150,000.00

This grant supports the development of new analytical tools for semiconductor
demand planning and supply chain coordination, focusing on the emerging platform
of contract manufacturing. The objectives of the research are to (1) develop
mathematical models that characterize demand drivers for products with short
technology lifecycles, (2) create economic models that characterize incentives
in contract manufacturing environments, (3) construct computing models that
translate theoretical insights into operational decision tools, and (4) conduct
extensive industry testing that validates the analytical developments. A main
motivation of this research is that current demand and capacity management
practices in the semiconductor industry were developed in the context of
vertically integrated enterprises with long technology lifecycles and stable
demand patterns. While the industry is moving toward increasingly complex supply
chain partnerships, accelerated technology innovations, and rapid product
introduction cycles, the operational implications of these changes are not well
understood. This research offers innovative models that enhance our
understanding of this dynamically changing environment.

If successful, this research will make contributions from two important
perspectives: 1. Effective Characterization of Demands with Shortening
Technology Lifecycles. The shortened technological lifecycle poses major
challenges to the time-series forecasting methods fundamental to all demand
planning systems. This research examines demand characterization methods based
on leading indicators and lifecycle growth models without relying on the sizable
historical data required by time-series models. 2. Effective Supply-Demand
Planning Within Complex Supply Chain Partnerships. Major corporations are moving
away from vertical integration, while their product realization is being carried
out through a supply chain structure built on outsourcing and partnerships. This
research proposes a supply-demand planning framework designed for the emerging
platform of contract manufacturing; in this setting, the uncertainty in both
demand and capacity that is prevalent is modeled explicitly, while supply-demand
planning decisions are integrated with contracting, sourcing, and capacity
configuration decisions.



