* 0432104
* BIC: Eye movements and depth perception in primates and machines
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Michele Rucci, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 09/30/2008
* USD 305,000.00

Our eyes are never at rest.Even when e are .xating upon a visual target,small
involuntary eye movements continuously perturb the projection of the image on
the retina.A substantial body of recent evidence indicates that these .xational
eye movements are an important component of the ay visual information is
acquired and represented in the brain.Neurophysiological studies with monkeys
have sho n that small eye movements strongly a .ect the responses of neurons in
the visual system.In the research of a previous NSF award (EIA-0130851),e have
shown that fixational instability is crucial for identifying stimuli presented
for the brief durations that occur during natural viewing (Rucci and
Desbordes,2003),and improves the efficiency of visual representations in models
of the lateral geniculate nucleus and primary visual cortex (Rucci and
Casile,2003b, 2004).Furthermore,reproduction of human eye movements in a robotic
system has sho n that .xational instability may provide reliable information of
distance (Santini and Rucci,2003). Building on our previous results and those of
recent neurophysiological studies,this proposal continues part of the research
of NSF a ard EIA-0130851.It describes a program of research that focuses on
extracting and integrating multiple depth cues to develop a reliable 3D
representation of the visual scene.This project follows an interdisciplinary
approach that integrates computer modeling of the visual cortex with robotic
experiments and measurements of eye movements in human subjects.The long-term
goal of this research is to develop machine vision systems that,by emulating the
computational principles of the brain,achieve high levels of robustness and e
.ciency. The specific aims of this project are to: 1.Develop a model of the
monkey primary visual cortex in which,following recent neurophysi- ological
.ndings,distinct populations of neurons respond during di .erent phases of small
eye movements. 2.(a)Analyze the information of relative distance transmitted by
di .erent neuronal populations when the model is coupled with a robotic
oculomotor orkstation that replicates human eye movements;and (b)integrate depth
information provided by di .erent cues into a coherent 3D representation of the
visual scene. 3.Investigate the self-organization of the model by means of
learning,so that the extraction and integration of depth information is
autonomously tuned to the physical and motor char- acteristics of the system. In
this research,the eye movements of human observers will be measured by a high-
resolution eye-tracker,and then accurately replicated by a robotic system (a
head/eye system with t o mo- bile cameras)that e have speci .cally designed to
reproduce the visual inputs to the eyes during oculomotor behavior.Visual images
acquired in this ay will be applied as input to computational models of neurons
in the striate cortex of primates.Intellectual merit: This project establishes a
direct linkbet een human and machine vision studies.By focusing on the
computational mecha- nisms by which eye movements a .ect visual processing,it
has the potential of providing new insights on the brain as ell as opening the
ay to the development of new algorithms in machine vision. Broader impact: The
interdisciplinary nature of this research o .ers new opportunities for train-
ing students.By collaborating with the PI,students in the Department of
Cognitive and Neural Systems at Boston University,a department ith an important
focus on computational modeling of the brain,will have an opportunity to combine
their theoretical orkwith the development of machine vision systems.