* 0432593
* GOALI:  Atomic Tailoring of Catalyst Surfaces for High Selectivity: Partial Oxidation of Propane
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* John Gleaves, Washington University
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 08/31/2008
* USD 302,689.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: GOALI: Atomic Tailoring of Catalyst Surfaces for High
Selectivity: Partial Oxidation of Propane

Proposal Number: CTS-0432593

Principal Investigator: John T. Gleaves

Institution: Washington University

Mixed metal oxides (MMO) are widely used as catalysts in the petroleum,
chemical, environmental, and pharmaceutical industries. A controlling factor in
catalyst performance is the concentration of oxygen and metal species in the MMO
surface. Industrial MMO catalysts are prepared by bulk techniques, which provide
limited control of surface properties. Samples with the same bulk crystal
structure and composition can exhibit different performance when prepared by
different routes. This difference may be attributed to a change in the surface
concentration of one or more of the catalyst constituents. This GOALI research
project will establish a new method of adding atoms to the surface of bulk
catalytic materials while maintaining the same bulk composition, and charting
the change in catalytic properties as the surface is heated or exposed to a
reactant mixture. This new process, dubbed "atomic tailoring", will be used to
develop highly selective and active catalysts for the partial oxidation of
propane to acrylic acid. Atomic beam deposition, a technique used in surface
science, has been adapted so that metal atoms (including those with high melting
points) can be directly deposited on particles. After deposition, special vacuum
transient response experiments (called TAP experiments) will be used to monitor
catalytic properties as the modified material is heated and exposed to a
reactant atmosphere.

Improved catalysts for propane conversion to acrylic acid will allow propane to
replace propene as a feedstock. The lower feedstock cost for propane, coupled
with reduced capital afforded by a direct rather than two-step process, will
lower production costs by 20-25%. The knowledge gained from fabricating more
active and selective partial oxidation catalysts for propane will be applicable
to other selective oxidation reactions, especially reactions of other alkanes.
From a U.S. economic and environmental perspective, the development of new
catalysts for alkane activation and selective oxidation to commercially useful
products will deliver energy savings of up to 37 trillion BTUs/yr and will
significantly reduce the generation of green-house gases. Published results from
this study will also be useful to other researchers who are designing
experiments to probe molecular level processes on complex catalytic surfaces.
This GOALI program will introduce graduate and undergraduate students to
exciting real-world problems that when solved will have a significant economic,
social, and environmental impact. Students will work as part of a diverse team,
and they will gain hands-on experience designing, building, and running complex
experiments that define the state of the art. The program strongly encourages
minority and female students to become involved in research while still
encouraging all undergraduates to pursue advanced degrees. Graduate and
undergraduate students will work with industrial researchers at an industrial
laboratory and will have the opportunity to present their work at academic-
industrial group meetings and at national scientific meetings.

