* 0432893
* Enter the Countryside:  A Regional Approach to Settlement Systems in Southern Bénin, West Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Adria LaViolette, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2005
* USD 11,987.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Adria LaViolette, Neil Norman
will conduct a regional archaeological survey and test excavations on
communities surrounding the site of Savi in Benin, West Africa. Savi was the
capital center of the Hueda Kingdom and a focal point of the trade in captured
Africans bound for trans-Atlantic slavery from the late17th to early 18th
century AD. Previous excavations within the palace zone at Savi indicate a
densely settled center that attracted international trade. However, little is
known of the communities that surrounded the palace and what (if any) political
and economic relations connected the palace to outlying areas. With the range of
settlement systems types that have been identified in the region, it is possible
that Savi was nested within an urban system or removed from regional political
and economic networks. In order to address such questions, the project proposes
to recontextualize Savi in time and space within regional systems of exchange
and political authority by focusing research on these contemporary countryside
sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research that specifically addresses these non-
elite areas and possibly rural communities is important because it provides data
for the unstudied demographic majority of the region. Through addressing the
spatial, chronological, and economic changes of outlying communities vis-a-vis
the palace center, the often assumed urbanity of palace settlement systems can
be evaluated. That is to say, it will be possible to determine if the palace
center provided political, economic, or social considerations to a rural
countryside with the expectation of other considerations in return. Detecting
variation in production activity and artifact type at differing site types will
contribute to an understanding of social differentiation and specialized
production activity. Likewise, this data can be used to evaluate the integration
of outlying sites in regional political and exchange
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond research questions of interest to social
scientists, this project will have a broad impact at the local level with the
instruction of scientific techniques and the presentation of project data. By
agreement with the Universite Nationale du Benin (UNB), UNB students will
participate in all phases of the project and benefit from formal and informal
training. Also, project members will work to update the reserve collection and
public displays at the Ouidah Museum of History, which annually attracts
thousands of international visitors. The completion of a project website will
increase visibility for the project and the creation of a web-accessible
database will allow West African researchers to access all project data. Also,
project data will be disseminated through presentations at professional
conferences, newsletters, and refereed journals. Through addressing the project
in a co-operative and collaborative manner, insights of the diverse research
team will benefit scientific research at Savi, as well as strengthen
interpretations of project data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;