* 0432316
* Support of the 2004 "Membranes: Materials and Processes" Gordon Research Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2004
* G. Glenn Lipscomb, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 10/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: Support of the 2004 "Membranes: Materials and Processes" Gordon
Research Conference Proposal Number: CTS-0432316 Principal Investigator: Glenn
Lipscomb Institution: University of Toledo

This award will partially support the 2004 Membranes: Materials and Processes
Gordon Research Conference to be held August 1-6, 2004 at Colby-Sawyer College
in New London, NH. Professor Benny Freeman (University of Texas at Austin) is
the meeting chair and Professor Glenn Lipscomb (University of Toledo) and
Matthias Wessling (Twente University) are co-chairs. The program will feature
the latest developments in membrane science and technology in areas of national
interest including energy, biotechnology, and water treatment. The presentations
will come from a balanced slate of industrial, academic, and governmental
speakers; many of the academic speakers will be NSF awardees. Additionally, the
presentations will include work supported through current national research
initiatives such as the National Nanotechnology and Homeland Security
Initiatives. In terms of the broader impacts, support of the meeting will have a
direct impact on the development of young researchers. The requested funding
will be used to support attendance of graduate students, post-doctoral research
associates, and young faculty from U.S. institutions. Attendance at the Gordon
Conference will provide an opportunity to discuss their work with more senior
researchers and to stimulate their interest in a career in the membrane field.
Historically, the Gordon Conference has also been a fertile ground for the
cultivation of new collaborations and research ideas.