* 0432440
* Semiconductor: Incorporating Nonlinear Phenomena in Semiconductor Supply Chain Planning Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ronald Rardin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Barton
* 08/31/2007
* USD 0.00

The grant supports scientific and mathematical aspects of a joint project co-
sponsored by NSF and the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC), with data-
gathering, validation and testing supported separately by SRC. The combined
effort will investigate a series of refinements and extensions to the
investigators prior work on production planning models using nonlinear Clearing
Functions (CFs), which express the expected throughput of a resource as a
concave function of the expected work in process inventory (WIP). Extensive
computational experiments have shown that this model is capable of capturing the
interaction between resource utilization and lead times in manufacturing
environments while retaining the tractability for large-scale use. New research
will address how CFs can be fitted to various workcenters without the burden of
simulations and enhance the models to encompass three new elements impacting the
dynamic of complexity production operations: lot-sizing/setups, safety stock,
and dynamic/promotional pricing. Taken separately, each of these has been shown
to significantly impact congestion, throughput, and lead times. The new research
will attempt to exploit the flexibility of CF-formulations to derive an
integrated multiperiod planning model incorporating all three.

In high-technology, capital-intensive industries such as semiconductor
manufacturing, global supply chains, short product cycles and rapidly changing
market conditions render effective supply chain coordination a requirement for
success. Applications of company-wide production planning models that support
this coordination have been repeatedly shown to yield significant benefits.
Still, most methods tractable enough for large-scale application are unable to
model the congestion and lead-time dynamics of real operations. Success in this
research will make the already promising CF approaches more ready to model large
and complex operations, as well as incorporating other issues now handled
externally. The result could be a significant improvement in productivity and
service levels of critical manufacturing industries.