* 0432951
* Studies of Convection Initiation and Evolution
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2004,04/30/2005
* David Kingsmill, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2005
* USD 146,309.00

Under this award the Principal Investigator will perform research on the
initiation and evolution of convective storms. The goal is to advance
fundamental knowledge of the kinematic, dynamic, and thermodynamic processes in
convection initiation and evolution in order to improve the accuracy of storm
prediction by operational forecasters. Since the consequences of convective
storms can be severe, an increase in predictive capability will serve both
public and commercial interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boundary layer convergence
lines (boundaries) is a focus of this research. During the past fifty years, the
role of these boundaries in processes related to convection has been
investigated. Gust fronts, sea-breeze fronts, cold fronts, drylines, and other
boundaries, for example, have been associated with the initiation of convection.
Further, the evolution of convection has been hypothesized to be related to
boundary characteristics. This research emphasizes investigation of the role of
boundaries in convection initiation and evolution. The specific objectives are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Determine the kinematic, dynamic, and thermodynamic fields
associated with the development of horizontal shearing instabilities along
thunderstorm outflow boundaries and the role of these instabilities in
convection initiation.&lt;br/&gt;2. Characterize the kinematic, dynamic, and
thermodynamic structures associated with boundary collisions and the effect they
have on convection initiation and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;3. Determine the
kinematic, dynamic, and thermodynamic processes involved in convective cell
mergers.&lt;br/&gt;These objectives will be pursued by testing specific
hypotheses using high quality Doppler radar, surface mesonet, balloon sounding,
and aircraft data from the 1991 Convection and Precipitation! Electrification
(CaPE) experiment in east-central Florida. This program was conducted in a
region ideally suited to the topics addressed in this research and involved a
wide range of ground-based and airborne data collection instruments. Two
analytical approaches will be pursued. Objectives 1 and 2 will be investigated
through limited analysis of numerous cases to test research hypotheses in a
statistically significant manner. Objective 3 will be investigated through an
in-depth, case study approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iii&lt;br/&gt;