* 0432046
* Dissertation Research: Methods and Causes in Social Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Nancy Cartwright, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

This Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant explores the
two most prominent methods of causal inference in social science, the inductive
and deductive approaches. It follows John Stuart Mill in focusing on causal
tendencies, as knowledge of such tendencies is necessary for social policy and
planning. On the inductive side, a recently proposed qualitative comparative
method used in sociology will be critically analyzed. This method borrows
certain basic principles of Boolean algebra in order to identify the necessary
and sufficient conditions for the occurrence of a social phenomenon. Since the
problem of spurious correlation is the main obstacle to the successful
application of this method, several solutions to this problem drawn from the
recent philosophical literature on causality will be explored. On the deductive
side, the project will study the use of rational choice modeling for inferring
causes in economics and political science. This method is often claimed to
provide social scientists with knowledge of the most general and important
causal tendencies in the social world, namely those that result from rational
strategic action. Yet this requires an explanation of how models with highly
restrictive assumptions can actually describe real-world causes. Such an
explanation, the project argues, is in practice often absent. One of the most
successful applications of rational choice theory is generally agreed to be the
recent use of game theory in the design of spectrum auctions. So the project
will study in detail how robust causal tendencies are obtained from game
theoretical models in this case, by visiting the experimental laboratories used
to test the models and interviewing the auctions. designers. The authors will
draw conclusions from this for the general prospects of rational choice modeling
in social science. The issues addressed in this project carry both practical and
theoretical importance. The practical significance of formulating a normative
account of causal inference in social science is indubitable. Causal claims made
by social scientists often enter into some of the most important policy
decisions and figure widely in debates about their appropriateness. Making
explicit the &lt;br/&gt;methodological presuppositions of different inductive
and deductive approaches and critically analyzing them, will help to lift the
curtain on the realities of predicting social trends and defending certain
policy measures, and hence give us more rigorous tools with which to evaluate
social science and its applications. For example, the so-called rational choice
revolution is said to have made social sciences more scientific. Yet its
characteristic formal rigor and mathematical expression cannot by themselves
improve our ability to study causes. It is thus important socially and
politically to understand both the potential and the limitations of this
paradigm. The theoretical importance of studying how social science does, can
and should infer causal tendencies from empirical data and theoretical models
also cannot be overemphasized. In natural sciences such as physics the task of
causal inference has been closely connected with the practice of
experimentation. Since the latter is not nearly as pervasive and feasible in the
context of social research, the study of causal laws and mechanisms in social
sciences raises the question of the unity of method in science. This project
will directly contribute to the question of whether the social sciences should
strive to develop distinct methods to study the social world, or instead attempt
to imitate the controlled experiments of the natural sciences. Despite their
prominence in social science, neither the deductive nor inductive methods of
causal inference explored in this project have received sufficient attention
from philosophers of science. By correcting that &lt;br/&gt;oversight, this
project will move the intellectual agenda of philosophy of science closer to the
actual concerns of social scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;