* 0432636
* International Mini-Workshop Series:   "An Assessment of Options for a Post-CMOS Information Industry"; April-September 2004; Stresa, Italy, San Francisco, CA, and Brussels, Belgium
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Ralph Cavin, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 05/31/2005
* USD 40,000.00

By 2016 or earlier the Semiconductor Industry will be nearing the end of CMOS
scaling and that continued progress in functionality-cost ratios will require
the invention of new information processing technologies. A range of new
concepts for devices, fabrication techniques, and system architectures are
emerging today under the general heading of nanoelectronics. That may eventually
provide the basis for continuing the Moore's Law advances in information
technologies that we have experienced for the last three decades.&lt;br/&gt;A
wide range of new ideas have been proposed for post-CMOS technologies, such as
molecular electronics, carbon nanotube devices etc. Characteristic of any new
area, it is difficult to discern which of these concepts has the potential to
provide a technological basis for information technologies of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2003, the Semiconductor Industry, via the
International Technology Roadmap for&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductors (ITRS) process,
began to assess the applicability of a wide range of research devices to serve
as a basis for continuing historical functionality-cost
trends.&lt;br/&gt;Industry specialists conducted these assessments without
substantial inputs from the university research community and they indicated
that none of the research devices studied for logic applications is a likely
candidate to continue the Moore's law cadence for information technology beyond
the end of CMOS scaling. This rather bleak assessment, if correct, drives the
need for new thinking in device and architecture research. On the other hand,
the 2003 ITRS assessment may be the result of the ITRS Emerging
Research&lt;br/&gt;Device Technology working Group's (ERD TWG) inadequate
comprehension of the performance potential of the proposed new device
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks travel funds for
university researchers to attend three mini-workshops with the ITRS Roadmap's
ERD Working Group members so that the 2004/2005 version of the ITRS will reflect
a consensus view on candidate technologies proposed for Post-CMOS
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;