* 0432077
* Dissertation Research: "Radio for whom?"  Media Activism, Identity, and the (Re)Imagination of FM Radio Technology in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Ronald Kline, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 12,000.00

Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, a growing grassroots movement has registered
dissatisfaction with status quo media, which activists perceive as falling short
in such areas as providing news and musical programming free of corporate
influence. These activists have attempted to counterbalance these perceived
shortcomings by making known their critiques and gaining greater access to the
means of media production; they aim to change the status quo arrangement of
media ownership and are working directly with low power FM (LPFM) technology to
do so. This Science and Technology Dissertation Improvement Grant is an
ethnographic investigation of social settings and technical practices
surrounding LPFM activism. Its goal is to reveal how these actors enact their
beliefs about democratic media access and media diversity through low power FM
radio (LPFM) activist work; these activities include lobbying, teaching
themselves to use transmission and production technologies, and providing the
public with technical, logistical, and legal support. The study will focus
primarily on a community of LPFM activists in Philadelphia, but data will be
collected at a variety of sites where the actors travel for meetings with
regulators, community groups, LPFM stations and prospective stations, and other
activists. In drawing on scholarship in Science & Technology Studies (STS), this
project has the benefit of significant insight into the social life and meaning
of LPFM technology. More specifically, four themes will be emphasized in order
to explore these actors. conceptions of LPFM and their work with it: 1)
identity; 2) expertise; 3) gender; and 4) interpretative flexibility. These
themes will be used to make visible (and perhaps audible) the rich and complex
interactions between social relations, gender and technical identity,
interpretations of technology, and activism. As a small-scale, low-tech, yet
widespread technology that has largely been unexamined in STS scholarship or
elsewhere, LPFM constitutes an important site of inquiry, which will be
especially relevant in the present context of widespread interest in claims
about the impact of information technologies. Much work in STS focuses on large-
scale, relatively established relationships such as that between science and the
state; conversely, this project offers insight into the marginal, smaller-scale,
less stable enterprise of technological activism. This is an equally important
site for research, and this project aims to reveal the dynamic, highly
contingent environment in which activists (attempt to) effect change. These
activists are also citizens and they conceive of their work as having a broad
relevance and public good, which extends beyond small interest groups or
community radio aficionados, into the lives of ordinary citizens, with the
potential to enable greater civic participation. This study represents an
opportunity to contribute to scholarship in and beyond STS and potentially to
activism. It will provide a general understanding of citizens. engagement with
technology at a site of resistance to a perceived betrayal of democratic values
due to corporate homogenization and control, involving media institutions,
activists, publics, corporations, and regulatory bodies.