* 0432499
* Development of Predictive Methods for Thermodynamic Properties Relevant to Environmentally Benign Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Clare McCabe, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2004
* USD 198,380.00

McCabe, Clare M. Colorado School of Mines

"Development of Predictive Methods for Thermodynamic Properties Relevant to
Environmentally Benign Processes"

As our awareness and understanding deepens of how industrial activities affect
the environment around us, so do the regulatory constraints aimed at reducing
the emission of harmful industrial pollutants. Initiatives such as the Pollution
Prevention Act, the Clean Air Act and the Montreal Protocol, have resulted in
the need to re-evaluate many chemical processes, particularly in relation to
solvents, which account for two thirds of all industrial emissions. Hence, as
current solvents have become banned or discouraged from use, solvent replacement
in reaction, separation, and dissolution/cleaning operations is one of the key
methods for turning an existing process into an environmentally benign (EB) one.
In the pursuit of EB processes, the application of neoteric solvents, including
supercritical carbon dioxide and ionic liquids, shows enormous potential for
industrial application, and it is these fluids on which the proposed research is
focused.

The future focus on the design of EB processes, whether achieved by solvent
replacement or by the development of fundamentally new EB chemical processes,
parallels a crucial emerging need for an accurate, comprehensive methodology for
calculating the thermodynamic properties (especially phase equilibria) of
mixtures containing novel solvents at operating conditions relevant to the
application of these solvents. For the wide range of conditions and systems
expected to be encountered in EB processes, the most desirable method for
predicting thermodynamic properties will be robust, rapid and versatile. The PI
will address this need by undertaking a sustained research program whose goal is
to apply molecular theory and simulation to the development, modification and
deployment of a predictive molecular-based methodology based on a molecular-
level statistical associating fluid theory (SAFT) integrated with other
molecular modeling techniques. The PI believes that the resulting methodology
will be the modeling platform of choice for the design of EB processes. The
combination of new theoretical developments in SAFT to enhance its predictive
capabilities in key areas relevant to EB systems, ab initio methods to
facilitate potential model development and testing, and computer simulations to
provide both a rigorous test of the theory and aid in potential model
development, will enable a true predictive platform to be realized. In pursuit
of this goal two broad application areas relevant to EB processes will be the
focus of the research activities. The first focuses on the accurate modeling of
polar polymer-solvent systems through the incorporation of the underlying
molecular interactions in these systems into the theoretical approach. Secondly,
efforts will be concentrated on developing models and molecular theory for
describing the thermodynamic properties of ionic liquids and their mixtures.

Broader Impact of Proposed Research - If successful, the project research will
have a major impact on the ability to design and implement EB processes by
providing a comprehensive, predictive, largely data-free framework for obtaining
the key required physical and chemical properties. The lessons learned from this
project will facilitate similar advances in other application areas. Strong ties
with industry and experimental groups will be maintained throughout the project
which will provide students with the opportunity to experience the theoretical,
experimental and practical sides of research. Additionally, these collaborations
will enable validation of methods and models and provide insight into the key
problems faced by industry in adopting EB alternatives to existing and new
processes. Integrated with the research effort will be the development of an
active learning- based molecular modeling course suitable for both graduates and
undergraduate students in which the results of this work will be highlighted.
Undergraduate participation in the project will be strongly encouraged through
research projects and women and minorities actively recruited through the PI's
participation in the Science-Related Degrees project at CSM. The project
research and course development will ensure that students at CSM will be exposed
to and participate in the frontiers of molecular modeling and the molecular
thermodynamics of EB processes.

