* 0432844
*  Children as Legacies of War: An Exploratory Study of Humanitarian Actors as Agents of Change
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Charli Carpenter, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 01/31/2007
* USD 91,496.00

HSD-0432844&lt;br/&gt;Charli Carpenter&lt;br/&gt;University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will support an exploratory project on
the humanitarian response to children born of mass rape and forced pregnancy in
conflict situations. The research analyzes the transformative processes
triggered by the use of forced pregnancy campaigns in ethnic warfare and the
role human rights advocates in post-conflict situations can play in mitigating
negative socio-cultural reactions to children born of mass rape. The initial
project includes an interdisciplinary workshop and a resulting volume of essays,
which is designed to initiate comparative research on the ways in which
different societies respond to children born as a result of wartime rape. NSF
funding will allow participation in the project by non-North American scholars
who would otherwise be unable to travel to the workshop. Secondly, the PI will
conduct focus groups with humanitarian practitioners in New York, Geneva and
Nairobi in order to gather data on the state of and gaps in existing knowledge
about the conditions under which norm advocacy efforts in post-conflict
situations impact socio-cultural reactions to mass rape survivors and their
children&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research will increase our understanding of
the relationship between gender, ethnicity, violence and group identity. A
burgeoning literature has identified the ways in which gender violence in armed
conflict relates to broader socio-political upheavals, but very little has been
written on the role played by children born of such violence, or ways in which
human communities adapt to an influx of such children after armed conflict. The
study's results will be disseminated through an edited volume, a policy paper
and conference presentations and has the potential to impact scholarship on
identity, aggression and inter-ethnic violence, as well as policy initiatives to
mitigate the impact of these dynamics on human groups after conflict. Moreover,
by actively involving scholars and practitioners from non-Western contexts in
the theory-building and research enterprise, the project will broaden the
participation of geographically under-represented groups and broaden our
insights about the complexity of these social dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;