* 0433745
* ADVANCE Fellows Award:  The Development of a Tissue-Engineered Vascular Graft from Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 05/31/2004,01/31/2006
* Laura Suggs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 01/31/2006
* USD 138,246.00

0137590 Suggs Cardiovascular tissue engineering (CVTE) is an emerging field with
the goal of creating vascular tissues that restore, maintain, or improve
function based on the principles of engineering and the biologic sciences. The
primary goal of this project is to develop a tissue-engineered vascular graft.
Based on the current state of knowledge in the field of CVTE, several objectives
can be outlined in the development of an ideal tissue-engineered vascular graft.
The graft should have sufficient strength to be easily sutured and withstand
arterial pressures. The cells used in developing the tissue-engineered
construct, particularly endothelial cells, should be autologous and should be
derived from adult individuals with minimal donor site
morbidity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to utilize techniques to drive
multipotent cells towards smooth muscle cell and endothelial cell lineages. Once
these cells have been differentiated using various soluble chemical factors,
they will be seeded sequentially onto porous collagen foams and cultured under
both pulsatile and shear stresses. The cell/collagen constructs will be
evaluated relative to static controls with the hypothesis that the
differentiated phenotype of the cells comprising the graft and the strength of
the graft itself can be controlled and maintained by a combination of both
chemical and mechanical stimulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coronary artery
disease can be treated with various interventional procedures; however, these
procedures have a high failure rate due to restenosis and often must be followed
by surgical reconstruction. Conduits are typically removed from the same
individual and used as a bypass around the affected artery. Some individuals
have unsuitable arteries or veins because of varicosities, branching, or
inadequate lumen size. If these autologous conduits are not available or not in
satisfactory condition, there are no currently available grafts to replace the
small diameter (&lt;4mm) coronary arteries. The development of an autologous
conduit engineered from bone marrow cells would save the lives of patients who
have no other options.&lt;br/&gt;