* 0433632
* Physical Properties of Strongly Correlated Quantum Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Xiao-Gang Wen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

This grant supports theoretical research on fundamental condensed matter
physics. Condensed matter physics has been dominated by two primary themes. The
first is Landau's Fermi liquid theory and the second is Landau's symmetry
breaking theory along with renormalization group theory. Recent studies suggest
that new themes are emerging in condensed matter physics. The research supported
by this grant will explore these new themes.

One of the new developments is the quantum/topological order introduced by the
principal investigator (PI). Topological order describes a new kind of order in
fractional quantum Hall (FQH) states. Quantum order describes the internal
structure of over one hundred different quantum spin liquids.
Quantum/topological order represents new types of order that cannot be described
by Landau's symmetry breaking theory. More recent research indicates that
quantum/topological order is closely related to the phenomenon of string
condensation. The theory of quantum/topological order and string condensation is
still in its infancy. This research will attempt to develop a more complete
theory. In particular, the following projects will be studied:

The theory of string condensation has a potential to become a well-developed
theory like Landau's theory of symmetry breaking. The mathematical framework
behind symmetry breaking states is group theory. This project will try to reveal
the mathematical framework behind string condensation. The new knowledge will
lead to a systematic understanding of phase transitions between different string
condensed states as well as the collective excitations above string condensed
states. The new knowledge will also lead to a classification of different string
condensed states.

Under prior support, the PI showed that a continuous transition between clean
FQH states can occur as long as the FQH states contain non-bosonic neutral
quasiparticles. Using the relationship between topological order and string
condensation, continuous transitions between more general FQH states will be
studied, as well as their experimental consequences. These theoretical studies
will lead to systematic experimental studies of continuous transitions between
clean FQH states. Since FQH states can be viewed as string condensed states,
these experiments can also reveal the properties of transitions between
different string condensations.

The underdoped high Tc superconductors have some very unusual properties. Their
normal state contains electron-like quasiparticles. However, the Fermi surfaces
of the quasiparticles are small segments that violate the Luttinger theorem.
This project will develop a theory for this strange underdoped normal state. The
quantum order and the associated spin liquids will play a key role in the
research. The new theory of the underdoped normal state will lead to better
understanding of the mechanism and nature of the superconducting transition.

The research accomplished under this grant will have a broad and deep impact on
many areas of physics. The string condensed states have robust quantum
entanglements that can be used to perform fault tolerant quantum computing.
Since the collective excitations in a string condensed state are gauge bosons
and fermions, it deepens our understanding of the origin of elementary
particles. %%% This grant supports theoretical research on fundamental condensed
matter physics. Condensed matter physics has been dominated by two primary
themes. The first is Landau's Fermi liquid theory and the second is Landau's
symmetry breaking theory along with renormalization group theory. Recent studies
suggest that new themes are emerging in condensed matter physics. The research
supported by this grant will explore these new themes. ***

