* 0433410
* Hazard proximity and the perception of cancer risk: A multi-level spatial analysis.
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Craig Trumbo, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Researchers have looked at the social and psychological conditions associated
with living near environmental pollution. For example, it has been shown that
fear of cancer is more prevalent in communities located near toxic exposure
sites. But overall, surprisingly little is known about the effect that being
close to a suspected environmental health hazard may have on the perception of
risk from that hazard. Many factors are probably involved, including economics,
education, and the characteristics of the hazard itself. This study will add to
our understanding of the relationship between hazard proximity and risk
perception by looking at data collected in a survey of over 20 communities in
which cancer rates are of concern due to suspected environmental health hazards.
Locations in which cancer cluster investigations have been conducted were
surveyed and approximately 1,000 respondents have participated. The survey
provides information on how individuals see the risks associated with local
hazards, how they interact with information about these hazards, how they view
the credibility of various information sources concerning local cancer rates and
their level of concern about cancer itself. &lt;br/&gt;The analysis to be
conducted in this investigation will link these survey responses, by street
address, to a variety of other data that are available through the use of
Geographic Information Systems (GIS). Additional sources of data will include,
for example, the Toxics Release Inventory and state Cancer Registries. Through
the application of GIS and spatial analysis the project will examine the role
played by a number of elements that together may influence how proximity affects
risk perception. The outcome of this work will be a quantitatively demonstrated
model of spatial risk with sufficient rigor to serve as a foundation for ongoing
attention to this problem by investigators across a range of disciplines.
Finally, it is clear that merging databases such as the Toxics Release Inventory
and Cancer Registries using the Web and GIS will be an important force in the
future definition of concern over hazards and the manner in which individuals
and society views risk.