* 0433736
* Collaborative Project:  Implementing Physics By Inquiry Using Undergraduate Peer Instructors and Cooperative Group Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Jack Taylor, Baltimore City Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/2007
* USD 42,753.00

The Physics by Inquiry curriculum (PbI), developed at the University of
Washington with support from the National Science Foundation, has been shown to
be very effective in helping students learn scientific concepts. However, the
low student to instructor ratio normally required to implement PbI is one
barrier to a widespread adoption. Intellectual merit: The primary objective of
the project is to adapt and investigate how the PbI curriculum can be
implemented without the need for physics graduate student teaching assistants as
it is currently being implemented by its developers. Instead, formal cooperative
group learning techniques and undergraduate teaching assistants are being used.
The investigators all have extensive experience with recent innovations in the
teaching and learning of physics. Broader impacts: The project allows PbI to be
more easily adopted by institutions that serve populations targeted by the PbI
curriculum (e.g., underprepared students and K-12 teachers). These institutions,
including community colleges and teaching colleges, often do not have graduate
students or any history of using undergraduate teaching assistants. The
institutions collaborating on this effort are Baltimore City Community College
(BCCC), Southern Connecticut State University (SCSU), and the General College at
the University of Minnesota (GC-Minn). At SCSU, the target audience for PbI is
pre-service K-12 teachers. At BCCC and GC-Minn, the majority of students are
underprepared for university course work. Many students at BCCC and GC - Minn
are under-represented minorities.