* 0433483
* Architectural Dating at Chavin de Huantar, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 07/31/2007
* USD 25,000.00

on these sites' relationships with the monumental center of Chavin de Huantar,
Peru. New research, however, has demonstrated that Chavin's architectural
sequence is much different and more complex than previously believed, and that
its monumental construction concluded between 900 - 780 B.C., the time
previously thought to mark the site's beginning. This represents a major shift
in Chavin chronology that significantly impacts understanding of Andean
formative social development.&lt;br/&gt;Chavin's few dates are now associated
with the final monumental stage and later periods of the site's long
construction sequence. Consequently, the time depth represented by the undated,
complex monumental stages prior to this suggests that the sequence extends much
farther back in time than previously believed. This increased time-depth would
dramatically change archaeologist's understanding of the Andean formative
period. Additionally, many other formative sites are sparsely dated, making
inter-site comparisons problematic. Dating of the architecture at Chavin and
other formative sites is thus a fundamental priority for accurately
understanding the chronology and social development of this
period.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is therefore to test new ways
to directly date architecture, in order to establish the absolute chronology of
Chavin and, in the future, of other formative sites lacking sufficient dates.
Traditionally, archaeological dating of prehistoric architecture relies on
collecting radiocarbon samples from cultural deposits within or surrounding
buildings; predictably, however, direct associations between such samples and
the actual construction of buildings can be tenuous. The goal of this research,
in contrast, is to directly date the construction materials of the buildings
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;Two simultaneous projects to test novel dating methods at
Chavin will be carried out. The first will be a pilot project to assess the
feasibility of using optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) to date the
incorporation of plaster, mortar, and sandstone and quartzite stone blocks into
Chavin's buildings. The second project will assess the feasibility of applying
radiocarbon dating to the mortar and plaster at Chavin in particular and to
architecture in the formative north-central Andes in general. This work is part
of a larger collaborative project at Chavin ongoing since 1994. It will take a
minimally invasive approach, holding at its core a fundamental concern to impact
the preservation of this important site as little as possible, through the
collection of extremely small samples.&lt;br/&gt;Team members include experts in
luminescence dating, radiocarbon dating, and Chavin's architectural sequence.
They will develop methods to collect samples in novel contexts. Work will
include assessing the appropriateness of Chavin's building materials for dating
using OSL and radiocarbon dating; systematically searching for and collecting
samples for each method in key areas from each of the site's fifteen phases
within its five larger construction stages; using digital and laser technology
to record sample data; and coordinating with ongoing excavations at Chavin. If
successful, this research will produce new field methods for use in future
projects dating similar architectural materials.&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
work will also contribute significantly to anthropology by, first, establishing
OSL as a method for directly dating prehistoric building materials, with
potential for wide application; second, establishing direct radiocarbon dating
of architecture as a method suitable in the north-central Andes; and third,
establishing the absolute chronology of Chavin's architecture, with profound
implications for understanding formative social development. This work will thus
create a methodological, chronological, and theoretical foundation for future
comparative study of architectural sequence and chronology across many formative
Andean centers. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research include, first,
integrating research and education through graduate student training and
participation in the project, and through the collaboration of specialists to
address a significant archaeological problem; second, broader participation of
diverse team members in NSF programs; third, contribution to a larger,
international collaborative project; and finally, the broad dissemination of
results through conferences, journals, books, and websites as well as teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;