* 0433718
* Collaborative Research: Anoxic Sediment Diagenesis at the Sulfate-Methane Interface: Does a Novel Microbial Syntrophy Result in Enhanced POC Remineralization?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Francis Sansone, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2007
* USD 85,761.00

ABSTRACT - Berelson 0433322&lt;br/&gt;Organic carbon breakdown, or diagenesis,
within continental margin sediments is an important component of the C cycle in
marine sediments as its extent controls long-term burial rates. Scientists from
University of Southern California, California Institute of Technology and
University of Hawaii have hypothesized a novel diagenetic process that may
result in enhanced carbon remineralization when both sulfate and methane are
present. Based on preliminary data, this process appears to occur at a localized
horizon (cm's thick) where there is a microbial syntrophic relationship between
anaerobic oxidation of methane by archaea and sulfate reducing bacteria. They
will study sediments of the Santa Barbara Basin using high-resolution pore water
measurements to create models of the chemical gradients and calculate diffusive
flux values. The microbial community will be described using total microbial
cell counts, archaeal and bacterial 16S rDNA and dsrAB-based community
characterization, and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). Manipulative
incubation experiments will attempt to induce higher rates of carbon
remineralization by the addition of sulfate and or methane.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of this unique zone in anoxic marine
sediments has potentially significant implications to current modeling
approaches to carbon diagenesis, interpretation of paleoproxy records in marine
sediments and to general understanding of sediment microbial community ecology.
Collaboration between a microbiologist and two geochemists will illustrate the
synergies created by interdisciplinary research to a wide range of students
including REU, middle and high school students, as well as the graduate and
undergraduate students participating in this collaboration on cruises and in
data analysis.