* 0433773
* Perceptions of the Past, Present, and the Future:  A Survey of the Iraqi Public
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2007
* Mansoor Moaddel, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2007
* USD 120,438.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0433773 &lt;br/&gt;Mansoor
Moaddel &lt;br/&gt;Eastern Michigan University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The swift
breakdown of the Iraqi State has resulted in new social conditions in the
country. This project examines the effect of these conditions on the worldviews
of the Iraqi public. It will: (1) explore key features of the worldviews and the
long-term concerns of the Iraqi public under the current conditions of political
uncertainty, economic difficulties, and social tensions; (2) examine
similarities and differences between these worldviews and those of the Islamic
publics of the neighboring countries where survey data are available; (3)
investigate how Iraqis assess, rethink, and re-form their conceptions of self
and others in the coming years; (4) examine how these attitudes are related to
the interaction among the middle-layer social institutions, ethnic- and
religious-based organizations, provisional authority and ruling elite; (5)
explore how new political developments may weaken/strengthen the development of
secular feminism and female identity; and (6) identify, in light of the existing
comparative historical analyses of culture in the Islamic world, the processes
that may hinder/promote (a) the rise of Arab nationalism, (b) Iraqi territorial
nationalism/supra-tribal nationalism, (c) pan-Islamic nationalism, and (d)
tribal nationalism/ethnic identity. To address these issues, the PI plans to
conduct a national values survey in the country every two years over the next
six years. This funding supports of the first of these three surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study has significant potential broader impacts. For
example, knowledge of Iraqi society gained by this survey will be a useful
contribution to policy making, enhance understanding between the American and
Iraqi publics, and provide insights into Iraqi society necessary for building a
post-Saddam democratic polity. This project will also have far-reaching
implications for the social-scientific study of the relationships among social
transformation, state formation, foreign occupation, and the development of
culture and identity formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;