* 0433419
* Collaborative Research:  Development and Evaluation of a Natural Hazard Interactive Laboratory for Improving Decision Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Holly Taylor, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 05/31/2008
* USD 74,573.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This work examines the impact of a fully
developed interactive computer-based role-playing laboratory on decision making
based on scientific data. Our previous studies showed the "proof of concept" of
Eruption, a role-playing simulation of a volcanic hazard, and its impact on
decision making using an innovative evaluation strategy that incorporates
cognitive science methodologies. This work also allowed us to identify specific
design principles that impact higher-order thinking and increase the
effectiveness of CAI laboratories. Incorporation of these principles into the
fully implemented Eruption will increase its impact on higher-order cognitive
skills such as decision making, problem solving, and critical analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;The completed implementation and coincident assessment will further
inform the relationship between educational exercises and higher-order critical
thinking skills. This work will also allow further refinement of our cognitive
science based assessment methodology. By creating an objective measure of
educational impact, we can identify specific design principles that increase the
potential for reaching student populations with weaker math and science
backgrounds and/or those traditionally under-represented in the
sciences&lt;br/&gt;