* 0433280
* The Strength of Social Influence as a Determinant of Organizational Change
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Stephen Mezias, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2009
* USD 460,190.00

0433280 Mezias Abstract

This research addresses the question of "why changing a public school so hard?"
by bridging multiple theories of change with the cognitive and social structure
of interaction. A leading edge sociocognitive network model is developed to
provide a parsimonious and powerful explanation for the cognitive and social
dynamics that generate change in organizations. Specifically, three interlinked
studies are designed to test the sociocognitive network model within a context
notorious for its resistance to change - public elementary and secondary
schools.

Study I utilizes an experimental design that manipulates network interactions
and characteristics of change to determine their impact on individual and group
assessments. The impact of group assessments on the likelihood of change is also
investigated. Study II is a computer simulation study designed to determine the
impact of various network conditions on the sociocognitive process and answer
questions such as, "do limited interactions due to network size, structures, or
information sharing patterns effect shared understandings?" Study III is a field
study in New York City Schools Under Registration Review (SURR). It is argued
that differences in outcomes are driven by differences in organizational
members' shared understanding about the feasibility, urgency, effectiveness and
legitimacy of change. This triangulation of research methods has been
demonstrated to provide both contextually rich and reliable results when testing
new theory.

The research team is very multidisciplinary, with scholars from organizational
change, education, social networks and social cognition from two universities.
The study will also significantly involve graduate and undergraduate students.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT. This research advances existing knowledge by integrating
sociocognitive and social network theory to model the type of real-world
exchanges and interactions that take place in organizations. Evidence resulting
from the research team's experience and research in organizational contexts
faced with change corroborates theoretical assertions about the strength of the
sociocognitive model. A particular innovation of the model establishes boundary
conditions for the effects of cognition on change, arguing that the effects of
cognition on change depend on stable and widely shared social assessments of a
particular form. The proposed research addresses the call of the Human and
Social Dynamics program by 1) demonstrating how cognition is a product of social
structure and can be represented as a collective process; 2) integrating work
from network and sociocognitive theory as well as studies of strategic and
institutional change to demonstrate how collective cognition becomes the impetus
for change and 3) offering practitioners theoretically justifiable and
contextually valid knowledge with which to manage profound change in their
organizations. BROADER IMPACTS. Findings that illustrate the complex social and
cognitive dynamics responsible for change impact all organizations; yet, the
research is conducted with the needs of public elementary and secondary schools
in mind. Results of the research will be disseminated via workshops and
conferences to public school teachers and administrators to use as a new tool
for understanding and facilitation change in under performing schools where
students are mostly poor, are mostly people of color and are among the most
underserved groups in the nation. The positive research results can provide
knowledge that empowers practitioners to change schools in a way that realizes
the full potential of students and the organizations that serve them.

This project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2004 NSF-wide
competition on Human and Social Dynamics (HSD). Coordinated management of the
HSD competition and the portfolio of HSD awards involves all NSF directorates
and offices.

