* 0433692
* The role of microbial Fe and Mn oxidation in submarine weathering of volcanic glass
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Hubertus Staudigel, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2008
* USD 499,203.00

Researchers from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California will
characterize changes in surface chemistry of seafloor basalts, in particular the
rate of Fe and Mn release and oxidation, arising from microbial interaction with
volcanic glasses. The research addresses the following questions: (1) do
basaltic glasses support growth of chemolithoautotrophic bacteria in deep ocean
environments, (2) how does the composition of the basaltic glass affect the
microbial community composition, rates of glass alteration, and the formation of
secondary phases, and (3) do Fe(II)- and Mn(II)-oxidizing bacteria participate
in or accelerate the alteration of basaltic glass. The main goal of this work is
to determine if the activity of microorganisms significantly accelerates the
rates of basaltic glass dissolution in the marine environment.
&lt;br/&gt;Motivation for this work comes from the fact that basaltic glass is
one of the most abundant and reactive components of the ocean crust.&lt;br/&gt;
The scientific program will include both field and laboratory components. Field
investigations will include NOAA/NURP funded submersible dives on the flanks of
Hawaii and Loihi seamount to study recent lava flows and carry out exposure
experiments that will range from one to five years in duration. Sampling areas
will include those with glasses that possess a range of Fe(II) or Mn(II)
concentrations. Laboratory investigations will simulate biocorrosion of glass
under controlled chemical conditions. &lt;br/&gt; The analytical program will
entail investigation of changes in surface chemistry and in depths of Fe and Mn
leaching and oxidation using novel synchrotron X-ray based analytical techniques
developed by the research team. Biofilms grown by glass-colonizing bacteria will
be studied as well as the diversity and composition of microbial communities
growing on the glass. Characterization of natural and laboratory-grown Fe and Mn
oxidizing microbes from sea floor basalts will be carried out using state-of-
the-art molecular biological techniques (FISH, TRFLP). Geochemical analyses of
weathered basalts will include examination by electron microprobe and a scanning
electron microscope equipped with an energy dispersive chemical
analyzer.&lt;br/&gt; This work will answer the question of whether microbes
cause the weathering of volcanic glass and whether this process substantially
impacts biogeochemical cycles in the oceans. It will also determine whether
volcanic glass can serve as a viable substrate to support life in the deep ocean
crust. Broader impacts include the development and refinement of new surface
analytical techniques, support and training of a Postdoctoral Scholar and a
Ph.D. student. It will also make available data and research resources for
high/middle schoolteachers and students through the Internet via databases and
websites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;