* 0433918
* Radiocarbon Experiments in Boreal Forests to Assess Roles of Fungal Species in Decomposition
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Susan Trumbore, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2008
* USD 263,145.00

Decomposition of dead plant material by microbes elicits a large flux of
respired CO2 from soils to the atmosphere. Respiration rates are typically
challenging to predict under changing environmental conditions, potentially
because multiple microbial groups, including fungi, contribute to this process.
The objectives of our study are (1) to examine the potential for fungal species
to perform different roles in decomposition, and (2) to incorporate these
differences in large scale estimates of decomposition following forest fires and
N deposition. Specifically, we will examine the hypothesis that saprotrophic
fungal species differ in uptake rates of carbon sources, so that "Ruderals"
quickly acquire labile compounds, while "Competitives" primarily rely upon slow,
constant uptake of recalcitrant compounds. If this hypothesis is supported, it
would suggest a mechanism for resource partitioning among fungal species. We
also expect that contributions to decomposition by Competitives will be
inhibited under greater N availability, and this reduction will be most
pronounced in young fire scars, where recalcitrant substrates are abundant as
woody debris. &lt;br/&gt;To address these goals, the proposed work encompasses
three major approaches that will be based in boreal forests of Alaska. First, we
will perform dual-isotope labeling of mushrooms under field conditions to
examine trade-offs that may influence partitioning of substrate use among fungi.
A mix of radiocarbon (14C) labeled recalcitrant substrates and 13C labeled
labile substrates will be applied to the soil, and a timeline of isotope
signatures of CO2 respired from mushrooms of known fungal species will be
measured. The release of 14C- versus 13C-labeled CO2 will indicate the extent to
which different species use recalcitrant versus labile carbon. The timing of
13CO2 respiration will indicate the rate at which different species can exploit
new labile C sources. Second, we will examine natural 14C signatures of fungi to
estimate the ages of compounds decomposed by individual species. We expect that
Competitives will possess older C than do Ruderals, if Competitives are
specializing on more recalcitrant compounds. Third, we will combine information
regarding functional roles of fungal species with data derived from surveys of
mushroom abundance in natural and nitrogen-fertilized areas along a fire
chronosequence in Alaska, in order to estimate effects of shifts in fungal
communities on carbon transformations in the soil. We expect that nitrogen
additions will reduce the ability of lignocellulose degraders to decompose woody
debris generated by forest fires. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposed work includes an examination of large-scale consequences of shifts in
microbial community composition under global change, potentially improving our
ability to predict ecosystem responses to the environment. The broader impacts
include the development of field-labeling techniques that take advantage of the
sensitivity of accelerator mass spectrometry measurements of 14C in order to
minimize experimental artifacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;