* 0433801
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Active subsurface methanogenesis and anaerobic organic matter decomposition in a Devonian black shale
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Anna Martini, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 02/28/2009
* USD 145,770.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Microorganisms employ many novel strategies to derive energy
and obtain nutrients, and in doing so alter the chemistry of their environments
in ways that are significant for formation and transformation of geologic
materials. We propose to investigate one such strategy: microbial methane
generation in sedimentary basins. Stable isotopic signatures of CH4, CO2 and H2O
in shale formation waters indicate a microbial origin for several natural gas
reserves. However, these signatures leave intriguing issues unaddressed.
Anaerobic hydrocarbon degradation proceeds by many metabolic pathways including
sulfate, nitrate, and iron reduction, fermentation, and methanogenesis, and has
been recognized in petroleum reservoirs, polluted aquifers and deep marine
sediments. This research will expand understanding of methane generation by
exploring anaerobic decomposition of organic matter in subsurface sedimentary
rocks leading to economic methane accumulations.&lt;br/&gt;The Antrim shale
(Late Devonian, Michigan USA) is one of the largest shale gas reserves in North
America. Isotopic studies have established that this gas is dominantly microbial
in origin. This project will focus on a N-S transect of wells through the main
gas-producing trend, sampling formation waters, archived cuttings, and freshly
drilled well cores. Prior research on Antrim formation waters by Martini and co-
workers provides a solid framework for understanding the subsurface physical and
chemical environments within the region. A positive working relationship with
energy companies and land owners in northern Michigan allows us an unusual
degree of access to the field site, including opportunities to collect fresh
material during drilling and to use poorly-producing wells as natural
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This research integrates analytical
approaches from aqueous geochemistry, organic geochemistry, thermodynamics,
molecular biology and microbiology. We will synthesize our results into a
conceptual model that addresses key research questions including: How do
analyses of temperature, salinity, nutrients and metabolic substrates reveal
thermodynamic and environmental constraints on the activity of these
organisms?&lt;br/&gt;What does chemical characterization of bitumens, kerogen,
and dissolved organic matter reveal about specific sources of organic matter
that fuel methane generation in this subsurface environment?&lt;br/&gt;What are
the 16S and functional gene molecular phylogenies of active microorganisms
within Antrim Shale formation waters, and what metabolic roles do these
organisms play?&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary efforts have determined a high diversity
of methanogenic Archaea in formation waters from two Antrim wells, including an
entirely new cluster of mcrA genotypes and novel 16S sequences within the
Methanomicrobiales, Methanosarcinales, and Methanobacteriales. 16S rRNA-based
Bacterial diversity is more limited, confined to sequences closely related to
acetate-producing Acetobacterium and within the Syntrophomoadaceae and
Syntrophobacteraceae. Surprisingly, no DNA evidence for sulfate- or metal-
reducing bacteria has yet been detected. Thus rather than a suite of electron
acceptors (O2, NO3, Fe, Mn and SO4) followed by fermentation and methanogenesis
(such as found in modern sediments), the subsurface methanogenic environment of
the Antrim may more closely resemble documented syntrophic communities in which
hydrocarbons are decomposed to acetate and H2, a reaction that is energetically
favored only when acetate and H2 are in turn rapidly consumed by methanogens.
Our research will explore both of these hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of this research are varied and far reaching. This study will define an
unusual microbial community relevant to human activities. It will also detail
how microbial activity in rocks may confound and overprint ancient molecular
biosignatures. In addition, the study will shed light on a poorly-constrained
source of reduced gases to Earth's atmosphere, important for understanding
controls on atmospheric composition, carbon cycling and carbon transformations
in earth surface reservoirs. Our collaborative research will increase
opportunities in education and training, including a new Five Colleges
Biogeochemistry course. We are also initiating partnership with Gaylord High
School, the regional public high school serving residents of our field area.
Because the gas industry is a large part of the local economy, it will be
valuable for students in this modest-income region to gain hands-on experience
with scientific endeavors occurring in their backyard. Lastly, by disseminating
our results widely, we will improve understanding of gas reserve origins,
indices for exploration, and controls on reserve production.&lt;br/&gt;