* 0433497
* HSD:  Modeling the Synergistic Effects of Social and Ecological Change in the 19th-Century North American Cod Fishery
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Andrew Rosenberg, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/2008
* USD 500,000.00

Many human communities organized around the extraction of open access natural
resources are confronted with dilemmas posed by rapid resource depletion and
deterioration of the natural environment. Nowhere is this more evident than in
commercial fisheries. Declining fish stocks, ineffective management policies,
and increased marginalization of fishermen worldwide imperil coastal fishing
communities, marine ecosystems, and critical food resources. Understanding the
long-term, synergistic structure of fisheries is essential to saving them, but
few baseline studies exist describing historic human engagement with marine
ecosystems. The federally subsidized, but unrestricted New England cod fishery
150 years ago offers an excellent model for examining social and environmental
variables affecting adaptive response among fishermen. Archival records of New
England cod fishing vessels between 1852 and 1866 present a data set suitable
for modeling human behavior in the hook and line fishery as well as the
synergistic influences of social and ecological change. Logs can report daily
catch, vessel location, depth of water, and the condition of the sea floor as
well as familial affinities among the crew and communications with vessels
fishing nearby. Fishing agreements list vessel size, homeport, crew names, and
residences and total catch weight. The combination of daily catch statistics,
observations at sea and geographic location with social, cultural, and
demographic data discloses communitarian knowledge systems, information
networks, and decision-making processes operating within ecological and social
contexts. This interdisciplinary research project will correlate ecological
change on cod fishing banks in the mid 19th century with choices made by New
England fishermen plying their trade. Data from archival fisheries records will
be evaluated historically and modeled with Global Information Systems (GIS)
Software. Tracking changes over time, the investigators will correlate the
geographic distribution of fishing vessels with homeport, familial and social
affinities, and biological indicators for cod stock generated by fisheries stock
assessment models. Discrete choice modeling will identify and rank variables
that influence behavior and signal changes such as adopting new technologies,
altering fishing strategies, and accepting greater risk in a dangerous business.
This project will train graduate and undergraduate students in aspects of
historical ecology as they work with original documents, modern statistical
modeling, and GIS. Outreach efforts will inform the public and strive to mediate
between conflicting stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By identifying modes of
traditional behavior among mid 19th century New England cod fishermen, the
project will analyze the factors influencing them and will chart trends in their
behavior. The project will contribute a behavioral baseline for an important
modern fishery currently in freefall by establishing a historic range of
responses to ecological and economic crises. Acknowledging 19th century
fishermen as accurate observers of the environment will encourage a dialog
between contemporary scientists and fishers on the state of the marine ecosystem
from which better management policy may eventually result. The interdisciplinary
analyses will offer potential for other historical scenarios featuring open
access resource exploitation, extend biological trends back in time. They will
contribute to an understanding of humans as architects of the natural world and
nature as an agent of social change while expanding the potential for
interdisciplinary education in the sciences and humanities. This award is made
as part of the FY 2004 Human and Social Dynamics (HSD) portfolio, following a
competition that involved participation from all NSF Directorates and Offices.
HSD awards are administered through specific programs that may change over the
duration of the award. Management of all HSD awards is coordinated on an NSF-
wide basis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;