* 0433884
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the impact of microbial interactions with geologic media on geophysical properties: Implications for  assessing geomicrobiological processes
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Estella Atekwana, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2007
* USD 270,644.00

Bacteria have been shown to play an important role in geologic processes,
however, their role in altering geophysical properties of rocks is not well
understood, nor has it been thoroughly investigated. This project is a three-
year collaboration between researchers at the University of Missouri-Rolla,
Rutgers University, and Western Michigan University. Its purpose is to
understand and measure geophysical changes resulting from microbial interactions
with geologic media. &lt;br/&gt; Specific objectives of the project are to
conduct laboratory and field studies to investigate: (1) the effect of increases
in microbial cell concentrations and biofilm formation on soil and sediment
electrical properties, (2) the effect of metabolic by-products of microbial
activity, such as biosurfactants and organic acids, on geophysical electrical
measurements, (3) potential changes in petrophysical properties (e.g.,
permeability, porosity, surface area) induced by microbial-mineral interactions,
and (4) differences in the microbial communities and their structure, dynamics,
and associations in sediments with anomalous geophysical signatures. The first
phase of the work will involve measuring the electrical signatures of bacterial
cells, biofilms, and organic acids in laboratory column reactors. Final reactor
products will then be imaged with photomicrography to investigate biofilm
distribution and changes in pore geometry. The second phase of the work will
focus on measurements of reactor sediment physical properties (formation factor,
surface area, porosity, permeability). Results of this work will help build a
database to relate electrical, physical, and biochemical parameters that can be
used in geophysical modeling of field input data. The final phase of the program
will concentrate on field measurements and observations on how changes in
sediment electrical conductivity can be related to microbial alteration of
geologic materials. These analyses will be carried out on cores and at the field
scale. This study will form the basis for the development of geophysics as a
tool for investigating geomicrobiological processes. &lt;br/&gt; Broader and
potential societal benefits include development of geophysical techniques that
can be used for monitoring and assessing biological colonization of groundwater
aquifers and microbial mineralization of dissolved pollutants in the near
subsurface. Educational and outreach initiatives will focus on student
involvement and student-led promotion of biogeophysics to the wider Geophysics
and Biogeosciences community at national mad international
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;