* 0433667
* UTSA's Noyce Scholars Program
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Stuart Birnbaum, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2010
* USD 582,280.00

Recognizing the need for more certified high school mathematics and science
teachers, the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) launched the UTeach
Program in August 2003. Funding through the Noyce scholarship program continues
and enhances this program. The Noyce component of UTeach provides 30
undergraduate Noyce scholarships and 12 Noyce Stipends (scholarships to post-
baccalaureate professionals returning for teacher certification). The goals of
the project are to (1) increase the number of mathematics and science teachers
certified for middle and high school teaching, and (2) to prepare these teachers
for the reality of inner-city schools through a substantive partnership with
area school districts. A central feature of UTeach is the on-going contact from
the very first semester of the freshman year with classroom teaching in
participating high-need public schools. Partnering public school classroom
teachers work closely with UTSA faculty and mentor UTSA students who are
pursuing a career in teaching. The classroom teachers are called UTeach Fellows
to indicate the critical role they play in the preparation of future teachers.

The need for improved mathematics and science education is recognized in San
Antonio through a wide array of stakeholders including five four-year
universities, a four-campus community college system, the business community,
and public leaders inserting math and science education into the city's economic
development plan. Through UTSA's UTeach Program, partnerships are already
developed to prepare teachers within a citywide context, involving multiple
high-need districts, business community input in support of local driver
industries, area military installations, and city officials. These Noyce
scholarships improve the range of these efforts and target the training of
individuals who are willing and prepared to serve districts where the need is
greatest. Best practices will be shared with local universities and colleges. In
keeping with the mission of UTSA (a designated Hispanic Serving Institution),
historically underserved groups are being aggressively recruited to serve as
STEM teachers in local schools.