* 0433086
* Disseminating Computational Modeling in the Social Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2004,12/31/2007
* James Kitts, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 12/31/2007
* USD 141,666.00

Simulation-based research allows a direct connection to be drawn between micro-
level behavior and emergent macro-level outcomes, and hold great promise for
theoretically driven quantitative research. However, the skills required to
understand and participate in this new research have not yet been integrated
into social science curricula. This project will consolidate and develop
learning materials in this important new area. The investigators will work on
model courses at the University of Washington and Cornell University, publish a
Teaching Resource Guide in social simulation, sponsor a workshop on Teaching
Simulation at the American Sociological Association annual meeting, and set up
an online repository for exchange of teaching and learning materials, including
an arena for interactive learning on the World Wide &lt;br/&gt;Web. The
published resource guide, online repository, and teaching workshop will assist
faculty in developing courses and in integrating computational modeling into
their existing courses. By enhancing teaching and curriculum development, this
toolkit will improve the integrity of students. applied training in dynamic
models. The short-term result should be a faster rate of adoption in
disciplinary curricula and improvement in training quality. This will contribute
to a longer-term result of increasing emphasis on explicitly modeling dynamics
in the social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;