* 0433959
* Enabling the Study of Long-Term Human and Social Dynamics:  A Cyberinfrastructure for Archaeology
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Traditional scientific research is focused within academic disciplines with a
marked divide between social and natural sciences. However, scientific research
is now crossing disciplinary boundaries, seeing human and natural systems as
inextricably linked. This project is ultimately concerned with understanding
long-term change in linked human-natural systems. Rapid change is often obvious,
whereas long-term change is difficult to observe and even more difficult to
study because scientific data typically span, at most, a few decades.
Archaeology, on the other hand, collects and analyzes data on human societies
and their environments that span centuries or even millennia. Thus, archaeology
has the potential to play a unique role in developing and testing scientific
models on such topics as demography, economy, and social stability.
&lt;br/&gt;However, the use of archaeological knowledge for these purposes is
limited by the inherent complexities on the data. Indeed, it is nearly
impossible to execute meaningful analyses that integrate primary data from many
archaeological research projects. This research initiates the process of
building a cyberinfrastructure for archaeology that would incorporate both new
and extant archaeological databases and would use systematized archaeological
knowledge and sophisticated computer methods to transcend the problems of data
comparability. &lt;br/&gt;The first component of this grant is a broad-based
workshop that will attempt to build a scientific consensus on a vision for a
cyberinfrastructure of archaeology, assess the professional and technical
challenges, and outline a strategy for achieving that vision. The second
component is in-depth exploration of a limited archaeological problem by a team
of archaeologists and computer scientists. This component seeks to understand
the detailed sorts of knowledge needed to compare and integrate actual data from
different field projects (e.g., their preservation and collection strategies)
and how to systematically represent that knowledge for computer use. The third
component will examine the technical problems posed by archaeological data
integration in light of the experience of other
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merit. A knowledge-based archaeological data-
integration system encompassing both new and extant datasets could provide
Internet access to extensive social and environmental data archives. Researchers
could extract databases of analytically comparable observations, propelling
synthetic research to a new level and enabling researchers across scientific
disciplines to address large-scale and long-term questions with a level of
empirical support that has been unthinkable. This research will also contribute
novel computer methods of data integration applicable to other scientific
domains in which data are inconsistently collected.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
The proposed system has the potential to transform a key component of
undergraduate education in archaeology. Employing this knowledge-based system,
critical thinking exercises could use large-scale research datasets instead of
the "toy" problems usually analyzed. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed system has far-
reaching impacts on the infrastructure of social and natural science. It would
provide a means to maintain the long-term utility of irreplaceable data in the
face of inadequate documentation and rapidly changing technology. Academic,
governmental, tribal and private enterprises would all be active consumers of
the resulting data integration system. By providing scholars in diverse fields
with meaningful access to long-term data on society, population, and
environment, archaeology can help explain the complex human and social dynamics
that have constituted today's social world and have shaped the modern
environment.&lt;br/&gt;