* 0433753
* Protein Interactions with Nano-Scale Controlled Surfaces:    The Molecular Basis for Non-fouling Behavior
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2006
* Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2006
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT - 0433753&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface resistance to protein
adsorption is currently a subject of great interest and is critical to the
performance of biosensors, implanted biomaterials, and drug carriers. Since
proteins have distinct shapes and surface functionalities, protein adsorption is
strongly dependent on the nano-scale chemical and structural properties of the
surface. Despite extensive research in protein adsorption, there is still a lack
of a molecular-level understanding of the non-fouling mechanism. Combined
experimental and simulation studies proposed in this work will target this
important problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: From
recent simulation and experimental studies from the &lt;br/&gt;PI.s group
supported through a NSF SGER grant (1/1/03-3/31/04), it appears that there is a
correlation between the non-fouling properties of oligo (ethylene glycol) (OEG)
self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) and the hydration/flexibility of OEG chains.
However, there is a lack of experimental measurements of the content and
structure of water molecules bound in OEG chains. There has been no direct
evaluation of the interaction forces between a protein and an OEG surface from
molecular simulations in order to elucidate the molecular origin of surface
resistance to protein adsorption. Furthermore, there are unresolved issues about
when OEG- or poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-based materials work or fail,
particularly at higher temperatures. In order to provide a complete and solid
understanding of the non-fouling mechanism at the molecular level, three
important problems will be tackled in this work: (a) to obtain force-versus-
distance curves as a protein molecule approaches an OEG SAM surface from
molecular simulations, (b) to probe the amount and structure of water molecules
bound in OEG chains using combined quartz crystal microbalance (QCM)/surface
plasmon resonance (SPR) experiments, and (c) to study the non-fouling mechanism
of OEG SAMs at higher temperatures using SPR. Since the molecular details of a
surface are of great importance to protein adsorption, OEG surface density and
structure will be altered using either mixed OEG/OH SAMs or mixed ethanol and
water assembly solvents. Hydrophobic CH3 and hydrophilic OH terminated SAMs will
be used throughout these studies as reference systems. All the SAMs used in
these studies will be fully characterized using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) and atomic force microscopy (AFM).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The success of this one year
project will advance our fundamental understanding of the non-fouling mechanism
at the molecular level, provide new criteria to evaluate non-fouling materials,
and assist the design of new non-fouling materials. It will have significant
impact on various applications ranging from biosensors to biomaterials, drug
delivery, and tissue engineering to marine coatings. While non-fouling surfaces
are critical to these technologies, a fundamental study of the non-fouling
mechanism is a driving force for discoveries of new anti-fouling materials and
coatings. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in this project,
particularly students from underrepresented groups. Undergraduate researchers
will be recruited through well-established outreach programs at local research
centers, in which the PI has been actively involved. The knowledge will be
disseminated through the courses, such as. Frontiers in Nanotechnology.,
.Computational Simulation and Modeling of Materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;