* 0433795
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Effect of Hindlimb Length on Running and Walking Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Daniel Lieberman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 9,800.00

Despite decades of research on locomotor energetics, the role of leg length in
determining locomotor energy efficiency and speed remains unclear. This project
will investigate the effect of leg length on energy cost and speed during
walking and running in human and domestic dogs in order to test a new
biomechanical model that incorporates leg length as a determinant of these
performance variables. Energy expenditure will be measured at a range of walking
and running speeds for both species during treadmill trials. A set of outdoor
trials will also be conducted in order to test the effect of leg length on
maximum running speed and acceleration, and to investigate tradeoffs between
energetic efficiency and maximum speed and acceleration. Results will be used to
test predictions of the model, specifically that increased leg length improves
energy efficiency and speed during walking and running, but at the cost of
decreased acceleration and increased energy necessary to swing the leg. The
inclusion of both bipeds (humans) and quadrupeds (dogs) will further provide a
means of investigating the link between leg length and locomotor performance
across a range of anatomical design. If successful, the model will provide a new
method of quantitatively assessing locomotor performance in both living and
fossil species by providing a new, potentially more accurate and reliable means
of making inferences about locomotor behavior and evolution. As the evolution of
the genus Homo is marked by a significant increase in leg length, this model
will be especially useful in testing current hypotheses regarding the evolution
of hominid locomotor and foraging behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
diversity of locomotor adaptations evident in living and extinct species, the
inability to predict locomotor performance reliably and quantitatively from limb
design represents a significant shortcoming in our understanding of locomotor
adaptation and ecology. This study will address this issue by testing a
relatively simple model that explicitly incorporates leg length as a determinant
of locomotor energy cost, and by testing the effect of leg length on maximum and
preferred speeds. This project also will promote the integration of graduate
training and research in physical anthropology with experimental physiology and
biomechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;