* 0433369
* Interoperability Strategies for Scientific Cyberinfrastructure: A Comparative Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Geoffrey Bowker, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/2010
* USD 650,000.00

This comparative study uses ethnographic, interview, and content data analysis
to provide a situated social and organizational comparison of three scientific
projects with distinct approaches to developing cyberinfrastructures and
achieving data interoperability. The three projects are GEON
(http://www.geongrid.org), a geosciences project using a national distributed
storage broker to create data sharing across multiple disciplines through
developing shared ontologies; LTER (http://lternet.edu/), a long-term ecological
program using metadata standards to federate data across a single discipline;
and Ocean Informatics, an oceanographic team building community and designing a
local metadata standard to bridge key data collections to a national standard.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Need: As new scientific cyberinfrastructures
emerge, a central question is how to share data across multiple distributed
organizational and social contexts. There have been many suggestions for
technical fixes for this pressing concern (particularly important since some of
today's great political questions, such as preserving biodiversity and
developing a sustainable relationship with the environment pivot on the ability
to federate data across organizational and disciplinary contexts). However,
there has been little study - and no comparative study - of the organizational
and social dimensions of differing interoperability strategies. The working
hypothesis for this project, drawing on research in the field of social
informatics over the past fifteen years, is that creation of a common shared
data infrastructure entails complex negotiations involving the relative
institutional weight of the different actors (institutions have a range of
motives for subscribing or not to interoperability strategies), the nature of
their disciplinary organization (in particular reward structures; openness to
interdisciplinary work; history of use of large datasets) and the nature of
their domain work (degree of commitment to long-term data storage and re-use;
decay rate of data over time; need to draw on large federate datasets). This
study will develop grounded understandings of the organizational complexity in
producing shared scientific cyberinfrastructure and the costs and benefits of
three interoperability approaches: metadata standards, ontologies, and
community-driven approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
development of scientific cyberinfrastructure is vital for this country's future
economic prosperity and for its ability to respond to key policy issues with
scientific and technical dimensions. Cyberinfrastructure is a large-scale
contemporary investment; this study will help inform the decisions that today
are determining future structural outcomes. At the level of science policy, the
project will facilitate understandings of the organizational and social
dimensions in building shared infrastructure. The research will produce a policy
white paper on data communities and scientific cyberinfrastructure and suggest
guidelines for the ongoing formative evaluation of infrastructure development
activities. As these new communication tools develop, there is a need for
educational programs to sensitize domain scientists, computer scientists and
science policy workers to social and organizational issues. The project will
produce, as a centerpiece to a Masters level program in cyberinfrastructure, a
graduate course about its development, as well as a secondary school lesson
module for use in an educational partnership. A 'Cyberinfrastructure Page'
website, modeled on 'Inquiry Page' (http://inquiry.uiuc.edu/), will incorporate
the course and module and allow this project to share results first with the
partner communities and then across communities. This will provide the kernel of
a resource site for researchers and practitioners in the emergent field of
scientific cyberinfrastructure, to share findings and best practices and to
engage in collective problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by an award from the FY 2004 NSF-wide competition on Human and Social
Dynamics (HSD). Coordinated management of the HSD competition and the portfolio
of HSD awards involves all NSF directorates and offices.&lt;br/&gt;