* 0433986
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement:  Dental Health and the Agricultural Transition in Sonora, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Bernardo Arriaza, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Trudy R. Turner
* 08/31/2005
* USD 8,900.00

Many diseases and nutritional imbalances leave permanent imprints in the
skeleton providing a unique record to study ancient health problems. This
research examines the teeth of a prehistoric human skeletal population from
northern Sonora, Mexico to explore the changes in human health that accompany
the transition to corn agriculture in the North American Desert West
approximately 4000 years ago. High yields, ease of harvest and storage was
likely an incentive for early Sonorans to shift from mobile foraging to corn
farming. This change in diet and mobility greatly impacted and seriously
worsened human health over the course of the next several thousand years and
eventually led to region-wide social collapse by the end of the 14th Century. It
is hypothesized here that corn dependence gradually increased among human groups
in the Sonoran Desert over the course of the Early Agricultural period (1500
B.C.-A.D. 200). This hypothesis will be tested by recording a suite of ten
dental observations (i.e.-abscesses, attrition, caries, tooth loss, etc.) that
correlate with dental health on a sample of 200 prehistoric human skeletons
recovered from La Playa, an Early Agricultural period archaeological site
located in Sonora, Mexico. Observations made on the population's dental health
will be tied to a time scale by radiocarbon and fluoride dating. The hypothesis
predicts that the La Playa burials will demonstrate a measurable decline in
dental health (i.e.-increased frequencies of disease, damage, and wear angles)
as corn increases in dietary importance over the course of the archaeological
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant because it uses a
biologically based model of dental health to test a contested archaeological
proposition concerning the introduction and adoption of corn agriculture in the
North American Desert West. In addition, the La Playa burial population is the
largest (at least ten times larger) and earliest burial sample dating to this
time period, which makes these skeletons unique to test the proposed changes
associated with increased dependence on agriculture. Furthermore, this project
represents a multidisciplinary effort utilizing bone chemistry dating (Fluoride
and AMS) and an analysis of dental health to address an archaeologically-based
question about the interaction between socio-political changes, diet, and
subsistence practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance networks
and partnerships by creating an international cooperation with Mexican scholars
which will lead to the organization of international workshops on corn
domestication and bio-cultural changes affecting both humans and deserts. It
will also enhance the professional development of the student.&lt;br/&gt;