* 0433496
* SGER:     Weddell Seal Visualization Project
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Terrie Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 06/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

During the past six years, over 600 hours of videotape documenting the under ice
ecosystem and&lt;br/&gt;foraging events of Weddell seals have been recorded with
corresponding 3-dimensional dive&lt;br/&gt;paths and metabolic measurements.
This data set has enabled a team of researchers to identify the ecological role
of different dive types of free-ranging seals and to examine the strategies used
by the animals for cost efficient hunting while breathholding on a dive. In
order to fully understand the underlying mechanisms that drive diving strategies
and foraging decisions of Weddell seals, as well as other marine predators,
there is a need to develop new approaches for presenting the diverse types of
data (i.e. numerical, observational, digital) collected by multiple sensors
placed on the animals. This proposal addresses the problem by exploring novel
formats for visualizing complex data sets. By combining video game animation and
virtual environment visualization technology, the scientists will create a
software platform for incorporating standard spreadsheet data sets to
simultaneously display physiological, behavioral, environmental, and movement
patterns of Weddell seals diving beneath the Antarctic ice. Specific goals
include developing a software tool that displays spreadsheet data as a 3-D
animation, integrating behavioral data with the 3-dimensional movements of free
ranging Weddell seals, creating a visual representation of the under ice
ecosystem for McMurdo Sound, and testing the effectiveness of the display on
students and marine mammal researchers.&lt;br/&gt;This study will be one of the
first to integrate video game technology with scientific databases from wild
animals, and as such is both novel and risky. The resulting program will allow
investigators to move beyond the typical 2 - 3 parameter correlative
presentations and to develop virtual environments for a wide variety of marine
predators. It will also provide a unique teaching tool for students of Antarctic
ecology and diving physiology. As such, the project benefits science,
engineering, and education fields, provides a novel approach to the presentation
of scientific data, and applies new expertise/perspectives (video game
technology) to common scientific research problems characterized by too much
data and too few options for critical analysis, synthesis and
integration.&lt;br/&gt;