* 0433787
* Economic Growth, Social Inequality, and Environmental Change in Thailand and Cambodia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Robert Townsend, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2008
* USD 650,000.00



Social inequality and income growth that varies considerably across households
are larger in developing economies than conventional economic factors can
explain. The researchers undertaking this interdisciplinary research project
hypothesize that environmental, social, cultural, and historical variations
interact with economic factors and affect households, villages, and regions
differentially, thereby explaining inequality and a large amount of the residual
variance in income growth. The investigators will examine these factors and
construct models of the rural, peri-urban, and national economies in Thailand
and Cambodia, particularly in the Lower Mekong River Basin. They will deploy the
methods and insights of the spatial social sciences, especially spatial
statistics, analysis of remotely sensed images, development of geographic
information systems (GIS), and the testing and refinement of formal economic
models based on new and existing empirical data sets. The work products of the
study will be: (1) extensive empirical data sets and conceptual models that
relate both physical (e.g., deforestation, water quality, land-use change) and
social (e.g., migration patterns, income inequality, and cultural practices)
variables to economic growth; and (2) tests of predictions made by formal
models. The results of the research will have broad implications for
understanding the whole Earth system, especially the ecological and
socioeconomic bases of land-use, land-conversion, and resource sustainability in
environments that are experiencing increasing economic activity, the emergence
or intensification of social inequality, periodic social crises, and consequent
environmental degradation.

The research team represents an unusual combination of social, physical, and
computer scientists, and the research will involve anthropology, economics,
geography, land-use imagery, climatology, and computer science disciplines as a
coherent whole. The project will contribute to the development of research and
education capacity in Cambodia and Thailand as well as among advanced Ph.D.
students in several disciplines in the United States. Women and ethnic
minorities in the U.S. and abroad will play key roles as research associates,
scientific technicians, survey team leaders and staff, and data-entry
technicians among other roles. The investigators will focus quite explicitly on
training, education, and human capital development in rural areas. The project
will contribute to the development of economic, social, and environmental
policy, and the data sets and models that we produce will be useful for planning
and managing the kinds of land-cover conversion that may occur in the future.
The U.S. investigators will collaborate intensively with several Thai
Universities and with government agencies and ministries and non-governmental
organizations in Thailand (such as the Bank of Thailand and the Bank for
Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives), and in Cambodia (such as the
Ministry of the Environment, the Ministry of Planning, and the Center for Khmer
Studies.) This award is made as part of the FY 2004 Human and Social Dynamics
(HSD) portfolio, following a competition that involved participation from all
NSF Directorates and Offices. HSD awards are administered through specific
programs that may change over the duration of the award. Management of all HSD
awards is coordinated on an NSF-wide basis.

