* 0433947
* Comparative Civic and Place Engagement in Three Latino Enclave Neighborhoods in Transition
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Patricia Price, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2007
* USD 606,187.00

The proposed research entails a three-city comparison of inner-ring Latino
enclave neighborhoods: Pilsen (in Chicago), Garfield (in Phoenix), and East
Little Havana (in Miami). In all three neighborhoods, established Latino groups
face challenges both from new Hispanic immigrants and from relatively wealthy
gentrifiers. This research will allow a systematic, comparative assessment of
how individuals and groups interact with one another civically through
organizations to shape their physical surroundings, and how these surroundings
in turn foster or hinder belonging and exclusion.

The PIs form a six-member interdisciplinary team of geographers, political
scientists, and an anthropologist. In each neighborhood, teams of two local PIs
will work in tandem with local graduates and undergraduates utilizing a
combination of quantitative and qualitative methods in four phases, including i)
preliminary interviews, ii) large-scale survey, iii) in-depth interviews, and
iv) focus groups. Data will be geocoded and georeferenced for spatial analysis
in a Geographic Information System (GIS). The project duration is three years,
from January 2005 December 2007. The expected outcomes of this research are
fourfold: i) to foster interdisciplinary synergy resulting in new theoretical
understandings based in part on the use of GIS, ii) to produce a stream of
collaborative and individual scholarly publications, iii) to promote further
multidisciplinary comparative studies that are policy relevant, and iv) to train
underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students. This research is strongly
supported by initial findings from pilot research, which suggests that inner-
ring Latino enclave neighborhoods are sites of intense negotiation that
telescope broader issues.

The intellectual merit of this project arises from its contributions to
understanding contemporary urban socio- spatial dynamics. These engage at
multiple scales, and include negotiation of i) new Latino diasporas and the
perceived Latinization of the United States, ii) the unfolding uneven
geographies of development, and iii) changing bases of human solidarity and
cleavage. Research on civic engagement has largely ignored the spatial arena
through which civic engagement is conducted and indeed shaped. Likewise,
research on the changing spatiality of cities has paid scant attention to the
diversities within immigrant and ethnic groups and how these diversities shape
the ways that immigrants and ethnics engage with the physical spaces of
neighborhoods in materially consequential ways. The dramatic spatial
transformations underway in inner-ring neighborhoods provide an ideal
environment to query the assumptions that immigrants and inner-city minority
populations are civically disengaged, that civic presence amongst Latinos is
lacking, and that decisions over the shape, use, and control of neighborhood
spaces is out of the grasp of residents. This research also clarifies debates
over the existence and modalities of pan-ethnic solidarity, and addresses
assumptions about Latinos as political actors.

The broader impacts of this proposal are many. Global changes have set in motion
new human diasporas, shaped new geographies of wealth and power, and reworked
the social and spatial landscape of large cities. Understanding the human and
spatial dimensions of these reorganizations, and how people engage with and
actively shape them, constitutes the broader impact of this project. Inner-ring
ethnic enclave neighborhoods distill broader contentions over immigration, urban
redevelopment, political participation, and citizenship. How these issues are
addressed is seen by some to shape the very identity of the U.S. Negative policy
toward Latino immigration as well as anxiety over the perceived Latinization of
the U.S. might be understood in part as a consequence of insufficiently nuanced
knowledge. The research involves a broad range of social science themes (urban
studies, ethnic studies, immigration studies) and social science disciplines,
and integrates a spatial statistics component. Finally, the proposed research
directly addresses the educational and training goals regarding Hispanic
students of the home institutions of the PIs as well as the PIs respective
disciplinary associations.