* 0433165
* Ecological Boundary-Setting in Mental and Geophysical Models
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/2004,06/30/2008
* Asim Zia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2008
* USD 630,750.00

When agencies and the public attend to an environmental "problem," they
explicitly or implicitly bound that problem in space and time by associating it
with a system and a set of dynamics that they think generates the problem. These
boundary- setting decisions are crucial to problem formulation-the most
difficult aspect of analyzing decisions-and they also determine which data, and
which scientific theories, will be deployed to understand and model the systems.
Past research has suggested that stakeholders from different interest groups
often "model" the system differently, depending on their interests, so bounding
decisions become controversial, blocking agreement on the nature of the problem
and making effective action impossible. The research team will address boundary-
setting activities and choices in two very different settings. First, the team
will develop and use interviews, discourse analysis of documents, and revealed
preference valuation, in conjunction with GIS modeling and mental modeling
techniques, to examine and represent how citizens and participants "bound" the
system they care about. Second, we will examine how geo-physical modelers-
especially those who build models intended to be useful in public decision
making-set the spatio-temporal bounds of their quantitative models. Using this
combination of social scientific methods and geophysical modeling techniques,
the team will explore the role of social values in boundary-setting.
Historically, the group will use developments in the Chesapeake Bay region in
the 1970s and 1980s--and the determination of agencies and the public that
environmental problems in Chesapeake Bay must be understood as a watershed-
scaled problem--as an exemplar of a successful confluence of science working in
a context of shifting policy boundaries.

The research will examine a series of environmental problems by building upon
existing work in three rapidly changing metropolitan areas: Atlanta, Chicago,
and St. Louis. Each city faces serious issues requiring reconsideration of how
environmental and social problems are bounded and addressed. Two types of values
will be studied: (a) sense of place values--values that residents associate with
their locality--and (b) spatial dimensions of equity issues, as private and
public decisions may create differentials in the quality of life within and
across physical and political boundaries. The intellectual merit of the study
derives from rigorously developing and applying innovative empirical methods to
the formulation of pressing environmental problems, improving our understanding
of the modeling of spatial dynamics associated with some of society's most
complex problems.