* 0433637
* Collaborative Research:  Creating Dynamic Social Network Models from Sensor Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2004,10/31/2009
* James Kitts, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2009
* USD 594,955.00

This project will develop a hybrid method for rigorously observing structures of
social interaction over time, and validate this method by comparison with
conventional survey and observation designs. It will use both wearable and fixed
computer devices to collect streaming data on research participants' physical
location, speech, and motion, and then will develop computational models to
infer structures of social interaction from these data. This suite of tools will
thus allow direct automated measurement of networks of face-to-face interaction
over time. Having demonstrated and validated this approach, the project will
illuminate a set of classic theoretical problems that have eluded rigorous
analysis under conventional methods. Substantial advances in modeling the
dynamics of social networks have been frustrated by the paucity of appropriate
data for empirical investigation, as scholars must often address dynamic
theories using cross-sectional or sparse panel data. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
team of investigators includes experts from both Computer Science and Sociology,
integrates tools from both fields, and addresses questions that would be
intractable without this interdisciplinary lens. For example, the precise
measurement of interaction in time and space allows researchers to observe the
co-evolution of social roles (as performed by individuals in day-to-day
interaction) and structural positions in a social network. The streaming
measures of social interaction allow a detailed analysis of conversations,
analyzing how styles of communication change within social relationships over
time, including the effect of structural position on styles of interaction and
the effect of interaction style on position in the network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine the simple evolution of social
networks over short (weeks) and long (month and/or years) time scales. Using
Global Positioning Systems and various other location sensor technologies, the
work will contribute an explicitly spatial investigation of network dynamics,
modeling the interplay of the physical environment and social networks. For
example, particular locations may serve as hubs or bridges, connecting otherwise
disparate network components. Results may refine scientific understanding of the
co-evolution of social networks and physical locations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a set of methods for social network
observation and analysis, generate datasets of unprecedented breadth and depth,
and provide an independent standard for comparison of conventional tools, all of
which will be invaluable resources for the broader scientific community. The
resulting longitudinal network datasets are likely to be mined for insights into
social network dynamics by many other researchers, while the team of graduate
students working under this project will benefit from unique interdisciplinary
training. Beyond basic research, the novel application of sensor-based and
machine learning methods to understanding human communication has broad
applicability to real-world social problems. As a simple example, a refined
understanding of the co-evolution of networks and physical locations may provide
insight into macro-level processes of community integration and disintegration,
informing social architects and urban planners. The project will promote
teaching, training and understanding among researchers in computer science and
social science.&lt;br/&gt;