* 0433804
* Starter Grant: Diversity and Activity of Denitrifiers Across Estuarine Gradients
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Christopher Francis, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2007
* USD 50,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Chris Francis of Stanford University to
investigate how the distribution, diversity, and activity of denitrifying
bacteria are influenced by environmental gradients in Elkhorn Slough, a small
California estuary that opens into Monterey Bay. Denitrification, the
transformation of nitrate and nitrite to gaseous products (NO, N2O, N2) under
anaerobic conditions, is the main biological process responsible for returning
fixed (usable) nitrogen from ecosystems to the atmosphere. Surprisingly, how
environmental factors known to control denitrification rates (e.g., nitrate,
organic carbon, oxygen, etc.) influence the diversity of denitrifying microbial
communities is poorly understood. Elkhorn Slough, encompassing a wide range of
physical/chemical gradients, is an ideal natural system in which to utilize both
molecular biological (i.e., DNA-based) and cultivation approaches to address
such questions. In particular, genes encoding nitrite reductase, the enzyme
responsible for the key step of the denitrification pathway (NO2- -&gt; NO) will
be used as a molecular marker to characterize the diversity of denitrifying
bacteria in sediment samples collected at four sites along the estuary. In order
to compile a culture collection of novel estuarine denitrifiers, for which
virtually nothing is currently known, intensive cultivation studies will also be
undertaken in the Slough. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elkhorn Slough is a principal
wetland complex in central California and is considered one of the most
ecologically important estuaries in the state, as evidenced by its rare National
Estuarine Research Reserve (NERR) status. Roughly 25-50% of external nitrogen
inputs are removed by denitrification in this treasured estuary, and this
project will provide critical information regarding how the underlying microbial
communities are influenced by complex environmental gradients. The resultant
collections of nitrite reductase gene sequences and estuarine denitrifers will
provide a valuable resource to the scientific community and, ultimately, reveal
insights into the ecology and regulation of this biogeochemically-important
process in all estuarine (and coastal) systems. Finally, this project will help
support the research of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;