* 0433313
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Temperature Route to Cu(In,Ga)Se2 for Flexible Photovoltaics
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,11/30/2004
* Douglas Schulz, ITN ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 11/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project provides a new
approach to low-temperature processing of a compound semiconductor material,
copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS). CIGS is presently being used as the
solar absorber layer in some thin film polycrystalline solar cells with world-
record efficiencies of 19 percent. While there is a move in the display and
photovoltaic (PV) communities towards continuous roll-to-roll manufacturing
owing to cost benefits, roll-to-roll CIGS solar cell processes currently give 6
to 8 percent efficient modules. This is thought to be due to microstructural
limitations in the CIGS absorber layer as a consequence of lower temperature
sintering required when using a polyimide substrate. The research objective of
this project is to demonstrate improved conversion efficiencies for CIGS solar
cells using a low-temperature processing step. To do this, small grain CIGS
films will be subjected to conditions that favor grain growth yielding a large-
grained polycrystalline semiconductor. Temperature will be carefully controlled
and optimized to determine if this process might enable economical substrates
such as polyethylene terephthalate. If successful, the approach would be
generally applicable to polycrystalline metal chalcogenide electronic materials
where performance improvements might be anticipated with a reduction in the
number of grain boundaries.

The commercial application of this project is in the manufacture of high
efficiency, flexible, solar cell semiconductor material. This project allows a
feasibility demonstration for a semiconductor growth methodology using CIGS
solar cells as the first example. Assuming the low-temperature treatment results
in the formation of large-grained materials and gives increased solar conversion
efficiencies, the process could be utilized as a plug-in at an existing roll-to-
roll CIGS manufacturing facility. The development of 15 percent efficient CIGS
solar cells on flexible and lightweight substrates would address the needs of
higher-end solar cell products used in portable electronics such as cell phones
and laptops where a 10-year market estimate of $5 billion is not unreasonable.
While existing PV technologies may meet the cost target for portable PV (i.e.
$10/W) these are not applicable given the low-specific power density and
inflexibility of the modules thus providing a significant opportunity for an
emerging solar cell technology. For this consumer application, the value added
through the use of portable PV is the convenience of never "plugging in" to
recharge a power system. In addition to CIGS solar cells, this low-temperature
growth approach could impact the emerging fields of flexible electronics and
electronic textiles through new routes to transistors and/or thermo-electrics.