* 0433132
* HSD:  An Exploratory Space-Time Data Analysis Toolkit for Spatial Social Science Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Sergio Rey, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2008
* USD 97,318.00

The study of regional economic growth, inequality, divergence and convergence
attracts considerable interest across multiple social sciences. By definition,
these analyses rely on data that are spatially referenced. Only a few very
recent studies, however, have given attention to the role of spatial dependence
and spatial heterogeneity in the empirical analysis of regional economic
evolutions. Research in the fields of geographical information systems (GIS),
spatial statistics, and spatial econometrics has generated new methods designed
to treat these spatial effects, but these methods do not address the dynamic
dimensions of regional economic change. A truly integrated social science
requires a toolkit that integrates both the spatial and temporal dimensions of
socioeconomic phenomena. The objectives of this research project are to develop
such a toolkit by (1) examining the implications of spatial clustering and
spatial heterogeneity for the application of exploratory data analysis (EDA)
techniques in a dynamic context; (2) developing new statistical methods for
exploratory space-time data analysis (ESTDA); and (3) implementing these methods
in an Open Source package for exploratory space-time analysis of social
processes. The methods to be used include exploratory spatial data analysis
(ESDA), exploratory temporal data analysis (ETDA), Monte Carlo simulation
studies of the empirical properties of the new ESTDA methods, object-oriented
programming, and dynamic geovisualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will make significant contributions to the practice of spatial social science,
the modeling of human dynamics, and to basic understanding of the nature of
regional growth and inequality. The incorporation of space and time into models
of regional inequality and growth will provide more comprehensive and accurate
descriptions of human social and economic behavior. The project will develop an
exploratory space-time toolkit that will be Open Source and accessible to a
broad array of social science researchers to enhance the analysis of human and
social dynamics. As such, this research is expected to have implications in
areas such as studies of urban segregation patterns, space-time epidemiology and
public health, criminology, housing market dynamics, socioeconomic inequalities,
among others. From a policy perspective, the development of new spatially
explicit measures will provide planners and analysts with capabilities to design
policy interventions targeted at key individual geographical areas. By taking
spatial spillovers into account, this spatially focused strategy will leverage
the impact of such policy programs across the boundaries of a single area,
thereby increasing the effectiveness of the policy. This project is supported by
an award resulting from the FY 2004 NSF-wide competition on Human and Social
Dynamics (HSD). Coordinated management of the HSD competition and the portfolio
of HSD awards involves all NSF directorates and offices.&lt;br/&gt;