* 0433702
* Collaborative Proposal Cybertrust:  Center for Internet Epidemiology and Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2012
* Mark Allman, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2012
* USD 3,716,167.00

Collaborative Research: Cybertrust Center for Internet Epidemiology and
Defenses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stefan Savage, University of California - San
Diego&lt;br/&gt;Vern Paxson, International Computer Science
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0433668&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of
widespread software homogeneity and the Internet's unrestricted communication
model creates an ideal climate for infectious, self-propagating pathogens -
"worms" and "viruses" - with each new generation of outbreaks demonstrating
increasing speed, virulence, and sophistication. The Center for Internet
Epidemiology and Defenses aims to address twin fundamental needs: to better
understand the behavior and limitations of Internet epidemics, and to develop
systems that can automatically defend against new outbreaks in real-
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the scope and emergent behavior of
Internet-scale worms seen in the wild constitutes a new science termed "Internet
epidemiology". To gain visibility into pathogens propagating across the global
Internet, the Center is pursuing the construction and operation of a distributed
"network telescope" of unprecedented scale. The telescope in turn feeds a
"honeyfarm" collection of vulnerable "honeypot" servers whose infection serves
to indicate the presence of an Internet-scale worm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To then
fight worms once detected, the Center works on developing mechanisms for
deriving "signatures" of a worm's activity and disseminating these to worm
suppression devices deployed throughout the global
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the Center strives to ground its research
in the potentially thorny, but highly relevant, "real-world" issues of informing
the development of legal frameworks in terms of the appropriate use of anti-worm
technologies and their applications for providing forensic evidence; and
enabling the development of actuarial models for quantifying exposure to
aggregate risk and liability from Internet epidemics, critical for supporting
the emerging cyber-insurance industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;