* 0433776
* CPA: Conference Support Proposal: 2nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Formal Methods and Models for Co-Design
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Sandeep Shukla, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2005
* USD 4,000.00

Proposal to NSF CPA Cluster for Supporting Student Travel to the 2nd ACM/IEEE
&lt;br/&gt;International Conference on Methods &amp; Models for Co-Design
(MEMOCODE.04) &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As computing systems are
becoming increasingly complex, integrated to daily usable &lt;br/&gt;artifacts
such as cell phones, cars, hand-held devices, medical prosthetics and other wide
&lt;br/&gt;range of applications, the need for design methodologies which can
guarantee successful &lt;br/&gt;integration of hardware and software, functional
correctness and reliability is gaining &lt;br/&gt;importance. Today.s computing
is no longer limited to servers, work stations and desktop &lt;br/&gt;computing,
but they are embedded everywhere, most importantly in the medical space, as
&lt;br/&gt;well as in the safety critical systems such as avionics control,
automotive control etc. &lt;br/&gt;However, historically hardware and software
have been built separately, and both being &lt;br/&gt;extremely complex, the
methodologies that ensure correct construction of hardware or
&lt;br/&gt;software are themselves research topics. Yet, we are faced with the
need for formal and &lt;br/&gt;mathematical techniques to model and analyze
systems which integrate both hardware &lt;br/&gt;and software, because of the
increasing reliance of human society on ubiquitous and &lt;br/&gt;pervasive
computing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In 2003 the First International ACM/IEEE
Formal Methods and Models for Co-Design &lt;br/&gt;(MEMOCODE) conference, for
the first time, brought together researchers who apply &lt;br/&gt;formal methods
in software engineering fields, and those who apply formal methods to
&lt;br/&gt;design and validate hardware systems. It was felt from the panel
discussions, key note &lt;br/&gt;talks, and informal discussions that formal
method practitioners from both sides have a &lt;br/&gt;lot of share in terms of
knowledge, experience and techniques. Also, the hardware-&lt;br/&gt;software co-
design problem imposes an ever than before need for this symbiosis, which
&lt;br/&gt;was the original aims of creating this series of conferences. More
importantly, the US &lt;br/&gt;researchers present at the conference last year
(in France), felt that there is a lack of &lt;br/&gt;research activity in this
important area of formal methods in the US, compared to the
&lt;br/&gt;initiatives and research activities in Europe. As a result, this year
the conference is being &lt;br/&gt;held in San Diego, California, to bring more
US participants, and create a forum for US &lt;br/&gt;researchers to exchange
formal method ideas, techniques and creative initiatives. This
&lt;br/&gt;proposal seeks financial support from NSF to support US graduate or
advanced &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students attending the conference for the
first time, so that they get &lt;br/&gt;exposure to various aspects of formal
methods, and recognize the importance of formal &lt;br/&gt;methods in system
design, especially hardware/software safety critical systems. The
&lt;br/&gt;intellectual impact of this support from NSF would be that the
increased attendance of &lt;br/&gt;bright young students will fuel more research
work in this very important area. The &lt;br/&gt;European community has made
much more progress than their counter parts in the US &lt;br/&gt;due to a much
less degree of interest by researchers to pursue formal methods. NSF can
&lt;br/&gt;make substantial contribution to the enrichment of educational and
research objectives of &lt;br/&gt;MEMOCODE. The workshop has some funding from
sources other than NSF for invited &lt;br/&gt;speakers and other expenses.
Broader Impact of the requested NSF funding is that it &lt;br/&gt;will provide
travel support for students of US researchers, to encourage education and
&lt;br/&gt;research in the workshop topic. The emphasis will be on funding
students who do not &lt;br/&gt;otherwise have funding sources to attend the
conference, and an attempt will be made to &lt;br/&gt;fund members of
underrepresented groups.