* 0433772
* Collaborative Research: Mercury isotope fractionation during microbial and abiotic redox transformations
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Bjoern Klaue, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2008
* USD 219,210.00

EAR 0433772&lt;br/&gt;BLUM&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An investigation of the isotope
fractionation of mercury (Hg) by microbial and abiotic redox transformations is
proposed herein. It is believed that this work fits appropriately within the
Geosciences program: Research in Biogeosciences Opportunities in Geomicrobial
Processes. Specifically, this research fits into Focus II of this program, which
emphasizes developing new research techniques (including isotope proxies) to
address questions generated at the intersection between biology and geology. Two
of the PIs (Blum and Klaue) have worked for the past five years to develop an
analytical method with high enough precision to allow measurement of natural
variations in the isotopic composition of Hg. This group has demonstrated that
they can routinely measure Hg isotope ratios to an accuracy of 0.02 permil per
atomic mass unit (amu) and recent research by this group has explored Hg isotope
variation in meteorites and ore deposits. A central question in the application
of Hg isotopes to the study of Hg in the environment and as a biogeochemical
proxy is the degree to which microbes fractionate Hg during various redox
processes. To answer this question quantitatively requires a team with
specialization in the microbiology of Hg transformations (PIs Barkay and
Reinfelder at Rutgers), and specialization in the isotope geochemistry of Hg
(PIs Blum and Klaue at Michigan). In preliminary experiments this team has
demonstrated that a strain of Hg resistant Escherichia coli, which produce the
mercuric reductase enzyme (MR), fractionate Hg isotopes during the reduction of
Hg (II) to Hg(0). The magnitude of this fractionation is up to 1.5 permil per
amu, (&gt;50 times uncertainty) and it follows a Rayleigh law with a
fractionation factor of 1.0006.&lt;br/&gt;These initial results give the PIs
great optimism that Hg isotopes will provide a powerful new tracer of Hg redox
transformation in the environment, and a proxy record of changes in Hg redox
processes through geological time. The objective of this study is to conduct a
series of carefully controlled experiments to investigate Hg isotope
fractionation during each of the major microbial and abiotic redox
transformations. The specific processes that will be investigated include: 1)
The reduction of Hg (II) to Hg(0) by the bacterial MR, by light-dependent and
independent algal processes, by Fe(II)- dependent reduction in thiobacilli, and
by photoreduction. 2) The oxidation of Hg (0) to Hg(II) by bacterial enzymes
whose primary cellular role is protection against oxygen damage. 3) The
methylation of Hg (II) to MeHg by sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB). 4) The
degradation of MeHg to Hg (II) and CH4 and CO2 by the reductive and oxidative
pathways, respectively. This project will set the groundwork for Hg isotope
systematics and the use of Hg isotopes in geology and biogeochemistry. Once
developed, the Hg isotope tool will allow future studies that address issues
such as: 1) the tracking of sources, pathways and sinks of various Hg species in
the environmental and in geological deposits, 2) the use of Hg isotopes as a
paleo-redox proxy in lacustrine and marine deposits, and 3) the study of the
evolution of Hg-microbe interactions in sediments and sedimentary
rocks.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The proposed research activity will lay the
groundwork for a completely new methodology that has the potential to
significantly enhance understanding of mercury biogeochemistry on scales ranging
from microbial mechanisms to individual lakes to global cycles and finally to
the geological record. The research team members have proven track records in
studying Hg-microbe interactions (Rutgers PIs) and the isotope geochemistry and
aquatic ecology of Hg (Michigan PIs) and are poised to make rapid advancements
in this combined research area.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed research
will integrate students from both Rutgers and the&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan, giving them experience in advanced laboratory techniques and at the
intellectual intersection between the biological and geological sciences where
important, and sometimes paradigm- shifting, research advances are being made. A
female PhD student at Rutgers, who has already completed the preliminary
experiments, will work on the microbial experiments for her dissertation work
and travel to Michigan to participate in the mass spectrometry and theoretical
isotope geochemistry. An undergraduate student at Michigan will assist with the
analytical geochemistry as part of a senior thesis research project. The cross-
fertilization of methods and scientific approaches will be beneficial to all of
the research participants and will likely lead to additional collaborations.
Results will be published and disseminated broadly. As exposure to Hg remains a
major public health concern this project will assist in the implementation of
sound environmental practices to reduce Hg contamination and
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;