* 0433948
* HSD/DHB: Emergent Social Behaviors in Sensorimotor Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* James Patton, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 08/31/2008
* USD 534,048.00

A most basic form of human social interaction is the physical cooperation
necessary to perform a manual task in pairs (dyads) or groups. This project will
explore how the human sensorimotor control system implements cooperative motor
control. In preliminary work, the project team has demonstrated that when a dyad
embarks on a repeated simple manual task requiring speed and accuracy, motor
strategies quickly arise that not only differ significantly from individual
strategies on the same task, but also provide better performance. This result
runs counter to conventional wisdom that high accuracy tasks are best performed
by one individual alone. Nevertheless, from both evolutionary and ontological
perspectives, the result is reasonable: humans are social animals and have
developed sophisticated ways of working together physically. Motor interactions
represent a social communication mechanism distinct from facial expression,
gesture, and spoken language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team encompasses
cognitive science, neurobiology, robotics, and sensorimotor control, and
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigate the language of physical communication
between two or more individuals as they develop a cooperative strategy to
perform a mechanical task. Identify channels of this communication, for instance
modulation of arm stiffness. Investigate the adaptation that underlies the
emergence of cooperative behaviors during physical communication, as the
participants negotiate, compromise, specialize, teach and learn, or in some
other way arrive at an effective cooperative
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigate cognitive influences on cooperative
behaviors. Determine the extent to which the cooperative behaviors reflect
cognitive influences on motor control, as opposed to implicit or inherent
biomechanical properties of the sensorimotor
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigate the emergent behaviors as specifically
social phenomena. Assess their extension to groups sizes of more than two, and
the social aspects of adaptation, such as the effect of errors or "breaches of
trust." Investigate the substitution of an automated partner (robot) for a human
partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigate the factors at the sensorimotor level
that allow dyadic motion control to optimize performance better than individual
motor control. Hypotheses include reduction in delays associated with the
triphasic burst pattern of muscle activation, and the partitioning of motor
noise into separate spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include:
improving our fundamental understanding of therapist/patient interactions during
physical or occupational therapy, many aspects of which are repetitive dyadic
physical interaction. The work may also lead to better ways to make use of the
social dynamics between individuals in physical interaction, which would be
relevant to situations such as hands-on teaching/learning a in sports training
or helicopter flight training, shared control of teleoperators or of unmanned
aerial or underwater vehicles, and shared control of minimally invasive surgery
or telesurgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;