* 0433927
* The Dynamics of Civil War Outcomes: Bosnia and the North Caucasus
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Kristian Gleditsch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/2008
* USD 685,610.00

HSD-04333927&lt;br/&gt;John O'Loughlin&lt;br/&gt;Kristian
Gledistsch&lt;br/&gt;Jeremy Mennis&lt;br/&gt;Gerard Toal&lt;br/&gt;Michael
Ward&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores civil war outcomes in Bosnia
and in the North Caucasus area of Russia. Both regions experienced violent civil
war in the 1990s consequent to the break-up of Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union.
While fighting has ended in Bosnia, now under the protection of NATO forces, and
conflict ebbed in adjoining republics, it continues in the North Caucasian
republic of Chechnya. The PIs explore four inter-related questionst: 1) What is
the character and localized distribution of economic, social, political,
environmental and health outcomes of the wars in the conflict zones? 2) What
factors explain these distributions? 3) How can the application of an integrated
methodology of individual and aggregate data that relies on opinion survey,
census, governmental, and remote sensing data collection be operationalized in a
spatial analysis across a variety of scales? 4) Are postwar developments in the
former conflict regions promoting or retarding interethnic harmony and
democratic values, thus enhancing or reducing the prospects for long-term peace?
The PIs investigate the public health effects, environmental and infrastructural
effects, political attitudes, refugee movement and settlement, ethnic cleansing
and separation, social interactions, and economic adjustments after wars. Data
come from a variety of sources including census, electoral and other
governmental data over the past 15 years, at the smallest geographic units
available; opinion and attitude surveys in the zones affected by war; and remote
sensing imagery at both coarse and fine resolutions to map the pre-war, conflict
and post-conflict contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are a collaborative
team representing five US universities and local research partners in Russia and
Bosnia. The project builds a GIS for each study region that integrates three
types of data at multiple scales. The PIs use spatial statistics including
exploratory spatial data analysis, geostatistics, data mining, social network
analysis, and multilevel modeling. The research deepens the empirical analysis
of underlying factors of possible future conflict in the Islamic republics of
the North Caucasus of Russia and in Bosnia. It also gauges the prospects for
peaceful relations between nationalities in the two regions and provides answers
to key questions about the nature of community conditions in former war zones as
local, national and international agencies try to cope with the aggregated
disruptions to peoples, economies and environments over the past 15 years. The
study ascertains the scope of structural and personal damages, the separate and
cumulative effects of forced and voluntary population movement, the differential
impacts across localities and communities of war dynamics and the depth of
national, religious or ethnic-based consciousness. &lt;br/&gt;