* 0433567
* Temporal Dynamics of Phonological Expectations in Language Comprehension and Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Delphine Dahan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2010
* USD 697,451.00

Perception requires interpretation. The information provided by the senses is
often incomplete, conflicting, and noisy; we understand the world by evaluating
sensory data and weighting it more or less heavily according to specific biases.
Many of these adaptive biases are learned through experience. For example, we
perceive speech according to our knowledge of the language's sounds, words, and
grammar, and according to what we think the speaker is likely to be saying. All
this interpretive guesswork is necessary partly because as listeners, we try to
understand someone's speech while they are still talking; and as speakers, we
only enunciate when we think we have to. This research investigates the use of
adaptive perceptual biases by closely monitoring people's interpretation of
speech. The studies use eyetracking techniques in which listeners' visual
fixations to sets of pictures reveal what listeners think sentences mean. For
example, in evaluating a word, how important is the precise acoustic realization
relative to the likelihood of a given word? The research also studies how biases
in language are learned by infants and young children, who are surprisingly
proficient interpreters of speech. These developmental studies examine how
infants and toddlers can use what they have learned about language so far to
help them learn and understand more.

The research promotes understanding of how linguistic information of several
kinds is brought to bear on interpretation. Speech is inherently ambiguous. What
strategies do our minds recruit in perception? Understanding how normal adults
interpret speech helps in the design of intervention strategies for patients
with compromised language, second-language learners, and the hard of hearing;
understanding how infants and children make use of their knowledge of sound
structure in language and their growing vocabularies yields a better
understanding of language acquisition, early communicative deficits, and
phonological bases of reading difficulty. In addition, the research uses
phonological learning and interpretation as a test case for understanding the
temporal dynamics of human interpretation at multiple time scales: in the
moments when speech is being heard; while learning of specific probabilities or
associations proceeds; and while the infant grows into an adult.