* 0433654
* International Integrated Microdata Series
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Robert McCaa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2010
* USD 4,930,000.00

A vast body of raw census microdata covering much of the world over the past
four decades survives in machine-readable form. The bulk of these data, however,
remains inaccessible to researchers. This project creates an integrated global
database of over 150 censuses from at least 44 countries. The International
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS-International) will be the world's
largest public-use population database, with multiple samples from each country
enabling analyses across time and space. These microdata and accompanying
documentation will be freely available for scholarly and educational research
through a web-based data dissemination system. The project leverages NSF
investment in a major social science infrastructure project now nearing
completion, "International Integrated Microdata Access System" (SBR9908380).
That project covered many of the costs of finding and preserving microdata and
documentation, negotiating dissemination agreements, developing data cleaning
and sampling procedures, creating data conversion and dissemination software,
and establishing design protocols for data and documentation. As a result,
creation of the new database will be highly cost
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Census microdata represent
an extraordinary untapped resource for research and education in human and
social dynamics. With over five hundred million records spanning four decades,
the new database will offer far broader chronological scope and greater sample
densities than any alternative data source. For most countries, censuses are the
most representative source of population data available. The new database will
allow investigators to analyze global change during a period of unprecedented
economic, demographic, and political upheaval. The research team is uniquely
qualified to undertake this massive database project. The investigators
represent a diverse range of fields, including demography, economics,
epidemiology, history, regional planning, and sociology. They have an
unparalleled record of accomplishment on large-scale census infrastructure
projects and wide-ranging international microdata experience. The Minnesota
Population Center will house the project, providing exceptional facilities and
technical support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This project will reduce
barriers to international research and education by preserving datasets and
making them freely available, converting them into a uniform format, providing
comprehensive documentation, and implementing web-based tools for disseminating
the microdata and documentation. The database will provide fundamental
infrastructure for a broad range of fields in the social and behavioral
sciences, including economics, geography, sociology, population studies, and
environmental studies. Researchers in most countries do not presently have
access even to their own national census microdata; IPUMS-International will
democratize access to this vital scientific resource, creating unprecedented
opportunities for global-scale research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most census data
have traditionally been available only in aggregated tabular form. Census
microdata provide information about individual persons, families, and
households, and they allow users to interrelate any desired set of population
and housing characteristics. The flexibility offered by microdata is essential
for comparative research on social dynamics because the aggregate tabulations
produced by national statistical offices are usually not comparable across time
or between countries. In the few countries where census microdata covering
multiple census years have been easily available to researchers, these data are
the most widely used source for the study of large-scale economic and
demographic transformations. Making integrated census microdata available for
almost half of the world's population will allow researchers to describe the
transformation of the world in far richer detail than previously possible. Even
more important, these data will provide unprecedented opportunities to
investigate the agents of change and assess their implications for human
society. Census microdata are an essential resource for studying large-scale
transformational changes such as economic development, urbanization, fertility
transition, large-scale migration, population aging, mass education,
democratization, and growing international trade and capital flows. The
availability of multiple censuses for each country lends historical depth,
revealing the trajectories of change hidden in snapshots from the recent past.
These data allow detailed study of the relationships of social and economic
change to variations in climate, geography, and environment. They are also
uniquely suited to assessing the human consequences of social, economic, and
demographic transformations in such diverse areas as family structure, economic
inequality, cultural diversity, and assimilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;