* 0433488
* Microbial Controls on the Mobilization and Speciation of Arsenic from Newark Basin Shale
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2009
* Lily Young, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 10/31/2009
* USD 445,396.00

ABSTRACT OF RESEARCH&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MICROBIAL CONTROLS ON THE MOBILIZATION
AND SPECIATION OF ARSENIC FROM NEWARK BASIN SHALE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North
American Rift Basin spans part of New Jersey (Newark Basin) and has arsenic
containing red, gray and black shale. In a recent study conducted by the NJ
Geological Survey, it was determined that 15-30% of the wells from this area had
arsenic levels exceeding 10 g/L and up to 215g/L. Human exposure to arsenic
within the environment is typically through drinking water and the consumption
of water with arsenic concentrations greater than 10 mg/L greatly increases an
individual's risk of developing lung and bladder cancer (NRC, 2001). As a
result, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has proposed a reduction
in the maximum contaminant level (MCL) for arsenic in drinking water from 50
mg/L to 10 mg/L (USEPA, 2001). Arsenic mobilization in the Newark Basin could be
due to the oxidation of pyrite in black and gray shale, and/or release of
arsenic from hematite or other iron oxides in red shale (Serfes et al, 2004).
Although chemical and physical processes play a role in the weathering of these
minerals, there is also evidence that microorganisms may be essential to the
process. The hypothesis of this proposal is that microorganisms play a defining
role in the mobilization and speciation of arsenic in the Newark Basin and its
groundwater. Three objectives will be undertaken: 1) To compare the community
structure of attached and suspended microorganisms associated with gray/black
shale and with red shale found in the Newark Basin. It is hypothesized that
pyrite-impacted aquifers will have a different microbial community structure
than those impacted by hematite. These differences will help us identify the
specific organisms critical to arsenic mobilization. 2) To examine the degree to
which microbes enhance arsenic mobilization at ambient (circumneutral) pH from
native pyrite and hematite. It is proposed that iron oxidizers facilitate the
release of arsenic from pyrite and that iron reducers may mobilize arsenic from
hematite under anoxic conditions. In addition, it is proposed that arsenic
oxidizers and reducers are active in controlling the relative abundance of As(V)
and As(III) and thereby affecting arsenic transport and distribution. The
organisms involved in arsenic mobilization and speciation will be identified and
characterized. 3) To identify iron-utilizing microbes associated with the pyrite
and/or hematite shale and arsenic-utilizing microbes involved in the speciation
of arsenic from the Newark Basin using biomolecular markers based on 16S rDNA
sequence. Fluorescent in-situ hybridization (FISH) and scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) will be used to observe the spatial distribution of both iron
and arsenic active microbes on surfaces of black and red shale. It is proposed
that the organisms will associate with specific minerals in the shale, for
example, iron oxidizers will attach to pyrite and arsenite oxidizers will be
associated with As(V)-enriched iron oxides. Understanding the role that the
microbial community plays in mobilizing As from the geologic media will
constitute a new contribution to our basic knowledge of biogeological weathering
and trace element cycling in the earth's environment. Understanding the
processes that lead to the mobilization of arsenic from naturally-enriched
minerals is essential to predicting and protecting the quality of drinking water
supplies. Although this project is directed at the arsenic issue in the Newark
Basin in New Jersey, the Eastern Rift Basin of North America is a major
formation in the mid-Atlantic and northeast region of the US and other similar
sedimentary basins around the world are sources of drinking water. &lt;br/&gt;