* 0433789
* Collaborative Research: Preservation and Long-Term Bacterial Survival in Quaternary Age Salt from Death Valley, Chile and Bolivia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* William Rosenzweig, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2008
* USD 185,714.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research explores the fundamental problem of
long-term survival of microorganisms in geological materials. Although Vreeland
et al. (2000) showed that an organism can survive in a fluid inclusion within a
halite crystal for 250 Ma, there is little information about the number of
microorganisms trapped inside geological materials and the survival of those
organisms for periods of 104 to 106 years. The proposed interdisciplinary
research on Quaternary age salt cores from three basins (Death Valley,
California, Salar de Atacama, Chile, and Salar de Uyuni, Bolivia) will provide a
rich archive for study of the distribution of microorganisms in fluid inclusions
in saline minerals. The goal of the proposed research is to obtain data on the
distribution, survival, and diversity of microorganisms that have been in the
subsurface for periods of several hundred thousand years. The presence or
absence of microorganisms in fluid inclusions in halite crystals will be
interpreted in the context of the original surface environments (saline lakes,
saline pans, saline groundwaters) and physico-chemical conditions (temperatures,
major ion chemistries) in which the salts precipitated. The knowledge gained
from this study will help refine the search for microbial life in fluid
inclusions in ancient evaporites on Earth and possibly Mars.&lt;br/&gt;Thin
sections of core samples will be examined to determine the original environments
in which halite precipitated. Chemical analyses of fluid inclusions in halite by
the ESEM-X-ray EDS technique will document the major element chemistry of the
brines that harbored ancient microbes. Knowledge of brine inclusion chemistries
will guide preparation of culture media to mimic the chemical environment in
which the ancient halobacteria lived. Homogenization temperatures of fluid
inclusions from halites in the cores will be measured to obtain the actual
paleotemperatures of the brines from which the salt precipitated. Incubation
temperatures will be set close to these paleobrine temperatures. Samples of
halite for microbiological work will be petrographically screened at Binghamton
University (BU). Individual halite crystals will be cleaved to isolate primary
fluid inclusion populations and inspected for iomicroparticlesl. (possible
microorganisms) under visible and ultraviolet light. Halite crystals will be
surface sterilized at BU and West Chester University (WCU) and dissolved in
sterile distilled water. DNA extracted from halite crystals will be analyzed by
PCR assays targeting portions of 16S rRNA genes, followed by denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis (DGGE) to characterize the diversity of microorganisms (BU
and WCU). Cloning and sequencing of PCR products and individual bands excised
from DGGE gels will be done to establish the phylogenetic affinities of the
microorganisms (BU). The WCU lab will use culturing methods to attempt to
isolate microbes from fluid inclusions in halite crystals and will perform
taxonomic characterization of halophilic and halotolerant Archaea and Bacteria,
using physiological, chemotaxonomic and molecular parameters.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project involves interdisciplinary research in geoscience and
microbiology at two institutions, involving four PI's, aided by one post-
doctoral researcher, a Ph.D. candidate, and several paid undergraduate students.
The research group from BU will visit the microbiology labs at WCU to exchange
ideas between groups and receive further training in microbiological lab
methods. At BU, a geobiology seminar highlighting the results of this research
project will be offered each year to graduate and undergraduate students. The BU
group plans participation in a weeklong summer field and laboratory enrichment
program for elementary school children and organized 1-2 day summer workshops to
provide training and curriculum development for 15 local teachers from grades
5-9. A website for researchers and K-12 students will be created on ancient
microbial life featuring current research at BU and WCU. WCU undergraduates will
be employed in all aspects of the research. Material for Dr. Vreeland's
Microbial Ecology course will come from data developed during this
project.&lt;br/&gt;