* 0433679
* Agricultural Decision-Making in Indonesia with ENSO Variability: Integrating Climate Science, Risk Assessment, and Policy Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Rosamond Naylor, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2009
* USD 702,366.00

This Human and Social Dynamics Priority Area project involves an
interdisciplinary research approach to informing agricultural decision-making in
the face of climate-related uncertainty. The research will focus on Indonesia,
where agricultural production is strongly influenced by the annual cycle of
precipitation and by year-to-year variations in the annual cycle caused by El
Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) dynamics. The project will use a combination of
general circulation model experiments and downscaling models to assess the
influence of global warming on the annual climate cycle and on ENSO-induced
changes in precipitation and agricultural production in Indonesia. These model
experiments will result in a set of regional climate scenarios for Indonesia in
the mid-21st century that will be used for decision analysis. Projected crop
production and production uncertainty will be derived from the climate scenarios
using regression analysis. A risk assessment framework will then be developed to
link the probabilities of climate change to its potential consequences, and to
show how adaptation measures, such as the development of drought tolerant crop
varieties and irrigation investment, could alter the magnitude of potential
damages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two main goals of the research are: i) to
project the impacts of global warming on Indonesian agriculture by means of
changes in mean climate and climate variability (i.e., ENSO); and ii) to analyze
how these projections (including relevant bands of uncertainty) can be used to
inform agricultural decision-making processes. The intellectual merit of this
project is based on its interdisciplinary and integrated design: to date,
climate models have been developed with little knowledge of agricultural system
dynamics, and agricultural policy analysis has been conducted with little
knowledge of climate dynamics. The educational merit of the project is based on
the training of students from interdisciplinary and disciplinary graduate
programs at all of the participating universities and the development of
teaching models. The practical merit of the project stems from the fact that the
combined forces of ENSO and global warming are likely to have dramatic, and
currently unforeseen, effects on agricultural production and food security in
Indonesia and other tropical countries. Once the model template is designed,
validated, and used in Indonesia, it can be applied to other tropical
agricultural countries.