* 0433040
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Biogeochemical Exploration of Acidic and Neutral Hypersaline Environments of Australia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,03/31/2008
* Kathleen Benison, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 03/31/2008
* USD 208,070.00

EAR-0433040&lt;br/&gt;Benison&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An NSF Biogeosciences grant
has been awarded to Drs. Melanie R. Mormile, Francisca E. Oboh-Ikuenobe
(University of Missouri-Rolla), and Kathleen C. Benison (Central Michigan
University) to determine if evaporites truly trap a representative population of
microorganisms from hypersaline environments. If this is found to be true, these
findings can possibly be extrapolated to microorganisms entrapped in ancient or
possibly extraterrestrial evaporites and used to describe previous microbial
communities and therefore, make interpretations about past water chemistries and
past climates. Microorganisms represent the basic life forms existing in most
environmental settings. They are sensitive to climatic parameters, and can
influence water chemistry, biological activity, and mineralization. Evaporite
minerals are a wealth of paleoenvironmental data due to their sensitivity to
climate, water chemistry, and hydrology. In addition, evaporites can form in
extreme environmental conditions, such as extremely acid saline lakes in Western
Australia. These lakes might serve as good analogs to Mars. Traditionally,
studies of evaporite settings and their deposits have overlooked microorganisms
largely because they are generally poorly preserved in the rock record. However,
through this research, answers to the following questions will be found: What
microorganisms are present in the lake waters, groundwaters, and sediments of
acid and neutral saline lake environments? Are the microorganisms found living
in the waters represented in the fluid inclusions of the evaporite minerals? Are
the microorganisms specific acidophiles? What role did the microorganisms play
in the evolution of the water chemistry? To answer these questions, a sampling
trip will be made to Australia to collect a comprehensive set of lake water,
groundwater, evaporite, and siliciclastic sediment samples. The following
objectives will be achieved: 1. Identify and compare the biological remains in
halite and gypsum with those in their parent waters and sediments. Both
traditional culture methods and molecular biology techniques will be used to
compare the microbial populations in the environments listed above. 2. Grow
evaporite crystals under laboratory conditions to study selected environmental
influences on crystal formation and the microorganisms that become entrapped. 3.
Identify any differences in microorganisms (ranging from prokaryotes to
freshwater dinoflagellates and algae) between neutral and moderately acidic
saline lakes and groundwaters in Victoria and Western Australia, between neutral
and extremely acidic saline lakes within a small region of Western Australia, as
well as among extremely acidic saline lakes and groundwaters in Western
Australia. The 16S rDNA from the bacteria isolated from these environments will
be sequenced and compared. 4. Constrain depositional, environmental, and
climatic conditions using basic sedimentology, petrography, fluid inclusion
studies, and palynology. Sedimentary structures and grain characteristics will
be used to trace depositional history. &lt;br/&gt;We anticipate that novel
microorganisms will be found. These organisms can possibly be used for the
bioremediation of contaminated sites that are impacted by extremes in saline and
acidic conditions. In addition, our findings will have implications for future
Mars research and the possibility that life can occur on planetary bodies
besides Earth. Of all the planetary bodies explored, Mars most closely resemble
Earth. In particular, terrestrial acid sedimentary systems are similar in
general mineralogy, geochemistry, and geomorphology to the Martian surface.
Furthermore, this project will be responsible for the training of students
ranging from undergraduate level to Post-Doctoral students. There is also a
significant outreach component that includes a partnership with the St. Louis
Science Center as well as a course on the geology and microbiology of extreme
environments targeted towards K-12 educators.&lt;br/&gt;