* 0433941
* Molecular Mechanisms of Soluble Fe(III) Reduction by Metal-Reducing Members of the Genus Shewanella
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Thomas DiChristina, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 416,250.00

Iron is the fourth most abundant element in the Earth's crust and plays an
essential role in the biogeochemical cycling of many elements. Yet little is
known about microbially mediated Fe(III) reduction in anaerobic systems. Such
reactions are to a wide variety of environmentally significant processes,
including the biogeochemical cycling of Fe, Mn, trace elements, and phosphate;
degradation of organic matter; weathering of Fe(III)-containing clays and
minerals; and biomineralization of Fe(II)-bearing minerals such as magnetite.
This work, which will be carried out by researchers at the Georgia Institute of
Technology, strives to determine the molecular mechanism by which metal-reducing
members of the genus Shewanella solubilize and subsequently reduce soluble
Fe(III). Complementary genetic, biochemical, and in situ voltammetric approaches
will be used to clone the Shewanella genes involved in solubilization and
subsequent reduction of soluble Fe(III). The soluble Fe(III) reductases
expressed from these genes will be analyzed for protein structural
characteristics and electron donor oxidation and electron acceptor reduction
activities via in situ voltammetry. The purified reductases will also be used as
the antigen to generate soluble Fe(III) reductase antibodies for determining the
subcellular location of the reductases in Shewanella. Soluble Fe(III) in natural
environments may originate from Fe(III)-reducing bacteria which synthesize and
excrete Fe(III)-solubilizing compounds. This work will provide the first
evidence that Fe(III)-reducing bacteria play a significant role in the
production of soluble Fe(III). Results from our proposed study will also
demonstrate the importance of the solubilization of solid Fe(III) by
Fe(III)-reducing bacteria in iron cycling. Because the bioavailability of
Fe(III) depends on the crystallinity of solid Fe(III), the availability of
exogenous chelators, or the abundance of active sites onto solid Fe(III), it is
possible that Fe(III)-reducing bacteria adapt to their environmental conditions
by using multiple Fe(III) reduction pathways. The proposed research will provide
novel information on the genes and predicted gene products required to
synthesize and excrete endogenous Fe(III)-solubilizing compounds and Fe(III)
reductases. This information will be used in subsequent studies to determine the
chemical composition of the solubilizing compounds and will provide insights
into this possibility by focusing on a poorly studied pathway. Results from our
study will help refine diagenetic models in which Fe(III) is assumed to be a
reactive solid and may therefore have a significant impact on the fields of
biogeochemistry. In terms of broader educational impacts, this study will engage
students from two disparate, yet complementary disciplines who will combine
their expertise to tackle a complex biogeochemical problem.