* 0433693
* The Neural Basis of Risky Decision Making
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Russell Poldrack, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 09/30/2008
* USD 764,118.00

This grant, funded under the Human and Social Dynamics (HSD) Competition for FY
2004, provides funding for a set of studies that use functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the brain systems involved in decision
making. Many decisions must be made without advance knowledge of their
consequences and under some degree of physical or financial risk. Whereas the
cognitive processes involved in decision making under risk are well understood,
the brain systems that underlie these processes have only begun to be explored.
This project will examine how brain pathways for the processing of reward and
punishment are involved in decision making, by imaging brain activity while
individuals make decisions regarding risky gambles (for example, the choice
between a sure receipt $20 or a 50/50 chance of either $50 or $0). Factors to be
examined include the relation of risky and riskless decisions, the effects of
extreme probabilities on risky decision making, and the dynamics of decision
making in a context of changing risk. Measures of skin conductance will be
obtained during imaging, so that physiological arousal can be quantified and
related to behavior and brain activity. Analyses will focus on whether activity
in particular brain regions related to the experience of reward or punishment
will be predictive of the individual's decisions. Each subject's behavior will
also be characterized using formal decision theory models, and the parameters
describing this behavior will be related to brain activity.

If successful, this research will provide novel insights into how the brain
makes decisions. In particular, the results will help to relate quantitative
models of behavioral decision making with their neurobiological underpinnings.
Knowledge about the neural basis of decision making will encourage convergence
across models at the neural and cognitive levels, and will provide
neuroscientists with new ways to characterize the relation between brain
activity and behavior.