* 0433980
* Groundwater Ecosystems:  The Interdependence of Microbial Mineral Weathering and Population Diversity
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2009
* Jennifer Roberts, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 10/31/2009
* USD 393,746.00

Groundwater ecosystems: The interdependence of microbial mineral weathering and
population diversity&lt;br/&gt;Jennifer A. Roberts, David Graham, and William D.
Picking, University of Kansas &lt;br/&gt;Rachel O'Brien, Allegheny
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation of bacteria in mineral weathering is
now an accepted, even expected component of subsurface geochemistry.
Microorganisms have been found at depths exceeding 3 kilometers and at
temperatures approaching 100C, and there is growing evidence that the
biochemical functions of these organisms may be the driving force behind many
low temperature mineral-weathering reactions. The scientific community has only
begun documenting microbial-catalyzed reactions, however, and many questions
arise. Do the responsible organisms benefit from weathering reactions? How does
mineral dissolution affect biodiversity in colonizing microbial communities?
Such weathering reactions have likely been operative since the beginning of
geologic time. Therefore, understanding such phenomena, and the associated
organisms, not only provides an immediate picture of ambient weathering
phenomena, but might also provide insights into microbial evolution and factors
that control subsurface biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;There are two goals for this
work. First, we will investigate nutrient-driven and metal-inhibited microbial
weathering of synthetic and natural silicate phases using native consortia from
a from six distinct groundwater ecosystems (temperate hardwood forest, tropical
forest, tropical clearcut grassland, temperate tallgrass prairie, boreal
wetland, and a tropical wetland). The results of this work will demonstrate how
trace concentrations of nutrients and metals in the solid phase influence
microbial weathering reactions. Second, we will characterize microbial activity,
community composition, and biodiversity in a select group of groundwater
ecosystems. Following this characterization we will examine the microbial
population succession that results from the introduction and weathering of
nutrient- and metal-bearing silicates.&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will
lend insight into the influence of silicate-bound nutrients and metals on
microbial weathering, and how mineral composition and weathering reactions
impact the biodiversity of the surface colonizing microbial community for a
variety of groundwater ecosystems. Our investigations will also elucidate how
modern microbial weathering processes function, and in turn, may help identify
key processes through geologic time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;