* 0433835
* C-RUI: Geomicrobial Processes in an Ancient Methane Seep Deposit: Resolving Temporal and Spatial Shifts in Localized Microbial Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Karla Parsons-Hubbard, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2007
* USD 70,700.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tepee Buttes (~76 Ma, Campanian) of Colorado
provide an excellent opportunity to model the preserved record of geomicrobial
processes at a fossil methane seep at a scale that has not been realized. The
broad aerial extent, accessibility, and quality of preservation allow for the
development of a genetic model of carbonate precipitation over time at
individual seeps and throughout the entire field. As the precipitation is
mediated by both anaeorobic oxidation of methane (AOM) and bacterial sulfate
reduction (BSR), the geologic record serves as a proxy for how the localized
microbial ecosystems vary temporally and spatially through the life cycle of an
individual seep. This proposal seeks to address the depth within the sediment at
which carbonate production occurs, to quantify whether the carbonate produced
from localized microbial ecosystems differs geochemically and petrographically
from carbonate associated with chemosymbiotic invertebrates, and to model how
the biogeochemical parameters vary in time and space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary work on the Tepee Buttes has demonstrated that
the complex paragenetic sequence of petrofabrics will, along with the stable
isotopic ratios, be useful in developing a model of the formation of the
carbonate mounds, including depth of formation. The recognition of bacterial
body fossils and microbialite will allow us to map the adjustment of localized
microbial ecosystems over the lifecycle of each butte. Carbon and oxygen stable
isotope analyses have shown that there is variation among sequences between
buttes and we will address these phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to
address the temporal and spatial sequencing of the microbially induced
carbonate/sulfide production through a collaborative project involving two
undergraduate institutions (Gustavus Adolphus and Oberlin Colleges) and a major
research university (University of Missouri, Columbia). The research entails
detailed field mapping over an approximately 3 km2 area, taphonomic and
petrographic study, and isotope geochemistry. In the field, surface components
of the mounds will be mapped to demonstrate microbial ecosystem distribution in
relation to carbonate phases and invertebrate populations. In the laboratory, we
will build upon earlier successes by applying a multi-directed analytical
approach involving petrography (cathodoluminescence, x-ray fluorescence),
SEM/EDS, and stable isotope ratios (C, O, and S).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Knowledge of the genesis of the Tepee
Buttes will provide important tools for defining microbial-sediment interactions
in modern and ancient seep settings.an active research area for (paleo)
biologists, geologists, and geophysicists. By applying a collaborative approach,
the PIs will gain from the individual strengths in microbial paleontology,
taphonomy, and isotope geochemistry focused on refining biogeochemical proxies
for recognizing the fossil record of microbial ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The results of this project will be valuable to researchers studying
biogeochemical patterns at both fossil and modern methane seeps. The
dissemination plan calls for the development of a DVD/CD-ROM for educators that
will open up the dynamic and complex world of microbial-sediment interactions in
methane seeps to a broad audience. This research will provide critical primary
research experience for at least four undergraduate students who will be
involved in all aspects of the research including formulation of field strategy,
laboratory analysis, and preparation of manuscripts. The students will gain an
appreciation for collaboration through the experience and teaching workshops,
and the project will broadly impact the undergraduate research capabilities and
teaching pedagogies of the PIs. &lt;br/&gt;