* 0433158
* Collaborative Research: Place-Based Decision Support for Spatial and Temporal Transference of Risk and Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Susan Cutter, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 09/30/2008
* USD 453,350.00

Place-Based Decision Support for Spatial and Temporal Transference of Risk and
Hazards&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of inequality (geographic,
temporal, social) is one of the least understood concepts in vulnerability
science, an emergent multidisciplinary field focused on what makes people and
places vulnerable to environmental threats from natural, technological, or
human-induced threats. This research examines the different impacts of hazards
and risks on people and the places they live and will develop new methods and
models for measuring vulnerability (and resilience) to extreme events and
chronic risks at the local level. Two place-based case studies will serve as
test-beds for linking theory, concepts, methods, and models in a GIS-based
decision support tool kit. The case study sites, Los Angeles, CA and Charleston,
SC were chosen based on the mix of common and unique hazards (hurricanes,
earthquakes), a range in scale-dependent complexities of the regions, the nature
of the built environment, and the local knowledge of team
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a protocol and tool kit
for gathering information to guide and advance knowledge of the changing
distribution and nature of hazards vulnerability. It will transfer such
knowledge and tools to the practitioner community, thus providing the scientific
basis for decisions regarding hazard preparedness, planning, response, and
reduction at the federal, state, and local levels. It will also help train the
next generation of vulnerability scientists.&lt;br/&gt;