* 0433010
* Collaborative Research: The Measurement and Neural Foundations of Strategic IQ
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2008
* Colin Camerer, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2008
* USD 200,429.00

The investigators will combine approaches from economics, decision science, and
cognitive neuroscience. The goal is to develop a system to measure how well
different people reason in strategic social situations, and to explore how
specific parts of the brain may be involved in strategic decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators plan to develop a measure to
summarize how specific individuals perform in a set of strategic tasks conducted
in a laboratory environment. They will administer these tasks -- eg, test
"strategic IQ" --to individuals in separate groups with distinct
characteristics. Three groups are made up of people who we might expect to be
especially good at strategic thinking: mathematically gifted undergraduate
students, students trained in the formal analysis of strategic thinking (game
theory), and experienced business managers. The fifth group are individuals with
specialized brain lesions that have specific and well-documented effects on
cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from all groups will be combined to test a
new theory developed by two of the PIs about how people learn to think
strategically. An additional study will involve only members of the fifth group.
These individuals will also complete strategic tasks while undergoing fMRI brain
imaging scans. The goal is to link evidence about the "games" that these
participants play poorly with evidence from brain images, to link specific kinds
of errors to specific brain circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;