* 0433818
* Improved Mentoring, Professional Development, and Recruitment of Educators for Secondary Science and Math
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Kathryn Watkins, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 12/31/2009
* USD 500,000.00

The Robert Noyce Scholarship program at the University of New Mexico (UNM) is
recruiting and preparing 22 to 34 new science and mathematics teachers for
Albuquerque Public Schools and the Bernalillo Public Schools. The program is
administered through the College of Arts and Sciences and the Albuquerque
Teachers Institute, a program in the College of Arts and Sciences that supports
K-12 outreach activities. Recruitment efforts target departments with large
numbers of STEM majors and the School of Engineering. A new interdisciplinary
course, Teaching Environmental Science, provides early field experiences for
undergraduate students to encourage science teaching as a career. Special
efforts to mentor Noyce Scholars include Master Teacher Mentors and summer
professional development programs offered through the Albuquerque Teachers
Institute. The mentoring efforts are designed to help teachers through the
difficult first years. The project's objectives include: 1) a 30 to 50% increase
in the number of STEM teachers graduating from UNM; 2) an increase in the number
of highly trained teachers in high need school districts; 3) greater visibility
of teacher training programs to all STEM majors; 4) increased numbers of STEM
students that consider teaching careers due to advertising and early field
experiences through the Noyce program; 5) better retention of new teachers
through improved mentoring activities; and 6) effective assessment of Noyce
scholars and a comparison group of new teachers.