* 0433445
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - New Perspectives for Boundary Value Problems and Their Asymptotics; May 16-20, 2005; Edinburg, TX
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Lokenath Debnath, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/2005
* USD 32,000.00

An NSF-CBMS Regional Conference on New Perspectives for Boundary Value Problems
and Their Asymptotics is proposed to be held at the Department of Mathematics,
University of Texas-Pan American (UTPA), May 16-20, 2005. Professor Athanassios
Fokas, Chair of Nonlinear Mathematical Sciences at the University of Cambridge,
has agreed to serve as the Principal Lecturer of the conference. Professor Fokas
will deliver ten lectures on the topic at the proposed conference. The objective
of the proposed lectures is to give a self-contained and comprehensive
exposition on a new method of Fokas and on the Deift-Zhou method for the
analysis of boundary value problems and their asymptotics. These methods provide
a unification as well as significant extension of the following three
topics:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) The classical transform methods for solving
linear partial differential equations (PDEs) and several of its variants such as
the method of images and the Wiener-Hopf technique,&lt;br/&gt;(ii) The integral
representation of the solution of linear PDEs in terms of the Ehrenpreis
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;principle, and&lt;br/&gt;(iii) The inverse scattering
method for solving the initial value problem for nonlinear
evolution&lt;br/&gt;equations. Special attention will be given to both the long
time asymptotics and the zero&lt;br/&gt;diffusion limit of boundary value
problems for integrable nonlinear evolution PDEs.