* 0433560
* Cerium Ferromagnets at the Quantum Critical Point
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Zachary Fisk, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2005
* USD 125,695.00

Control variables such as chemical composition, applied pressure and applied
magnetic field can be used to change the low temperature state of many
intermetallic compounds of the element Ce from antiferromagnetically ordered to
non-magnetic. This is achieved through lowering the ordering temperature, using
a control variable, to T = 0K, the so-called quantum critical point. The
realization that the rarely found unconventional superconductivity occurs in
many if not all cases in this quantum critical regime now brings to the study of
highly correlated electronic materials a focussed avenue for exploring the deep
and imperfectly known connection between magnetism and exotic superconductivity,
physics strongly implicated in high Tc cuprtate materials. This individual
investigator award supports a project that will extend these studies into
ferromagnetic Ce materials, allowing exploration of new aspects of the physics
involved. The investigation of new materials is a primary experimental strategy
in this research, pursuing in particular structure/property correlations - the
elusive goal of materials driven physics. In addition to training post doctoral
fellows and graduate students in materials driven condensed matter research,
undergraduate and high school students will be introduced in the laboratory to
condensed matter research through single crystal growth of new materials. The
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows involved with this research will gain
the experience of performing research at national facilities and laboratories.
In addition they will become more globally aware through participation in
international collaborations.

Almost magnetic metallic materials near absolute zero have properties differing
from usual metals. Exotic superconductivity has been discovered in a number of
such materials in the neighborhood of this so-called quantum critical point,
superconductivity which appears closely associated with the incipient magnetism
and which may be closely related to the superconductivity of high Tc cuprates.
This individual investigator award supports a research project that will explore
cerium ferromagnetic materials across the magnetic/non-magnetic boundary, a
class of materials which has been little studied in this connection and which
presents new aspects of the physics involved. The goals are to understand the
deep tie between unconventional superconductivity and magnetism, learn how to
discover new materials which express this physics and extend this understanding
into the richer and vaster field offered by new transition metal materials with
potential technical applications. Graduate students and post doctoral fellows
will be trained how to use the variable of new materials to conduct condensed
matter physics research. They will have the experience of performing research at
national facilities and laboratories. In addition they will become more globally
aware through participation in international collaborations. Undergraduate and
high school students will be introduced to condensed matter physics through the
synthesis of new materials.