* 0433990
* Hedonic Models of Location Decisions with Applications to Geospatial Microdata
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Lars Nesheim, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2008
* USD 600,000.00

The sorting of firms to locations, workers to firms, and families to
neighborhoods are important elements of economic life. Central to the theory of
local public goods and housing markets is the sorting of people into group of
agents, in order to exploit their comparative advantages. Agents specialize in
the activities that are most beneficial to them. The choices of peoples about
where to work and live and the choices of firms about where to locate and
operate are dynamic processes driven by a variety of factors, many of which are
geospatial in nature. These geospatial factors include inherent physical
attributes (such as rivers), human-created physical attributes (such as public
infrastructures), and dynamic social and economic interrelationships (such as
geopolitical entities like school districts, taxing bodies, or local zoning
boards). Two issues have limited the scientific understanding of these types of
processes and their role in human and social dynamics. First, data limitations
have often prevented social scientists from accurately measuring a combination
of geospatial and socioeconomic factors at a scale sufficiently fine to
disentangle the role each plays in economic and social decision processes.
Second, sophisticated economic models accounting for the diversity and
heterogeneity of firms and consumers and the richness of the equilibrium sorting
process are only now reaching their full empirical potential. This
interdisciplinary research project will address both issues. The researchers
will develop spatial social science tools to track the geospatial
characteristics of human social sorting processes used by both firms and
households, and they will use these tools together with new developments in
hedonic analysis. The project will provide a method for modeling social dynamics
by estimating the value of location-specific attributes, both for inherent
geophysical attributes as well as those that are created over time by human
interaction. The model will generate a characterization of the equilibrium
resulting from the sorting process of firms, workers, and households and will
provide a structure that can be estimated with the generated geospatial data.
This will enable researchers to describe spatial data and will allow them to
identify and estimate structural features of the data, which can then be used to
understand how the economic and social system will respond to changes in the
economic environment such as technological and demographic changes. Several data
sources will be combined in this project to create measures of geospatial
attributes and will use them with the hedonic methodology to study specific
empirical models of location decisions and location
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and combine
theoretical and empirical advances in hedonic models of human and social
dynamics with advances in spatial social science. It will provide a better
understanding of the dynamics of sorting. It will provide modeling tools to
study the mechanisms of social and economic dynamics in the context of location
decisions. It will provide empirical tools to measure geospatial attributes.
These new tools will be applicable to many policy relevant issues that have
important social implications, including environmental justice, racial
segregation, school quality, community infrastructure, public amenities, and
noxious facilities. Researchers in many fields, including economics, geography,
geographic information science, and regional science, will be able to take
advantage of the new tools. This project is supported by an award resulting from
the FY 2004 NSF-wide competition on Human and Social Dynamics (HSD). Coordinated
management of the HSD competition and the portfolio of HSD awards involves all
NSF directorates and offices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;