* 0433358
* Global Prices and Incomes, 1200-1950 - First Stage
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Peter Lindert, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 573,353.00

This project will develop a dataset on incomes and prices over six continents
and seven centuries. The data expedition seeks better answers to several
questions. Which countries were more productive in the past? Where have living
standards been high, and shy? Was there an early modern "great divergence"
between Western Europe and Eastern Asia, or did their economic differences
antedate Columbus or even the Black Death?

The project is designed to also compare prices, incomes, and productivity across
places and regions for each date. This means that all measures will be converted
to modern metric units with partial adjustments for quality differences. The PIs
will also carry out original archival research to gather data. Archival studies
will focus on East and Southeast Asia, African ports, Western Asia, medieval
Northwest Europe, and Latin America.

The PIs will also collect and evaluate their data to facilitate integrating
their database with the Penn World Tables, which tracks global economic outcomes
since 1950.

The international PI team will make their data and results immediately available
to the public through on-line access. Expected interest is high, since the Penn
World Tables are important to the UN, the World Bank, the OECD, and other public
agencies and NGOs

This award is made as part of the FY 2004 Human and Social Dynamics (HSD)
portfolio, following a competition that involved participation from all NSF
Directorates and Offices. HSD awards are administered through specific programs
that may change during the award period; management of all HSD awards is
coordinated on an NSF-wide basis.