* 0434354
* MSPA-CSE: Novel A Posteriori Analysis of Ecological Models: The Carbon Cycle
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Jay Breidt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2009
* USD 499,989.00

Many ecological models, such as the Integrated Regional Carbon Cycle Model
describing the cycling of mass and energy and exchange of materials at the
earth's surface, are characterized by complex, nonlinear interactions between
different physical sub-systems acting on a vast range of scales. The
investigators will develop and apply new tools for quantifying and controlling
the effects of the uncertainty in a differential equation model, such as those
that arise from experimental measurement, and for fitting such models to
physical measurements. The new tools will be based on a combination of an a
posteriori analysis technique that has been used with wide success in
engineering and statistical methodology used for complex data sets. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Models of the biosphere are becoming indispensable in the analysis
and prediction of large-scale environmental change, including global warming.
However, the complexity of modern models demands new approaches for analysis
that combine deterministic and statistical mathematics in order to allow the
rapid incorporation of new scientific understanding (e.g., new relevant
processes) and data sources (e.g. new satellite technologies) and to quantify
the effects of uncertainties in the representation of terrestrial systems. The
combination of the power of the mathematical and statistical tools being
employed in this project and the interdisciplinary mode of collaboration between
the investigators yields substantial promise of significant advances on
critically important issues in ecological modeling.&lt;br/&gt;