* 0434813
* Teachers' Domain Pathways to Science: Rich-Media Sources for K-12 Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Theodore Sicker, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,849,133.00

The WGBH Educational Foundation is expanding its TEACHERS' DOMAIN initiative to
include an integrated set of digital pathways to promote, guide, and support the
effective use of rich-media science resources by K-12 teachers, both in the
classroom and for professional development. Addressing each of the core subject
areas in the K-12 science curriculum (Life, Physical, and Earth Sciences), this
initiative features: 1) aggregation of video, interactive, and other rich-media
resources drawn from across the National Science Digital Library (NSDL) and
other collections; 2) adaptation of all assembled resources to conform to the
validated TEACHERS' DOMAIN model, presenting contextualizing information such as
background essays, lesson plans, and correlations to national and state-level
standards; and 3)dissemination, outreach, and support provided through digital
pathways produced specifically for this target audience, including a
professional development course, online workshops, classroom videos, and CD-ROM
demonstrations, to assure widespread distribution and informed use in
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this initiative lies in
the active participation of scientists and science education experts from the
Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS), the Digital Library for Earth
System Education (DLESE), and the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics,
and by WGBH's established capacity to develop compelling teacher training
resources that fully engage and inspire the user. The Center for Children and
Technology (CCT) at EDC is conducting ongoing evaluation to assess needs of
target audience as well as impact of products and services provided. The project
is ensuring broad and sustained national impact by working through the NSDL Core
Integration Team, its Policy Committee and Standing Committees, and other
developers of library collections and services. Additional activities underway
to assure the sustainability of this stewardship function include the
exploration of a partnership with the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) and its
349 independent member stations. The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in
the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the
Division of Earth Sciences in the NSF Directorate for Geosciences are providing
significant co-funding of this project in recognition of the value of this work
in advancing the larger educational goals of MPS and GEO.&lt;br/&gt;