* 0434666
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY 2005
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Amy Bouck, Bouck Amy C
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 01/31/2007
* USD 120,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
Informatics for FY 2005. The fellowship supports research and training at the
postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
these fellowships will play important roles in training the future workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "A comparative
genomic investigation of population-level forces governing the evolution of
selfish DNA transposable elements." This research combines the comparative
method of evolutionary biology with informatics and sequence databases developed
from model plant systems in order to investigate the evolutionary dynamics of
DNA transposable elements (sometimes called "selfish genes" or "genetic
parasites"). Transposable elements constitute the largest classes of
identifiable sequences in many genomes and are important agents of genetic
variation. The dynamics of Miniature Inverted Repeat Transposable Elements
(MITEs) among 18 closely related species of the plant genus Mimulus are being
analyzed. Mimulus has been a model system for studies of plant ecology and
population biology for over 50 years because their populations are particularly
notable for being evolutionarily labile in mating system. This study focuses on
the effects of host mating system on the evolutionary dynamics of genomic MITEs.

The fellowship provides training in computer and sequence-based research
methods, as well as the opportunity to develop insight into applying
bioinformatic resources to studies of diverse species. These objectives are
being met by a combination of intensive computer based research, directed
readings, participation in a training course at Cold Spring Harbor Labs, and
attendance at scientific meetings. In addition to mentoring students at Duke
University, the Fellow participates in the Educational Outreach Program in the
Durham Public School System.