* 0434897
* Glovers Reef Marine Research Station -- A Resource for Greater Understanding of the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Tim McClanahan, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2007
* USD 56,137.00

A grant has been awarded to the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) under the
direction of Dr. Archie Carr III for partial support to enhance the Station's
ability to serve as a base for research and higher education learning in the
Caribbean. Glovers Reef Marine Research Station is located approximately 45 km
off the coast of Belize and offers the scientific community an opportunity to
conduct high quality, replicable research at one of the Caribbean's most complex
and important coral reef systems. As currently configured, the Station can house
only eight researchers. With this limited capacity, the Station could not host
field courses and could not accommodate simultaneous visits by multiple-
investigator projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support of the NSF's Field Stations
and Marine Laboratories Program will enable the WCS to make the Station
available to a larger number of researchers through a modest expansion of the
station's scientific capacity and will support the wider dissemination of
results of that research through improved data management. WCS has already
expanded the capacity of the Station from eight to 16 researchers. Additional
facilities improvement that will be supported by the FSML program include
construction of a small classroom/meeting room that can be used for field course
activities. WCS will also use support of the FSML program to expand the existing
dry laboratory to accommodate a wet laboratory. Finally, WCS will develop a
spatially explicit web-based database to record metadata on ongoing and
completed research activities conducted at the Station. This database will allow
researchers planning future courses and investigations at the Station to
understand what work has already been done and where it has been done in and
around Glovers Reef Atoll. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical marine research
stations are outposts for the collection of basic scientific information that
increasingly has relevance to global discussions of climate change, depletion of
wild fish stocks, and ecosystem changes in the marine environment. Research
conducted at the Station is helping to provide scientific insights into a set of
questions including why reefs of the Caribbean have experienced a shift to algal
dominance over the last decade and what steps might be taken to promote the
recovery of coral dominance; to what extent fish larvae are dispersed across the
Mesoamerican Reef system and what mechanisms govern that dispersal; how reserves
can be designed to maximize benefits to both fishermen and fish populations; and
how various fish and invertebrate populations respond quantitatively to various
management measures. The answers to these questions help inform management of
reef systems in the Caribbean and around the world. Furthermore, the Station and
its "natural laboratory" of Glovers Reef Atoll serve as a dynamic, unique marine
classroom that can give high school, university, graduate, and post doctoral
level students an opportunity to understand the functioning of marine
ecosystems. Support of the FSML Program will increase the number of students and
scientific researchers who can use these facilities and the results of research
conducted at Glovers Reef Marine Research Station.&lt;br/&gt;