* 0434894
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Effect of Interactions between Estradiol and Mechanical Loading on Human Longitudinal and Periosteal Bone Growth
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Daniel Lieberman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 9,815.00

This study tests a hypothesized mechanism for two well-documented trends in
human skeletal evolution: that recent humans are less robust than earlier modern
humans, and that humans from warm climates have longer, less robust limbs than
humans from cold climates. The general hypothesis is that there is a
relationship between limb proportions and skeletal robusticity, because the
processes by which bones grow in length and in thickness are both influenced by
the hormone estrogen during skeletal growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
prediction is that variation in estrogen levels among individuals alters 1) the
expression of the estrogen receptor, which affects how bones respond to
mechanical loading (e.g. from exercise), and 2) the activity of cartilage cells
in the growth plate, which affects how bones grow in length. If the extent to
which bones respond to mechanical loading varies among individuals or
populations, then patterns of human skeletal robusticity may reflect both
loading history and changes in the levels of hormones such as estrogen.
Similarly, if interactions between estrogen levels and mechanical loading affect
bone length, then patterns of limb length may reflect habitual activity as well
as adaptations to climate. Distinguishing among these alternatives is crucial
for improving our interpretations of human adaptation and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 45-day experiment will use 24 sheep (Ovis
aries), divided into low, normal and high estrogen treatment groups. Half of
each group will be sedentary, and half will exercise daily. Fluorochrome dyes
will label bone growth. Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (rtPCR) will quantitatively measure estrogen receptor-a expression.
Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) immunoreactivity will measure
cartilage cell proliferation. The preliminary experimental results support the
hypothesis that variation in estrogen level influences epiphyseal growth and
diaphyseal responses to loading, and thus may affect patterns of skeletal
robusticity in humans. In a small sample of juvenile sheep, differences in
estrogen level and exercise had significant and dramatic effects on periosteal
growth rate in the femur and tibia. For example, mean daily apposition rate in
the femora of exercised animals is 44% higher in high-estrogen than in low-
estrogen animals (p&lt;.05), and 26% higher than in sedentary, high-estrogen
animals (p&lt;.05). Epiphyseal height also varies with estrogen level and
exercise: the height of the metatarsal growth plate is 41% greater (p&lt;.025),
and there are 29% more proliferative chondrocytes (p&lt;.05), in high-estrogen
exercised vs. sedentary animals, and the height of the distal tibia growth plate
is 25% greater in low-estrogen exercised vs. sedentary animals (p&lt;.025).
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will promote the integration of graduate
training and research in physical anthropology with experimental physiology and
skeletal endocrinology. The experiments will address a number of basic
biological questions about how interactions between estrogen and strain affect
longitudinal and periosteal bone growth. The specific effects of interactions
between hormone levels and environmental stimuli on human bone growth have never
been studied, but are quite relevant to a number of clinical issues, including
the attainment of peak bone density and prevention of osteoporosis. For this
reason, the results of this study will be disseminated in biomedical as well as
anthropological journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;