* 0434405
* AgrowKnowledge: The National Center for Agriscience and Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Terry Brase, Kirkwood Community College
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 06/30/2009
* USD 2,999,974.00

AgrowKnowledge, The National Center for Agriscience and Technology Education, is
continuing its leadership with its specific focus on agriculture technology
education in community colleges and secondary schools. Sixteen AgrowKnowledge
Community College Partners and their local secondary programs, a five member
University Council, and an active Industry Council share a vision for 21st
century agricultural technology education in which students from diverse
backgrounds: &lt;br/&gt; 1. Pursue rigorous, high quality programs of study in
Agriculture, Food, and Natural Resources (AFNR) with coursework that emphasizes
technology, mathematics, and science skills; &lt;br/&gt;2. Move through a
seamless educational system with clear articulation plans among secondary
schools, community colleges, and universities; and &lt;br/&gt;3. Graduate from
college well prepared for a dynamic and increasingly technological workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the Center is in its effort to
expand curriculum and faculty development and to institutionalize science,
mathematics, and technology as an integral part of student learning in
agriculture technology education. By having the University Council as part of
the consortium, AgrowKnowledge adds a research component, particularly in the
areas of articulation, recruitment, teacher education, and technology transfer.
Their involvement, with that of the Industry Council, also helps validate
curriculum and instruction projects, which are aligned with national standards
for science, mathematics, and technology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the Center is on students who, because of their exposure to emerging
technology, find themselves better prepared to enter agricultural careers,
whether assuming responsibility for the family farm, working as an industry
technician, or continuing their education for a professional degree in
agriculture science, research, or education. The 16 AgrowKnowledge Partners
reach out to a growing number of community colleges and secondary schools. As a
result, the Center is producing educational models, workshops, curriculum
guides, and instructional materials for an ever larger number of students and
faculty across the country. The AgrowKnowledge Center's purpose is to create
systems that support student success; to provide curriculum with advanced
science, mathematics, and technology skills integrated; and to develop community
college faculty who use that curriculum or enhance their own courses and
programs. Activities include the following: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. Tracking
student enrollment and develop recruiting tools to include recruitment of
underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;2. Tracking changes in selected community
college agriculture students' mathematics and science scores. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Expanding the strong participation of 16 Lead Community College Partners to
include formal recruitment of 32 additional community colleges; &lt;br/&gt;4.
Increasing the number of faculty involved in Faculty Development Workshops by
instituting a process that replicates the workshops regionally; &lt;br/&gt;5.
Increasing community college partnerships with secondary and post-secondary
schools and business and industry by holding Vision 2020 planning institutes, a
process for building those partnerships and encouraging 2+2+2 articulation;
&lt;br/&gt;6. Developing curriculum guides for areas of study that support the
use of emerging technology in agriculture to include identification and/or
development of programs of study, coursework, and computer-based Learning
Objects. &lt;br/&gt;7. Enhancing the replication of curriculum with science,
technology, and mathematics integrated through the website clearinghouse.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While agriculture education might once have been
considered a diminishing part of the community college system, today there is a
renewed vitality, in part because of the efforts of AgrowKnowledge members who
are recruiting new students, especially from underrepresented categories, and
finding new ways to excite students about a promising future for agriculture.
&lt;br/&gt;