* 0434153
* UCI Noyce STEM Teaching Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Everly Fleischer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2010
* USD 499,985.00

A collaboration between the University of California, Irvine (UCI) Schools of
Physical and Biological Sciences, the UCI Department of Education, four regional
school districts, and two regional community colleges is providing the necessary
infrastructure to recruit, train, and provide professional support for future
mathematics and science teachers preparing to teach in high-need school
districts in the Orange County, California region. The UCI Noyce Scholarship
Program builds on the infrastructure provided by a UCI Math and Science
Partnership project to provide a comprehensive continuum of teacher preparation
programs and strategies that achieve objectives for teacher recruitment,
preparation for teaching success, and nurturing a commitment to teaching in a
high-need district. Approximately fifty three one-year scholarships are being
awarded over a four year period to: a) prospective secondary math and science
teachers who are UCI STEM majors in their senior and final undergraduate year,
and b) single subject math and science preservice teacher candidates enrolled in
the UCI fifth-year credential program. At least two senior year scholarships per
year are identified for UCI STEM majors who have transferred to UCI from a
partner community college. Scholarship recipients fulfill their teaching
commitment in partner schools districts where they have had previous apprentice
teaching experiences, and where they benefit from new teacher induction programs
and professional development opportunities. The program is developing strategies
and conditions for preparing and nurturing STEM majors for success in secondary
teaching in high-need regional school districts with diverse student
populations. One strategy is to provide a continuum of coherently linked
preparation and professional support experiences, in pre-credential, credential
and induction phases, that develop subject matter and pedagogic knowledge,
teacher growth through reflective inquiry, and leadership potential. Another
strategy is to create collaborations between the university, regional community
colleges, and regional high-need school districts, in order to provide a
continuum of experiences to develop aspiring teachers' knowledge about and
commitment to a school district and its community, teachers, and diverse student
population. Undergraduate baccalaureate programs in mathematics and the
sciences, combined with state-approved undergraduate subject matter preparation
programs, provide the foundation of subject matter knowledge that is critical
for the teaching success of scholarship recipients. Similarly, the UCI
undergraduate educational studies minor and the Teacher Credential Program
provide the necessary foundations of pedagogical knowledge and practice that
scholarship recipients need. &lt;br/&gt;