* 0434200
* Conference on Group Processes in Computer-Supported Interaction: Technological and Social Determinism
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Garold Stasser, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,500.00

The use of computer-supported interaction has become a primary feature of
communication among group members, due in part to its structural (freedom of
time and geographical constraints) and psychological (anonymity) features. As a
consequence, many group researchers have investigated the role of group process
variables in computer-supported interactions. Because groups communicate via the
use of computers in many personal, educational, and professional settings, it is
important to continue and encourage the study of group processes in such
environments. One theoretical issue that is implicit in many of the studies of
group process variables in computer-supported interaction is whether technology
is deterministic or determined. Spears and Lea (1994) recognized this issue when
discussing whether technology was a panacea, allowing for greater freedom of
expression and equality of status, or a panopticon, limiting expression and
increasing control due to its ability for surveillance. The purpose of this
conference is to bring together a diverse group of researchers with established
programs of research on group processes in computer-supported interaction. This
conference should serve to make the theme of technological and social
determinism more explicit, thus leading to greater unity in the dominant
research programs. The proposed conference offers a unique and timely theme, and
is cross-disciplinary and cross-cultural.