* 0434292
* Collaborative/Workshop:  Global Conference on Sustainable Product Development and Life Cycle Engineering; Technical Unversity Berlin; Berlin, Germany; 29 Sep 04 to 1 Oct 04
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Nabil Nasr, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 07/31/2005
* USD 13,555.00

This award supports an international workshop, to be held in Germany at the
Technical University of Berlin September 29 through October 1. The workshop is a
"Global Conference on Sustainable Product Development and Life-Cycle
Engineering" and is co-sponsored by TU Berlin and the German Deutsch
Forshungsgemeinschaft. The objectives of the conference are to assess the state-
of-the -art of Environmentally Benign Design and Manufacturing as compared to
the previous NSF sponsored WTEC study, to assess the gap between research and
applications in the field; to develop recommendations for moving towards
sustainable products and enterprises; and to identify specific areas of
potential collaboration between the EU and the US research teams. &lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will include keynote talks, breakout sessions for discussion of five
topical areas, and roundtable sessions across themes to generate synthesis
across the topical areas and provide networking opportunities for the US and EU
researchers. Funding includes support for participants from the US who have been
conducting research in EBDM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
award include the impact that identifying the barriers and creating research
opportunties to remove these barriers that EBDM will have on the future creation
of sustainable products. This will directly affect materials and resource use,
and will provide industry with the tools necessary to make decisions that better
address environmental impacts through advances in total life cycle assessment.
The Workshop will also address education issues so that current teaching and
experiential modules can be shared, and new educational needs identified. The
impact for potential research also crossed numerous disciplines - mechanical
engineering, industrial engineering, environmental engineering, materials
science, and economics.&lt;br/&gt;