* 0434788
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Investigating the Role of Residential Quarters in the Development of Mesopotamian Cities: The Case of Kazane Hoyuk
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Cynthia Robin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Cynthia Robin, Andrew Creekmore will study
neighborhood organization at Kazane Hoyok, an Early Bronze Age (ca. 3000 - 2000
B.C.) city in southeastern Turkey. Kazane was part of a wave of urban
development that swept across northern Mesopotamia in the third millennium B.C.
The residents of these cities lived in densely packed houses grouped into
neighborhoods. In order to study the socioeconomic structure of the city and the
role of residents in urban growth, development and collapse, this project will
focus on a neighborhood in the heart of Kazane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
neighborhood study is important because it addresses the social fabric of the
city rather than a single household or institution. The spatial organization of
a residential neighborhood, combined with patterns of production and consumption
across this space, can reveal the dynamics of urban growth. Characteristics of
house size, ground plans and street patterns, combined with evidence for craft
and food production and access to luxury goods can reveal the degree of city
planning, social inequality, and economic centralization in the city. Such an
investigation of everyday life within an urban neighborhood is necessary to
explain how the social and economic choices of residents contribute to urbanism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cities are so large that they are difficult to study
archaeologically. A study of a single house or street is not sufficient to
explain urban social diversity, but excavating large parts of cities with modern
techniques takes much time and money. To address this problem the present study
uses magnetometry. With magnetometry, a machine carried above the ground surface
measures differences in the magnetic field of buried features. This machine
quickly creates a map of subsurface remains. At Kazane Andrew has mapped a two-
hectare neighborhood, complete with houses, streets, open spaces and craft
production facilities. Andrew will use this map to conduct targeted excavations
that sample multiple structures and spaces within the neighborhood. When the
architectural plans are combined with samples of artifacts from each building,
the result will be a comprehensive picture of social and economic diversity
across an entire neighborhood in the city. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will be presented to the scientific community and the general
public via presentations at conferences in America and Europe, including Turkey,
and through publications in academic and popular journals as well as a project
website. In particular, this research is important for the citizens of Turkey
and the project region because it will rescue a significant part of Kazane from
impending destruction due to expanding irrigation works. For Andrew and several
undergraduate and graduate assistants, including Turkish students, this research
will provide valuable training in remote sensing, excavation, and archaeological
analysis. This project is significant cross-culturally because the problems of
urban social and economic organization, both in antiquity and modern times, are
of interest across the globe from Asia to Europe, Africa and the Americas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;