* 0434464
* 2005 RNA Editing Gordon Research Conference to be held January 23-28, 2005 in the Ventura Beach Marriott Hotel in Ventura, California
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Donna Driscoll, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2005
* USD 7,000.00

The 5th Gordon Research Conference on RNA Editing will be held January 23 to
January 28, 2005 in Ventura, CA. This biannual conference is the only regularly
scheduled meeting devoted exclusively to RNA editing and RNA modification. The
conference will bring together a small group of scientists for five days in a
casual setting that fosters informal discussion among participants. To promote
crossfertilization between the editing and modification communities, the
conference program will be organized in thematic sessions, which will focus on
questions of common interest, including: the discovery of important new enzyme
forms that catalyze diverse types of editing and modification; identification of
the molecular parts of multi-component editing and modifying machines;
delineation of critical sequences in target RNAs recognized by editing or
modifying enzymes from plants, Physarum, and yeast; unraveling the biosynthesis
and subcellular trafficking of various editing and modifying machines; solving
the atomic structures of several enzymes; and important new insights into the
roles of editing and modification in mediating cellular processes. This
conference will provide investigators with a unique opportunity to discuss new
hypotheses and models, exchange information about new experimental strategies,
generate ideas for future projects, and initiate collaborations. To stimulate
new ideas and strategies, several prominent scientists from outside the field
will be invited to present their recent groundbreakings studies on similar
questions in related systems. A major goal of the conference is to foster
education by encouraging the participation of junior scientists.