* 0434187
* U.S.-Portugal Collaborative Research: Characterization of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes for Environmental Implications and Energy Storage
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2006,03/31/2007
* Mark Rood, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 03/31/2007
* USD 4,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Rood 0434187&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks support
for a US PI, Mark Rood at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, and a
graduate student, to work with Prof. P.B. Mota at the University of Lisbon in
Portugal to develop a better understanding of the environmental implications of
nanomaterials and to seek novel materials to store renewable
fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merit. The collaboration is directed
toward two tasks. The first task is molecular simulations describing the
interactions between single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) and environmentally
relevant molecules to engineer interactions between SWNTs and environmental
relevant molecules to engineer controlled structures of SWNTs for specific
applications. The second task is to determine hydrogen storage capacities of
SWNTs chemically altered to have high adsorption capacities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The full-fledged use of nanomaterials is
expected within the next ten years, meaning that knowledge of their
environmental aspects will be in great demand. The research also aims to find an
inexpensive way to store energy. The success of this work will reduce the costs
of other energy and environmental studies worldwide. The research collaboration
will contribute to the globalization of scientific research and over an overseas
experience to the participating graduate student.