* 0434790
* SGER: Observing the Interdependence of Precipitation and Precipitable Water Vapor during the North American Monsoon Experiment (NAME)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Emil Kursinski, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/2005
* USD 44,326.00

The overall scientific objective of this investigation is to understand the
interdependence of the summertime precipitation and vertically integrated
precipitable water vapor (PWV) in the Sierra Madre Occidental (SMO) Mountains in
Northwestern Mexico during the North American Monsoon (NAM). The focus is on
characterizing and understanding, at several time scales, the PWV, boundary
layer moisture, winds, convective storm environment and precipitation and
evaporation within the SMO and how they are modulated by larger-scale weather
features, such as inverted troughs, tropical storms, and Gulf surges as well as
how they are affected by the previous day's convective activity. The PI
hypothesizes that a strong diurnal cycle in PWV exists within the NAME region
that leads to maximum convective available potential energy (CAPE) and minimum
convective inhibition (CIN) over the middle elevations, SMO foothills and the
Mexican thorn forest region, west of the divide of the SMO, coinciding with the
area of observed maximum summer rainfalls and convective storm intensities. It
is further hypothesized that this diurnal cycle of PWV is modulated
significantly by transient mesoscale and large-scale weather features that
frequently affect the NAME region during summer, e.g., organized and large
mesoscale convective systems (MCSs), northward surges of low-level moisture up
the Gulf of California, westward moving middle and upper-level cyclones and
inverted troughs, and northward moving tropical disturbances. To accomplish his
goals, the PI will place a network of 6 GPS receivers (that provide continuous
measurements of PWV) and surface meteorological instrumentation at locations
across the SMO to make observations during the NAME field campaign (summer
2004). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include improved understanding of
the processes that regulate summer rainfall over the North American monsoon
region, which can lead to more accurate precipitation forecasts of benefit to
societal activities including water management.