* 0434581
* Integral: Expanding the NSDL Reach to Traditional Libraries
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2009
* Il Im, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 11/30/2009
* USD 849,997.00

This project helps users both within and external to the National Science
Digital Library (NSDL) to quickly find relevant documents and services across
and beyond the spectrum of NSDL resources. The IntegraL (Integrating Libraries)
project brings the potentially huge user population of traditional libraries to
the NSDL through their own on-line resources (article databases, on-line
catalogs and special collections). Users interact with these systems as before,
but in addition, IntegraL automatically adds customized sets of context-
sensitive links within their displays to related NSDL resources and appropriate
services. Further links lead to related resources and appropriate services
within the traditional library systems. IntegraL adds links to the digital
library screens as well, leading NSDL users to related collections and
appropriate services both within digital library systems and (with
authentication) traditional library resources at their local libraries, as well
as to publicly accessible special collections. IntegraL integration ameliorates
the separate silos of information problem endemic to libraries that own a myriad
of independent systems. This results in more effective library resource
utilization, especially for lesser-known assets such as special collections,
since IntegraL leads users directly to appropriate resources. IntegraL's initial
implementation is testing direct NSDL access to many thousand users through the
largest public library in New Jersey, on-line accessibility to all New Jersey
public library users, and four college and university libraries.