* 0434826
* SGER:  Foundations for Bioproduction
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Lee Schruben, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 06/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

The promise of bioengineering to improve millions of lives will require
efficient production and supply chain logistics systems that can manufacture and
deliver millions of high quality, low cost products to patients. The objective
of this project is to study how industrial engineering and operations research
(IEOR) tools for designing such systems can be applied to biomanufacturing, and
to establish a research agenda so that current IEOR tools can be modified, and
new tools can be developed, to improve bioproduction systems efficiency. The
project goal is to develop a fundamental understanding of biomanufacturing by
exploring how differences in production scalability, cross-contamination,
regulation, and the therapeutic characteristics of biologics impact production
planning, capacity expansion planning and analysis, quality control, supply
chain optimization, production economics, and organization
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within other high-tech industries, IEOR tools
such as simulation, scheduling and production control, capacity planning and
production economics, quality control, and supply chain optimization have helped
to dramatically increase efficiency. The potential exists to impact the
biopharmaceutical industry in the same way. However, this is a very different
industry, with its own set of criteria, constraints, and issues that must be
understood and quantified. A clear articulation of these issues and potential
impact of IEOR technology on the biopharmaceutical industry will help establish
a research agenda in this area. This project will include a workshop with both
industrial and academic participation as well as form the basis for a new
graduate course on logistics and production systems for biomanufacturing. In
addition, best practices benchmarking using performance metrics for
productivity, speed, flexibility and quality will be initiated. &lt;br/&gt;