* 0434996
* NeTS-NR Toward Mathematical Rigorous Next-Generation Routing Protocols for Realistic Network Topologies
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Schopf
* 09/30/2008
* USD 924,000.00

Proposal Number: 0434996&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kimberly Claffy&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of California, San Diego &lt;br/&gt;Title: Toward Mathematical
Rigorous Next-Generation Routing Protocols for Realistic Network
Topologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relentless
growth of the Internet has brought with it inevitable, and inextricable,
economic and social dependence on this infrastructure. In reality, the
dependence is mutual: without a robust source of economic support, the Internet
will be unable to evolve toward the potential it quite imaginably holds.
However, the Internet is quickly approaching a critical architectural inflection
point, which must be present in any network using the same architectural
assumptions, and reaching the same size, as the Internet. Most experts agree
that the existing data network architecture is severely stressed and approaching
its capability limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three related and
clearly defined focus areas: 1) execute the next step on the path toward
construction of practically acceptable next-generation routing protocols based
on more scalable and mathematically rigorous routing algorithms obtained
recently in theoretical computer science; 2) validate the applicability of the
above algorithms against several sources of real Internet topology data with the
emphasis on scrupulous measurement of critical statistical and graph-theoretic
characteristics of the Internet topology; 3) build and evaluate a model for
Internet topology growth, which reflects fundamental laws of evolution of large-
scale networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project constitutes a promising example
of multi-disciplinary research, intersecting networking, theoretical computer
science, and physics, and increasing the flow of knowledge between the affected
research communities. In particular, some results in all the focus areas will
have impact far beyond the realm of the current Internet. They will be elegantly
generic in nature and dramatically increase fundamental understanding of not
only the traditional Internet and data networks, but also of many other types of
self-evolving large-scale systems, such as biological, social, and language
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;