* 0434410
* Towards a Mathematical Theory of Space-Time Codes for Multi-Antenna Wireless Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2009
* David Grant, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William H Tranter
* 07/31/2009
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that future generations of wireless
communication&lt;br/&gt;systems will provide a wide variety of services such as
voice,&lt;br/&gt;video, high speed data, and interactive multimedia for a
variety&lt;br/&gt;of users ranging from the stationary to the highly mobile ---
with speeds&lt;br/&gt;ranging from the pedestrian to high vehicular speeds ---
and in a wide&lt;br/&gt;range of outdoor (urban downtown to rural) as well as
indoor&lt;br/&gt;(homes, office buildings, factories, etc.) propagation
environments&lt;br/&gt;commonly encountered in everyday life. Battery
limitations in&lt;br/&gt;hand-held devices or laptops and the scarcity of
bandwidth relative to the&lt;br/&gt;ambitions of such services dictate the need
for designing systems in which&lt;br/&gt;these resources must be used as
efficiently as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on
developing a&lt;br/&gt;mathematical theory of two-dimensional ``space-time''
codes based&lt;br/&gt;on algebraic number theory for reliable, robust
and&lt;br/&gt;resource-efficient data transmission over multi-antenna
wireless&lt;br/&gt;communication links. Robustness of performance to a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;channel conditions will be emphasized by considering general
code&lt;br/&gt;design criteria as will problems related to
efficient&lt;br/&gt;decodability. Scalable, high performance space-time codes
that can&lt;br/&gt;be dynamically adapted to changing channel conditions due
to&lt;br/&gt;changes in propagation environments, scattering geometries, and
user&lt;br/&gt;mobility will be investigated. Questions of both
existence&lt;br/&gt;and construction will be pursued. A new level of generality
is&lt;br/&gt;introduced in this project so that knowledge acquired&lt;br/&gt;for
code design for one model can be applied to other models.&lt;br/&gt;The long
history of mathematics shows that the very level of&lt;br/&gt;generality itself
can be a guide to what good codes should look&lt;br/&gt;like.&lt;br/&gt;