* 0434043
* HSD: Understanding Dynamic Resource-Management Systems and Land-Cover Transitions in Montane Mainland Southeast Asia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Jefferson Fox, Center For Cultural&Tech Interchg East&West
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2008
* USD 550,000.00

Contemporary concerns about climate change, global environmental change, and
sustainability have rejuvenated interest in the development of an integrative
theory of human-environment relationships. Montane mainland Southeast Asia is a
region of great biological and cultural diversity that has come under close
scrutiny in the last several decades as a result of both real and perceived
deforestation, land degradation, and most recently, the conversion of
traditional agricultural practices to more permanent cash crop agriculture
driven by regional and global markets. This interdisciplinary research project
will examine how resource management systems in montane mainland Southeast Asia
are changing in the wake of commodification of resources in order to appreciate
how these changes may affect sustainable resource use, landscape transformation,
and land cover. A multidisciplinary team from the social and biological sciences
will collect economic, demographic, institutional and cultural data in China,
Laos, and Thailand and link these data with a multi-temporal high-resolution
spatial database. These data will be analyzed to develop a narrative of land-
cover and land-use change in the study area. The investigators will use
cellular-automata and agent-based modeling to explore changes in social and
biophysical variables and enhance insights beyond the available empirical
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enhance basic knowledge regarding
the dynamic coupling between human societies and their ecosystems at scales that
range from the local to district, national, and global. The project will further
understanding of the roles of spatial information technology and modeling for
understanding long-term processes of ecological restoration and land-use
transition. The project will seek to further understanding of land-use change as
part of the coupled human-environment system. The project will facilitate
collaborations between U.S. and Asian scholars. The project will provide grad
student field-base research opportunities, and it will permit numerous different
ethnic groups found in montane mainland Southeast Asia to examine the social
implications of land-cover and land-use change for these groups, and it will
facilitate decision making by policy makers and stakeholders at local, regional,
and national levels. An experienced and diverse multidisciplinary team including
economists, foresters, geographers, and sociologists brings a broad range of
skills to this project. The project will facilitate interactions among social
and natural scientists examining the complex interaction among human and natural
systems. This project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2004 NSF-
wide competition on Human and Social Dynamics (HSD). Coordinated management of
the HSD competition and the portfolio of HSD awards involves all NSF
directorates and offices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;