* 0434627
* Facilities Improvements at the Archbold Tropical Research and Education Center, Dominica, East Caribbean-Planning Stage
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* B. Shepard, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2008
* USD 9,000.00

This award provides support for a strategic planning effort for the Archbold
Center located on the 92-hectare Springfield Plantation on the island of
Dominica. The Plantation was a gift of John Archbold to Clemson University in
1989. The Plantation has been used for numerous research projects and classes in
terrestrial, freshwater and marine biology. The station also houses a
significant herbarium. The station will play a central role in the Archbold
Tropical Research and Education Consortium (ATREC), which is being formed with
members from Clemson and other institutions. The mission of ATREC is to
facilitate research, education and training programs that promote the
understanding and conservation of biodiversity in tropical terrestrial, fresh
water and marine ecosystems. The station currently includes a main lodge with 5
bedrooms and dining facilities, an adjacent dormitory capable of housing 16
students, and other smaller buildings that can accommodate 6 - 7 visitors. NSF
funds will be used to develop detailed five-year plans for renovations to
existing structures with the immediate goal of improving laboratory, dormitory
and kitchen space. The improvements will allow the development of the Archbold
Center as a venue for workshops, conferences and symposia on conservation,
biodiversity and tropical ecology. The Center also will serve as a focal point
and resource for students and scientists from Domenica and other Caribbean
countries.