* 0434302
* U.S.-Hungary Chemistry Research:  Photoionization Study of Heats of Formation and Bond Energies of Organometallic Complexes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Tomas Baer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 32,940.00

This U.S.-Hungarian research project between Tamas Baer of the University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and Balint Sztaray and Laszlo Szepes of Eotvos
University, Budapest, will study the dissociation energies and dynamics of
energy-selected ions. They intend to determine accurate ionization and
dissociation energies with techniques using threshold photoelectron photoion
coincidence (TPEPICO) mass spectroscopy and photoelectron spectroscopy. By
combining solution and gas phase bond energies the team expects to learn about
solvation energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Budapest group will contribute
expertise in the synthesis and reactions of organometallic complexes as well as
in measuring photoelectron spectra of low vapor pressure samples. The Chapel
Hill group's expertise in TPEPICO will be employed to determine dissociation
limits for metal ligands. Results should produce new accurate data on the heats
of formation and bond energies. This would enhance our ability to develop models
and apply statistical theory of unimolecular decay to a broad range of complex
molecules. Success could help define catalytic properties of molecules with
applicability in a variety of synthetic approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
chemistry project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S.
students to the international research community through work at the Hungarian
institution and direct involvement in current thermochemical research and
application of spectroscopy techniques.