* 0434541
* SGER:Developing High Throughput Protein Network Analysis to Determine the Function of Unknown Rice Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2004,11/30/2005
* William McCombie, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* TEST user
* 11/30/2005
* USD 199,949.00

The goal of this project is to explore the use of high-throughput proteomics to
determine gene function based on the cellular interaction network of an encoded
protein. It is appropriate for a Small Grant for Exploratory Research because it
"ventures into emerging and potentially transformative research ideas".
Specifically, methods will be developed by which the protein: protein
interactions of rice genes of unknown function can be determined. This
information will allow identification which protein(s) with known cellular
role(s) interact with a given unknown protein, and will therefore will link the
unknown protein to that cellular function. The information will be captured in a
publicly available database. The data will also allow construction of broadly
based protein interaction maps of rice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate raining
will be provided in areas that will combine genome sequence analysis with
protein interaction analysis. Such skills will be crucial as the community
grapples with integrating these disparate, large datasets. In addition, the
approached developed could create a paradigm shift that could have a significant
impact in defining a new strategy for analyzing complex plant
genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data resulting from the work will be available
at:&lt;br/&gt;http://www.cshl.edu/genseq/riceproteome. &lt;br/&gt;