* 0434799
* FSML: Graduate Student Housing at the Louis Calder Center - Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2011
* Amy Tuininga, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2011
* USD 202,697.00

This award provides funds for construction of new housing intended to serve the
needs of graduate students at the Louis Calder Center, a forested preserve
located just 45 km north of the center of New York City. The Center is one of a
relatively few, well-equipped field stations near a major metropolitan area. The
primary missions of the Calder Center have been the provision of research
opportunities in relatively undisturbed ecosystems near an urban center and the
creation of opportunities for urban students to explore the natural world first
hand. Consistent with these missions, a wide variety of research and educational
projects are conducted at the station. These extend from field studies of Lyme
disease to studies of the impact on forested ecosystems of urbanization and of
introduced invasive species. All such studies involve students in their planning
and execution. The Center provides infrastructural support for students, staff,
educators, and visiting scientists who study at the station and its adjacent
ecosystems. To strengthen research, training and educational opportunities for
students, it is imperative to provide year-round housing on site, as this
ensures the kinds of "on-the-spot" studies that distinguish field stations as
special institutions for learning. Housing of students near the station is
difficult as the Center lies in a region that is among the most expensive in the
nation for temporary housing. In the past, lack of affordable nearby housing has
required students using the station to commute up to 3 hours daily. The funds
will provide partial support for construction of three cabins, each able to
accommodate four students year-round. The project will improve educational
opportunities for students by enabling full time access to field-based research.