* 0434644
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY 2005
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Leslie Ries, Ries Leslie
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 01/31/2008
* USD 120,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
Informatics for FY 2005. The fellowship supports research and training at the
postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
these fellowships will play important roles in training the future workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Changes in North
American butterfly distributions in response to climate and land-use change."
Global biodiversity declines and shifts in species' ranges are strong evidence
of the widespread impacts of human activity, but the challenges of uncovering
patterns and determining root causes are daunting, and large-scale, long-term
data sets rarely exist. The 4th of July Butterfly Counts is a nationwide program
that has grown over the past 30 years so that currently over 500 sites in North
America are monitored each year by a network of volunteers. This project uses
these data to determine if there are any general declines or range shifts in
butterfly species distributions throughout North America and if there are
certain groups of species that seem especially vulnerable to environmental
changes.

In addition to the value of the research, the fellowship permits the Fellow to
expand her interdisciplinary expertise while building new skills and developing
partnerships with researchers in the fields of bioinformatics and computational
biology, thus preparing her for independent research in spatial ecology and
conservation. Additionally, the fellowship provides for developing the best ways
to communicate these types of results to policy makers and the general public.