* 0434862
* Modernization of Computer, Communications, and Data Management Equipment at the Nantucket Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2008
* Kenneth Sebens, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2008
* USD 46,458.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Massachusetts Boston under the
direction of Dr. Sarah Oktay-Quigley for partial support for the acquisition of
broadband internet capability for the Nantucket Field Station (NFS) facility. In
addition, funds granted will be used to purchase much needed computer and data
transfer equipment to enrich research and instructional programs, archive
decades of environmental and biological data, provide real-time web data feeds,
and expand the usage of the facility. This grant will significantly increase the
NFS' ability to support research use and to maintain its high quality of
instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The multidisciplinary nature of the programs
supported by the NFS is reflected in the topics of current courses taught on
site: coastal ecology, salt marsh ecology, marine invertebrate ecology,
environmental geology, oceanography, hydrogeology, art, ornithology,
linguistics, instructional design, and medical counseling. Examples of research
and educational programs that will benefit from this grant include the
following: NFS participation in an island-wide Biodiversity Assessment
Initiative, collaboration on water quality surveys with the Town of Nantucket, a
citizen beach profiling project, and funded projects investigating coastal
circulation, fisheries management, groundwater flow, and salt marsh remediation.
The NFS also provides laboratory space for many visiting scientists funded
through the NSF on studies ranging from gray seal repopulation surveys to the
reintroduction of the American Burying Beetle. The Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Program in Ecology and Conservation Biology at UMass Boston
culminates their annual summer program with a retreat to the Field Station to
present their summer research projects and conduct field trips. The research
facility is available for use by all scientific, local government, and
environmental organizations on Nantucket.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The NFS' unique
location on Nantucket enables research addressing a wide range of environmental
concerns such as habitat protection of endangered species like the northern
harrier to identification of pollution threats to sole source aquifers. The NFS
is closely linked with the town of Nantucket, local environmental and land
conservation non-governmental agencies, citizen scientists and naturalists, the
arts community, and the educational system. As such, we have a great
responsibility to inspire environmental stewardship and provide scientific data
that can be used in environmental management decisions. This award will benefit
a rapidly growing research community, enable the dissemination of large amounts
of data between area ecological stations, and provide a storehouse of
educational materials available to the community. The NFS is open to the public
and provides educational outreach through an interpretive nature trail and
interactive research demonstrations. Hosting school groups, senior citizen
trips, organic landscaping forums, poetry performances, and Native American
Heritage programs are among its many contributions to the community.&lt;br/&gt;