* 0434213
* MSPA-CSE: Statistical Methods for Precipitation Nowcasting and Verification
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Christopher Wikle, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2009
* USD 750,000.00

This project seeks to develop a new approach to short-term forecasts of heavy
precipitation based on a multi-resolution statistical representation of the
relevant atmospheric dynamics incorporated within a Bayesian hierarchical
modeling framework. The primary input data will be reflection data from weather
radars and the dynamics of the evolution of the precipitation will be
represented as a low-dimensional stochastic process. One set of research
questions includes the nature of the map between the hidden dynamics and the
precipitation field, of the propagator determining the evolution of the hidden
dynamics and its relation to atmospheric physics, and of the parametric
dependence of the map and propagator functions on meteorological variables. A
variety of linear and nonlinear maps, conditioned on meteorological parameters,
between the hidden low-dimensional process and the multi-scale precipitation
field will be tested. The propagator will be approximated by a quasi-stationary
first-order Markov process where the limited time dependence is represented as a
parametric dependence on the meteorological regime. The model will be applied to
and tested with radar and other meteorological data collected during the THOR
observing project over Illinois, Ohio and Indiana. The method will be compared
with short-term forecasts for this region obtained from existing prognostic
tools. Later in the project, the approach will be extended to the development of
a sequential prediction algorithm using sequential Monte Carlo techniques. A
second set of research questions relate to the development of effective
verification techniques. Methods for automatically identifying storm cells in
data and forecasts and making cell-by-cell comparisons of their shape, location
and intensity will be explored. Finally the project will include research into
hypothesis testing techniques for storm cell predictions. The methodology
developed could lead to improvements in flood forecasting and a quantitative
estimate of the uncertainty in these forecasts with consequent benefit to
emergency services.