* 0434084
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Institutional Effects on Decision-Making &amp; Performance in Public Land Agencies: The Case of Wildfire in the Interior West of the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Elinor Ostrom, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2006
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal will inquire into the reasons for the recent increase in
catastrophic wildfires on public lands in the American west. Due to a
significant increase in forest density and fuel accumulation in many western
ecosystems, fuel reduction has become the guiding principle for fire management
within public land agencies. However, efforts to implement fuel reduction
continue to encounter a multitude of obstacles. This is an especially puzzling
policy problem for two reasons: 1) the importance of fuel reduction has been
understood by agency officials for several decades now, and 2) few, if any,
policy actors with a stake in forest resources benefit from catastrophically
destructive fires. Thus there exists knowledge and the incentive to cooperate,
both, which one might expect, would drive the effort to reduce fuels in high
risk areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By doing extensive archival research and by
interviewing stakeholders and public officials at the national and state level,
this project will examine the methods of decision-making used within the U.S.
Forest Service, the National Park Service, and two state land agencies (in
Arizona and Colorado). The research will develop measures of the relative costs
of wildfire management, the time and number of procedural steps required to
treat high risk areas, the impact of federal regulations and compliance
requirements, the impact of lawsuits and legal complications, and the
relationship of agencies with communities and interest groups. A comparative
examination of decision-making within these agencies will help this project
identify key factors which are disabling to a nation-wide effort to reduce the
magnitude and costs of wildland fires.