* 0434605
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changes in Northern Rio Grande Ceramic Production and Exchange, Late Coalition through Classic (A.D. 1250-1600)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Timothy Kohler, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 11,100.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Timothy A. Kohler, Diane Curewitz will explore the
changing relationship between ceramic economy and social organization at the
transition between the Coalition (A.D. 1150-1325) and Classic (A.D. 1325-1600)
periods in the northern Rio Grande of New Mexico. Analysis of material
composition, technology, decoration, and distribution patterns of two Rio Grande
Glaze ware types, two Biscuit ware types, and micaceous cook ware will
demonstrate how population movement, aggregation into large villages, and a new
ideological system combined to transform production and exchange networks.
Linking these economic changes with developments in settlement and social
organization will increase understanding of the relationship between exchange
and emerging social complexity among the Ancestral Puebloan groups of the
region.

The focus of investigation will be to develop comparative measures of
specialized production, establish ceramic distribution patterns, and analyze
social networks based on the exchange of valued goods. Curewitz argues that a
new religious ideology, first brought by migrants from east-central Arizona in
the late thirteenth century, included an expanded system of communal feasting.
Decorated serving vessels used at these occasions identified owners as group
members and ritual participants, which added social value to and increased
demand for the vessels. Production was limited to potters with access to
requisite skills, materials, and ritual knowledge. Relative specialization would
increase from production for household use to a network of part-time independent
specialists, producing for exchange in excess of household and gifting needs.
Closer physical proximity of more distantly related individuals in the large,
dense, newly formed residential groups, combined with demand for vessels,
encouraged new exchange-driven social relationships based on the specific
qualities of the goods themselves. The new networks supplemented the existing
reciprocal, debt-based system.

The asymmetric exchange of culinary ceramics such as micaceous ware, ordinarily
given as gifts among close kin, suggests a growing system of barter.
Intensification of barter has potential to increase efficient and more
standardized production of items with social and subsistence value specifically
for exchange. This would strengthen the new non-kin interaction networks that
would support population movement, enhance attainment of social and political
power, and reduce subsistence risk. Specialized craft production and increased
division of labor (economic differentiation) may have developed without
centralized hierarchies, social stratification, and the wealth-based prestige
goods economic systems characteristic of state-level societies. This suggests
that economic processes had potential to increase social complexity without
simultaneously increasing political complexity.

The research program will coordinate resources at Washington State University,
the National Park Service, the Bureau of Land Management, the Museum of New
Mexico, and Los Alamos National Laboratory. Underutilized ceramic collections
and previous work on Rio Grande ceramics will be assessed for scientific
research value, reanalyzed, synthesized. All data will be shared with State and
Federal agencies to support future research. Museum renovations in progress at
Bandelier National Monument will be enhanced by further detailed study of
ceramic collections. Public and professional presentations will take place in
New Mexico, at Washington State University, and at Society for American
Archaeology annual meetings. Reports will be submitted to the supporting
agencies, peer-reviewed journals such as the Journal of Archaeological
Anthropology, and popular magazines such as American Archaeology.

