* 0434443
* SGER:  Development and Provision of Critical Triassic Marine Faunal Data to the Paleobiology Database:  A Unique Opportunity Within a Limited Time Frame
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* David Bottjer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2005
* USD 26,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The Paleobiology Database (PBDB) represents a
remarkable collaboration among numerous individuals in the paleontological
community to assemble already-existing Phanerozoic data for large-scale
syntheses to address major paleobiological problems. With its application of
informatics approaches, the Paleobiology Database represents one of the most
novel initiatives in recent paleobiological studies. However, individuals with
the necessary experience and knowledge to assemble meaningful data for the
Triassic are rare, so that the PBDB currently has a critical Triassic data gap.
The convergence of three senior Ph.D. students at USC during the summer of 2004
who are experienced with the Triassic provides a unique opportunity to fill this
gap. Provision of graduate research assistant funds for the summer of 2004
through a SGER grant will allow the PBDB to take advantage of this opportunity.
&lt;br/&gt;This effort to fill the Triassic data gap will ensure the timely
development and utilization of the PBDB, which will produce results of great
benefit to the paleontological community at large. Furthermore, participation in
this project will provide these students additional experience with new
informatics approaches, which will allow them to adopt this forefront
methodology in their future research and teaching. This will assist not only the
overall direction of Earth science research, but of science in general through
their anticipated future teaching activity as professional Earth scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;