* 0434975
* NeTS-NR: Traffic Quantization: A Formal Framework for QoS and Scalability in Packet-Switched Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* George Rouskas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2009
* USD 357,314.00

The goal of this project is to develop traffic quantization techniques for
addressing the scalability challenges in packet-switched networks, as well as
prototype implementations of protocols and algorithms for quantized networks.
Traffic quantization is a new method for supporting per-flow functionality,
which can alleviate the complexity associated with per-flow QoS. A quantized
network offers only a small number of service levels. Rather than receiving the
service requested, each flow is mapped to one of the levels offered by the
network; this mapping is performed in a way that guarantees a QoS at least as
good as that requested by the flow. The directional p-median problem has been
introduced as a formal framework for reasoning about the bandwidth quantization
problem, but there is a new set of research avenues to pursue. Specific
objectives include the study of stochastic quantization and quantization for a
vector of traffic parameters, and the implementation of efficient algorithms
(scheduling, bandwidth-guaranteed routing) for quantized networks. Furthermore,
this project will investigate quantization as a technology enabling scalability
in a range of applications and problem domains (multiprocessor scheduling and
Grid computing). The end-result will be a collection of traffic quantization
techniques with formally verified properties, and a suite of scalable control
and data plane protocols and algorithms to support QoS guarantees in quantized
networks. It is expected that the results of this work will address the QoS and
scalability problems facing the Internet, and will lead to the development of
novel network architectures with the ability to cater to very large sets of
heterogeneous users by offering and guaranteeing a menu of optimized services.