* 0434777
* Macro-Ions Near Confining Surfaces: Influence on Colloidal Forces
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2008
* John Walz, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2008
* USD 460,000.00

Van Tassel, Paul R.&lt;br/&gt;Yale University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Macro-Ions
Near Confining Surfaces: Influence on Colloidal
Forces"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal forces between supra-nanometer sized
objects in electrolyte solutions govern many industrially and medically
important systems. Significant contributions to the overall colloidal force
arise from electric double layer, van der Waals, and depletion interactions. The
latter is brought about by an added macromolecular component whose size is
larger than the solvent and electrolyte but smaller than the colloidal objects.
A net force results from the unbalanced osmotic pressure in the region near
contact between two larger objects due to the altered concentration and
structure of the added component in this region. Current understanding of the
depletion force is based primarily on steric (i.e. hard particle) interactions
with spherical additives. However, a much more pronounced effect is possible
using charged and/or non-spherical macromolecular additives; this must be
understood/controlled if important applications in colloid/protein
crystallization, separation, and bioassay are to be realized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a combined theoretical and
experimental effort toward understanding, predicting, and technologically
exploiting the influence of macromolecular additive charge and shape on
colloidal force. The system of study consists of a spherical, ca. 10 micron
colloidal particle near a smooth flat surface in the presence of macro-ions (ca.
10 nm spherical or rod-like colloidal particles) and micro-ions (atomic-sized
counter ions/salt). The focus is on the behavior of the macro-ion component in
the gap between the particle and the surface and its relation to colloidal
force. The PIs bring to bear state-of-the-art experiment and modern molecular
theory to this study of macro-ions in a confined geometry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective is the experimental understanding of
the force versus distance profile between a model colloidal particle
(polystyrene or silica) and a planar surface (silica) in the presence of macro-
ions. The PIs will employ total internal reflection microscopy (TIRM) and atomic
force microscopy (AFM) and the significance will be a systematic account of the
influence of macro-ion charge, size/shape, and concentration - and micro-ion
charge and concentration - on the colloidal force versus distance profile.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second objective is the theoretical prediction of the
molecular structure and force profiles of the systems investigated
experimentally. The PIs will employ Monte Carlo simulation and density
functional theory and the significance will be a molecular
understanding/interpretation of our experimental results - and the possibility
of investigating systems not readily addressable via experiment - thus leading
to a true predictive framework for understanding interacting colloidal systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third objective is to exploit this predictive
framework to develop two novel applications of macro-ion additives. One is a
chromatography-based tool for particle separation and the other a method for
improving the effectiveness of bio-analytical tools in, e.g., cell separation or
microorganism detection. The significance could be new technologies exploiting
macro-ion control of colloidal forces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Social
Impact: To broaden the impact of the scientific objectives, the PIs propose the
active participation of undergraduate students in the research activities. The
PIs propose to further integrate this research into our undergraduate curriculum
by developing an appropriate AFM experiment for the Yale undergraduate lab
course. Funds for supporting the undergraduate student will be pursued through
the NSF REU program. Because the proposed methods (like AFM) are growing in
popularity within the research community, they anticipate the student experience
will serve as an excellent preparation for subsequent graduate study. Graduate
students schooled in these methods will conduct a tutorial, and students will
then have an opportunity to measure surface forces using these methods. The PIs
anticipate beginning student participation with the force between a particle and
a flat surface as a function of added salt and then moving to simple macro-ion
additives (like silica) where force oscillations occur. The significance will be
an early exposure to state-of-the-art surface analytical methods.&lt;br/&gt;