* 0434328
* Collaborative Research: MSPA-CSE: Equation-Free Modeling of Biological Self Organization: Coarse Computational Swarming
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Jeffrey Moehlis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2009
* USD 230,000.00

Animal populations, such as fish and zooplankton in the oceans, and terrestrial
species from bison to locusts and midges, can self-organize into schools and
swarms through the interactions of individuals with each other and their
environment. This project aspires to achieve a new level of understanding of the
emergence of such population-level behaviors through the development,
implementation, and validation of coarse-grained, systems-level numerical
methods for individual-based models of collections of organisms. Systems-level
tasks enabled through this computational approach include long-time predictions,
stability and bifurcation analysis (which details how observed behavior depends
on environmental and organism properties), control, and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding aggregation behavior is of both
theoretical and applied importance, for problems as diverse as fisheries
management and pest control. The details of animal behavior involve individual-
level dynamics that are too complicated to analyze rigorously. What is of
interest, however, are the macroscopic dynamics of populations. This project
will build a tool for providing this understanding, in a systematic, flexible,
and effective way. The algorithms and ideas that will be developed will also
have an impact outside of biology, with potential applications in computational
chemistry, materials science, and economics.&lt;br/&gt;