* 0434632
* Colloquium: An Experimental Approach to Genome Annotation to be held July 19-20, 2004 in Washington, DC
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Richard Roberts, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 05/31/2005
* USD 63,408.00

The American Society for Microbiology will convene a group of approximately 30
expert scientists for a colloquium July 19-20 in Washington DC, to discuss the
problems faced in annotating the many complete microbial genome sequences that
are now known and to develop a comprehensive, analytical, and practical report
that may be used by the scientific community, federal agencies, the corporate
sector, and the lay public. The colloquium will bring together bioinformaticians
and experimental biologists to discuss how a synergy between the two groups
might be established, potentially leading to coordinated efforts to identify the
functions of genes of unknown function and a parallel effort to identify the
genes that correspond to known enzyme activities, not so far linked to
identifiable gene products or genes. These two ideas (characterizing genes in
search of a function and functions in search of their genes) are complementary
in perspective, with a common goal of improving the knowledge base upon which
accurate genome annotation relies. Although the tools of modern bioinformatics
can make credible predictions about potential functions for the proteins encoded
by hypothetical open reading frames, only by subsequent experimental
verification can that annotation be considered reliable. The colloquium will
provide an opportunity for discussion between bioinformaticists and
experimentalists to highlight the kind of information that is most useful to
experimentalists who would test bioinformatic predictions. The discussion will
also consider the criteria for prioritizing open reading frames suitable for
experimental analysis. A professional science writer, working closely with the
steering committee, will develop a draft report for review by the colloquium
participants. It will provide a background briefing based on the colloquium
presentations and a set of recommendations for further scientific endeavors in
the field. The report will be developed in print and electronic formats.