* 0434104
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Culture Change, Psychosocial Stress and Immune Function Among Female Chinese University Students
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2005
* A. Steegmann, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Richard Kay
* 11/30/2005
* USD 7,829.00

Cultural, political and economic changes in the People's Republic of China (PRC)
have divided the rural and urban communities. Populations moving between these
communities experience "culture change"; and as a consequence suffer varying
degrees of psychosocial stress. University students are an ideal population in
which to study this process. They span a range of backgrounds and come together
to live in a new, global, urban environment: the university. Students of rural
upbringing risk higher stress levels since they confront new and discordant
behaviors, ideas and knowledge. In addition they experience systemic and
interpersonal discrimination, both subtle and overt. The higher suicide rate
among rural women underlines the seriousness of behavioral pressures. To test
rural/urban differences in stress levels, 220 female students will be recruited.
Each student will complete two interviews, a questionnaire, several blood
pressure readings and provide a blood sample. The research design treats stress
(blood pressure and Epstein-Barr Virus antibodies) as the dependent variable.
Stress is increased or decreased by several independent variables.

This project connects ethnographic data with biological markers of stress. It
will provide a greater understanding of the interaction between multiple sources
of stress in a high-risk, natural population and further contribute to the
understanding of how social pressure and changes impact health in a non-Western
context. This project builds on previous work of human biologists, incorporating
methods and theory in an innovative research design.

This study introduces advanced research methods and theory to a region
relatively new to human biology. It will provide data to health officials and
university staff on the challenges and the health consequences of negotiating
those challenges encountered by their youth. For the discipline of human
biology, it further tests the EBV method as a marker of chronic stress in a
natural population.