* 0434810
* US-GLOBEC NEP Phase IIIa-CCS: Changing Ocean Conditions in Northern California Current - Effects on Primary Production and Salmon
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2009
* Robert Smith, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2009
* USD 669,998.00

The investigators will launch an interdisciplinary study of changing ocean
conditions in the northern California Current during the 6-year GLOBEC LTOP
period, which encompassed an El Nino/La Nina transition, an invasion of
Subarctic water and a shift in the climate regime of the North Pacific Ocean.
They will focus on synthesizing multiple datasets (in situ oceanographic data,
coastal salmon survival data, and indices of climate or environmental status) to
learn how changes in water masses, currents, stratification, nutrient
concentrations, etc., respond to climate forcing and in turn affect primary
production and salmon survival. The four specific objectives of the study are
(1) to relate the changing in situ physical and chemical ocean conditions
observed during the major climate events of 1997-2003 to primary production and
salmon survival, (2) to determine whether in situ physical and chemical ocean
conditions, primary production, and salmon survival in the upwelling domains
north and south of Cape Blanco have similar interannual variability, (3) to
determine whether seasonal averages and interannual variability of ocean
conditions in the northern California Current system during the 1997-2003 epoch
system were significantly different from earlier epochs for which historical
data are available and (4) to relate commonly used indices of ocean conditions
to local in situ measures which directly affect primary production and advection
and to search for improved indices and measures. This synthesis of
interdisciplinary oceanographic data with salmon survival and climate indices
will advance intellectual understanding of critical processes in coastal
upwelling ecosystems and improve understanding of the dynamic processes that
contribute to statistical correlations between salmon survival and climate
indices. This study will have broad impacts on the future of ecosystem
monitoring and management in the Northeast Pacific, and on future research in
other coastal upwelling regions. Identifying a few in situ measures or
parameters that are critical for primary production and for salmon smolt
survival would make it feasible and efficient to use coastal observing stations
to monitor the health of the upwelling ecosystem.