* 0434355
* MSPA-MCS:     Face Recognition Using Integral Invariants and Cryptology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Nigel Boston, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 07/31/2008
* USD 499,997.00

The fundamental technical challenge of human face recognition is to deal with
the extremely broad range of variations in a face's appearance due to pose,
lighting, age, facial expression, distance and other factors. Ideal facial
features should remain invariant under these variations. While current face
recognition methods are limited in the conditions where they work, recent
advances in the mathematical theory of invariants and recent connections forged
with cryptology provide new insights for the face recognition problem that may
help broaden the generality and robustness of face recognition systems. In this
project, an interdisciplinary team will explore a unique approach that brings
together the latest developments in the mathematics of integral invariants,
psychophysical experiments on face recognition by humans, and state-of-the-art
face recognition algorithms and system development. Specifically, we plan to
address the following research goals: Establish a common mathematical foundation
between cryptology and object recognition, in particular obtaining information-
theoretical limits to data compression of human faces

Investigate the mathematical theory of integral invariants for 3D geometrical
objects, and develop efficient invariant feature extraction and pattern
recognition algorithms

Interact with a professional cartoonist and use experimental psychophysical
evidence to assess perceptual significance and to explore biological
interpretations of mathematical 3D integral invariant features in the context of
human face recognition

Develop a prototype system implementation for 3D moving face recognition. In
particular, we will focus on a scenario with multiple camera in a semi-
controlled environment for access control and watch-list spotting applications

The approaches taken in this project are cutting-edge, unconventional, and
promise significant breakthrough in advancing both the theory and practice of
face recognition performance. Broad Impacts In this project we plan to hold a
summer research experience program to serve under-represented groups; to develop
a new biometric informatics class that involves undergraduate students in
developing parts of prototype face recognition systems; to hold a man-machine
face recognition contest to garner public awareness of this area and to attract
young people to science and technology. Specifically, in both laboratories and
courses we will foster an environment for students from both mathematics and
computer science backgrounds to interact in learning and research, to stimulate
new ideas and to appreciate the mutual impact and interactions between
mathematics and computer science.