* 0434338
* MSPA-MCS: Automatic Geometric Simplification
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Stephen Vavasis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

ABSTRACT PI: Stephen Vavasis proposal: 0434338

The team members investigate new algorithms for automatic simplification of
complex geometries arising in solution of boundary and initial value problems
from engineering and biomedical applications. Geometric simplification allows
the use of finite-element meshes with many fewer elements, which greatly speeds
up the solution time of partial differential equations. Powerful new tools from
hyperbolic geometry are applied to the simplification problem. These tools
enable linear-time estimation of the effect on the solution of a change in the
boundary using purely geometric analysis and without prior information about the
solution. The simplification algorithm is based on a partitioning of the
original geometry into simpler shapes.

Brain injury is an enormous medical problem in the U.S., with 1.5 million new
cases per year, $56 billion spent on medical expenses, and countless lives
affected adversely. Life prediction for composite materials like concrete,
asphalt and laminates, similarly have significant public-safety and economic
consequences. These two disparate problems share in common the property that
they are amenable to computer modeling and analysis. Furthermore, for accurate
results, both applications require computer modeling of complex geometric
shapes. Unfortunately, complex geometric shapes require time-consuming
computations on large high-performance computers and thus limit the practical
applicability of computer modeling. The project invents computer methods that
can quickly and accurately simplify complex geometries. "Accurately" in this
context means that the simplification is guaranteed not to change the outcome of
the simulation by more than a small percentage. Therefore, the research project
leads to much faster analysis of problems with complex geometry. In the long
run, this leads to better understanding of the consequences and perhaps therapy
for traumatic brain injury and better life-prediction capability for complex
structural materials.