* 0434609
* US-Africa Planning Visit: Geolimnology Research on Lake Tanganyika
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Tom Johnson, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 6,047.00

Johnson 0434609

This planning visit award will enable the PI to meet in July 2004 with
scientists in Zambia and Belgium, and with research vessel operators in
Tanzania, to plan for collaborative fieldwork on Lake Tanganyika, East Africa.
This lake hold records of tropical climate history that are unparalleled in
their signal strength, temporal resolution, continuity and duration.
Unfortunately no investigations have rigorously linked tropical climate dynamics
with composition of sediments that settle to the lake floor. The PI envisions an
international collaborative field program in southern Lake Tanganyika, capturing
the monthly rain of sediment through the water column and linking it to local
climate and lake processes. A scientific team of collaborators from the U.S.,
Africa and Europe will be assembled and a detailed research plan will be
formulated. Proposals will be developed for NSF and for appropriate funding
sources in Europe and Africa in Fall 2004, requesting funds for the actual
science to be undertaken, beginning in 2005.

The broader impact of the planned research will involve the training of U.S.
undergraduate and graduate students in an international setting in which they
will participate in the fieldwork, laboratory analyses, and interpretation of
data. The PI's paleoclimate research contributes significantly to the better
understanding of climate dynamics over the continent that experiences more human
fatalities due to droughts and floods than anywhere else on Earth.





