* 0434406
* Technician Support: Phase I for MC-ICPMS Isotope Facility, Washington State University
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* John Wolff, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2008
* USD 225,000.00

EAR-0434406&lt;br/&gt;Vervoort&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding of this proposal
will provide salary for a technician to support the radiogenic and heavy stable
isotope facility at Washington State University. The technician will be
responsible for the day-to-day operation of the Neptune MC-ICP-MS and associated
clean laboratory. This position is essential to facilitate the pursuit of many
ongoing isotope geoscience projects, in areas such as crust and mantle
evolution, igneous petrology, Lu-Hf and zircon U-Pb geochronology, global
tectonics and biostratigraphy, and ensure their completion in a timely fashion.
The funding for an isotope lab technician will benefit both Washington State
University as well as the geologic community, by supporting a facility that has
a long-term record of providing geochemical service to geology. Our facilities
are open to the geological community and we welcome researchers to come to WSU
to perform their isotopic work here. We have several collaborations in place
that will bring faculty, research scientists, graduate and undergraduate
students to WSU from other institutions to perform chemical separations and
isotopic analyses on the MC-ICP-MS. The collaborations with outside research
groups have important benefits for both WSU and the visitors by allowing cross-
fertilization of ideas and techniques. WSU benefits from the influx of
scientific ideas that visitors bring. In addition, the type of isotopic analyses
visitors desire often drive the development of new analytical techniques.
Visiting researchers benefit by acquiring isotopic data for their projects, but
also by learning new techniques and by gaining an understanding of their data
from an analyst's point of view. Student participation will be an essential
element of these collaborations. The benefit to the student of visiting a
different institution and interacting with a different set of faculty and
students is enormous and is important step in a young scientist's career
development.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;