* 0434351
* MSPA-MCS:  New Tools for Algebro-Geometric Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Charles Anderson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2008
* USD 499,991.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael Kirby&lt;br/&gt;proposal:
0434351&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal develops new algebro-geometric tools
for data analysis, and in particular, for the investigation and understanding of
massive data sets arising in computer science, where both the ambient dimension
and number of samples may be large. Particular examples of interest to the team
include brain-computer interface (BCI) problems and computer-vision and
recognition problems. Specifically, the team is relating secant varieties (of
arbitrary order) to the determination of optimal projections of data sets; they
inquire what order of variety is appropriate and are investigating the
relationship between varieties of different orders. Secant varieties also play a
role in understanding canonical forms and decompositions of higher-order
tensors, which in turn are of fundamental interest in signal-processing
applications such as the BCI problem. Algebraic geometry provides a framework
for developing algorithms for higher-order tensors. Finally, very recent
developments in the Schubert calculus on Grassmannians have dramatically
increased the potential applicability of this theory. The investigators are
studying how to exploit these ideas to develop efficient algorithms for finding
near-optimal projectors subject to constraints. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research, which this team is carrying out, has distinctive impacts on the
mathematical and computer science communities. By bringing together groups of
researchers from seemingly disparate areas of expertise, it aims for cross-
fertilization among these fields. Computer science provides the problems for
which the team is developing new algorithms. Conversely, the team expects new
mathematical conjectures to arise from the practical problems being addressed by
this research. Furthermore, the graduate students (all working towards the
Ph.D.) will receive innovative training during the course of this project that
will prepare them for jobs in either academia or industry where they will have
tools and preparation essentially unlike any of their peers. This should greatly
enhance their ability to contribute new and innovative ideas to the team
research environment. Beyond this effect on the professional communities, the
applications driving the proposed research have clear and immediate impact on
aspects of such disparate issues as national security and the broadening of the
ability of disabled individuals to participate more fully in society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;