* 0434459
* SGER: Deep Coring of the Valles Caldera, New Mexico to Obtain a Long-Term Paleoclimate Record
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2005
* Peter Fawcett, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2005
* USD 29,635.00

This award, under the auspices of the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
(SGER) program, seeks support to obtain and analyze a deep (~100 to 150 meter)
sediment core from a lacustrine sequence in the Valles Caldera, northern New
Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is aimed at piggybacking on efforts
by Los Alamos National Laboratory and the US Geological Survey to drill into the
caldera in mid-May, 2004. The SGER funds will: 1) supplement drilling depths in
the caldera, 2) allow transport of the core to the LacCore facility in
Minnesota, and 3) enable preliminary analyses of core
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on determining the
paleoenvironmental record of long-lived lakes in the volcanic caldera and
ultimately will allow the researcher, and his colleagues, to develop a
paleoclimatic record for this part of northern New Mexico over a substantial
part of the Quaternary to about 1.25 million years. Research conducted on this
core will include developing a preliminary age model (via radiocarbon dating,
Argon isotopic age determinations, and tephrochronolgy), sedimentologic and
stratigraphic analyses (mineralogy, grain size, sedimentary facies and
sedimentary structures including varves if present), and paleomagnetic/rock
magnetic analyses of appropriate parts of the core. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers expect that the analysis of this lacustrine sediment core will lead
to a much better understanding of the nature of climate variability in the
American southwest. A strong potential exists that the research team will
recover sediments spanning several glacial-interglacial cycles. If this is so,
the resulting paleoclimatic record will be one of the longest in the American
Southwest and as such will be of wide interest in the paleoclimatic and
paleoecologic research community. The results should provide a useful long-term
context for understanding past changes in climate and montane ecosystems in the
southwest. If the timing of glacial-interglacial cycles can be determined from
the Valles caldera records, it would make a very interesting comparison with the
Devil's Hole paleoclimatic record from Nevada.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Knowledge
of climate variability from the American West is sparse due to the dearth of
data archives as compared to other regions in the terrestrial environment. A
volcanic caldera is not usually described as a paleoclimate archive but, if the
researcher and his colleagues are correct in their assumptions and successful in
their drilling efforts, they will add substantially to the data available to the
broader community. Given the management of Valles Caldera by the US Park
Service, any data recovered from the project will be developed into a public
display on the natural history of the region.