* 0434691
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Infrastructure for FY 2005
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2005,07/31/2007
* Christopher Wilmers, Wilmers                 Christopher    C
* Fellowship
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2007
* USD 93,750.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
Informatics for FY 2005. The fellowship supports research and training at the
postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
these fellowships will play important roles in training the future workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Bioinformatic
approaches to spatial and temporal analysis of Global Positioning Satellite
(GPS) data that relate animal movement to biodiversity." This research is
developing informatic tools to fit statistical distributions to large spatial
data sets. The are then being used in conjunction with mechanistic models to
test hypotheses across multiple scales of biological organization relating
spatial variation in gray wolf (Canis lupus) movements to patterns of community
diversity in Yellowstone National Park.

The Fellow plans a career of collaborative research in environmental science and
mathematics. The proposed postdoctoral fellowship is strengthening his
foundation in theoretical ecology and data analysis.