* 0434516
* Creep Damage Analysis and Remaining Life Assessment of Ferromagnetic Materials Exposed to High Temperatures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* ming wang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/2007
* USD 199,996.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0434516 &lt;br/&gt;J. Indacochea&lt;br/&gt;Univ. Illinois,
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study intends to establish a viable method to
measure creep damage of low alloy ferromagnetic steels used at elevated
temperatures, by using a magnetoelastic sensor developed at UIC. A basic
relationship between magnetoelastic phenomena and structural changes within the
ferromagnetic materials will be developed to assess creep. By understanding the
role of microstructure changes on the material's magnetic response, adjustments
to the sensor design can be made to enhance its sensitivity. Creep testing is
performed on several samples pertaining to two types of ferromagnetic steels;
systematically the corresponding magnetic responses of each sample will be
measured using the sensor. A calibration curve of "creep-magnetic response" will
be produced to evaluate the progressive magnetic behavior of the ferromagnetic
steels in relation to creep damage. The metallurgical changes of the
ferromagnetic materials are characterized by light, scanning, and transmission
electron microscopy with EDS, x-ray diffraction and microhardness measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;Issues surrounding domestic energy supply and protection against
infrastructure disturbances demand a closer evaluation and real time system
monitoring of materials to ensure reliability. A practical method to measure
creep damage of low alloy ferromagnetic steels is expected to result.
Development of NDE devices to evaluate the materials status is key to extending
the service life of energy producing systems. &lt;br/&gt;