* 0434870
* FSML: Expansion of Research and Education Infrastructure within Dauphin Island Sea Lab's Marine Science Hall
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* William Graham, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2008
* USD 411,285.00

A grant has been awarded to the Dauphin Island Sea Lab under the direction of
Dr. William M. Graham for partial support of a research and education addition
to DISL's primary research facility. In its current layout, Marine Science Hall
has exceeded its capacity to support the research and education needs of the
DISL faculty and students. The lack of space has placed a strict limitation on
growth of individual's research, on opportunities to incorporate laboratory
sections into courses, on the ability to support a growing visiting researcher
program, and on our need to increase faculty numbers. This award will double the
existing MSH laboratory, office and teaching space through construction of a
10,000 sq. ft. addition that will include: four new research laboratories; one
common-use teaching/visiting scientist laboratory; six new offices; a ventilated
sorting room; a seminar and small conference room; a centralized reception area;
open lobby spaces. This award covers approximately one quarter of the total
construction cost, and the remaining cost will be covered through the DISL
General Operating Fund.

This award will support and enhance a variety of research and educational
opportunities at the Dauphin Island Sea Lab. The Marine Science Hall facility
currently supports 10 full-time resident faculty, 4 post-doctoral researchers,
and approximately 40 in-residence graduate students. In support of anticipated
research growth of 2-4 new faculty over the next 5-10 years, new research
laboratory space must be constructed. In addition, marine science education from
K-PhD is an integral part of the DISL mission, and laboratory sections of
existing graduate and undergraduate-level courses are rare due to the lack of
adequate teaching lab space. The new addition will incorporate a flex-usage
teaching lab to allow growth of analytical courses. Finally, DISL lacks adequate
seminar facilities and the new addition will provide a 1,000 sq. ft. seminar
room with raised seating and state-of-the-art A/V equipment.

Since its inception in 1971, the Dauphin Island Sea Lab has been committed to
providing science education and outreach to all reaches of society. By creating
new opportunities for scientists through new hires in new areas, the MSH
addition will directly influence DISL's long-standing mission to providing
science education and outreach through formal and informal means. These include,
but are not limited to, DISL's ongoing REU program, K-12 activities shared with
DISL's Discovery Hall Programs, collaborative relationships with MESC member
historically black colleges and universities, Discovery Hall Program's COSEE
activities, and continued involvement with local, state and regional policy-
makers.

