* 0434253
* Collaborative Project: Nuclear Pathways - A Model for Composite Digital Collections
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Thomas Whaley, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2008
* USD 507,961.00

This collaborative project is implementing and communicating methods for
assisting educational content providers in combining resources from their
respective websites into coherent, composite collections. The project is
developing a composite collection, Nuclear Pathways, consisting of a closely-
knit group of collections relating to nuclear issues that serve a broad
community of educators and learners. The initial effort, led by the Alsos team,
integrates the Alsos (http://alsos.wlu.edu/), Atomic Archive
(http://www.atomicarchive.com/), and Nuclear Chemistry and the Community
(http://www.chemcases.com/nuclear/) websites into a composite collection for
nuclear issues. It consists of two content rich sites, Atomic Archive, and
Nuclear Chemistry and the Community, supported by a solid bibliographic
resource, Alsos, and the Alsos site for educators, Nuclear Connections. Both
collaborating sites will become members of the NSDL by providing metadata and
participating in NSDL activities. Atomic Archive represents a successful
commercial partner. Nuclear Chemistry and the Community is a component of an NSF
funded CCLI educational project (DUE-9652889), ChemCases that continues to
flourish. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques used and lessons learned in
integrating the three initial partners are being employed to recruit additional
websites (approximately 10) addressing nuclear issues. These websites are being
invited to join the composite collection and NSDL as associates. The National
Advisory Board of the Alsos library is performing review and selection of those
sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continuing development of the Nuclear
Connections site led by the Alsos team is expanding to reference materials
useful to teachers in multiple disciplines at all levels from middle school
through college and postgraduate training. It links vetted educational materials
(syllabi, suggested references, etc.) from the partner sites as well as from
individual educators. In addition, direct links to appropriate topics in the
associate sites are being embedded in appropriate locations in Nuclear
Connections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in
the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) is providing
significant co-funding of this project in recognition of the value of this work
in advancing the larger educational goals of MPS.&lt;br/&gt;