* 0434940
* NeTS - NR:  Topology Models for Decentralized Random Graphs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Dmitri Loguinov, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2009
* USD 335,541.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;NETS- Research in Network Technologies and
Systems &lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0434940&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Loguinov,
Dmitri&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas Engineering Experiment
Station&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NeTS - NR: Topology Models for Decentralized
Random Graphs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many networks found in the real
world exhibit characteristics drastically differ-ent from those of classical
random graphs. Examples range from social net-works and ISP-level Internet to
various cellular-level graphs. In addition to the well-known heavy-tailed degree
distribution, many naturally self-evolving graphs demonstrate high clustering
and short average distances between every pair of nodes. It has been a long-
standing problem in the scientific community to model such graphs using
algorithmic construction of synthetic graphs with properties similar to those of
real networks. While many different topology gen-erators and alternative
theories explaining the structure of real-world graphs currently co-exist, their
main drawback lies in the requirement for the nodes to cooperate during graph
evolution and to possess global knowledge of the entire graph at every time
step. To overcome this limitation, this project undertakes a study of
distributed, non-cooperative graph construction and offers a novel ap-proach to
modeling the numerous small-world networks observed in practice. Using random
walks as the main design element, the distributed graph con-struction can
naturally lead to high levels of clustering and heavy-tailed degree
distributions. Results obtained in this work are expected to advance our under-
standing of self-configuring graphs in nature and create usable models that will
allow various synthetic structures to achieve desired topological properties
through distributed actions of individual users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Admela Jukan&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;August 4,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;