* 0434503
* U.S.-Costa Rica Dissertation Enhancement:  Exogenous Versus Endogenous Control of Microbially-mediated Decomposition in Lowland Neotropical Streams
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Catherine Pringle, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 12,500.00

0434503&lt;br/&gt;Pringle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program
Dissertation Enhancement Grant will support the research of &lt;br/&gt;Mr.
Marcelo Ardon Sayao, under the direction of Dr. C.M. Pringle at the Institute of
Ecology, University of Georgia. Dr. Monika Springer of the University of Costa
Rica will assist with some aspects of the research and will help to coordinate
undergraduate student involvement at the U. of Costa Rica. The project will
focus on a vital ecosystem process, the decomposition of organic matter in
tropical climate streams, at the La Selva Biological Station, in Costa
Rica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an era of human alteration to global nutrient
cycles, it is critical to understand the effects of nutrients on ecosystem
processes. The proposed research will improve our ability to predict how streams
will respond to nutrient deposition. Specific objectives will: 1) examine
effects of initial leaf litter chemistry on breakdown processes in a Neotropical
lowland stream and compare the results to another tropical site and a temperate
site; 2) assess the influence of interactions between litter carbon quality and
dissolved nutrients on microbial and invertebrate leaf litter processing; and 3)
use artificial substrates of varying carbon quality to examine microbial
response to water nutrients. Funding from the Americas Program will improve this
research project by allowing comparisons between tropical and temperate sites
through chemical analysis of a broad range of tropical and temperate species and
help to develop and enhance an artificial substrate technique. Broader impacts
of this research also include strengthening relationships between Costa Rican
and U.S. academic institutions through the advancement of training of graduate
and undergraduate students in both countries. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;