* 0434390
* Integrated Statistical and Optimization Analysis for Computationally Expensive Models of Complex Environmental Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2009
* USD 626,354.00

The investigators will develop an integrated and computationally efficient
general method for utilizing field and laboratory data coupled with
environmental models to provide a site-specific basis for incorporating
uncertainty in parameter and input values into scientific investigations and
decisions related to environmental analysis, protection, and remediation. The
research will use recently developed methods of global optimization based on
response surfaces that provide an efficient method for calibration of model
parameters when, as is typical for complex environmental models, the model is
expensive to run. Efficiency (computational and statistical) will also be
improved by using, within a Bayesian framework, data transformations and
weightings that reflect nonnormal distributions, heteroscedasticity, and
correlation in the data, to address different sources of uncertainty.

Future states of the environmental system will be forecast by simulating the
underlying environmental model for a number of sets of parameters selected
according to the posterior distribution of parameter values and using a response
surface approximation of each output variable of interest. Sensitivity and
uncertainty analyses will be done and their accuracies will be investigated. The
research will be applied to the Cannonsville reservoir in New York and the
bioremediation of toxic chlorinated ethenes in groundwater used for drinking
water.