* 0434171
* US-South Africa Cooperative Research:  Cospeciation, Host Switching, and Symbiont Sharing in Ectosymbioses: A Multiple Layer Phylogenetic Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Diana Six, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2006
* USD 25,050.00

Six 0434171 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an international
collaborative research investigation on Dendroctonus bark beetle-fungus
symbioses. These symbioses include interactions among beetles and fungi from
three distinct groups, as well as with phoretic (hitchhiker) fungus-feeding
mites. In collaboration with Dr. Michael Wingfield at the University of Pretoria
in South Africa, we propose to develop a molecular phylogeny of the Ophiostoma
fungal associates for comparison with a phylogeny of the beetles. Such
comparisons yield insights into evolutionary histories and relationships of
interacting organisms. Future work will include the other fungal groups and the
mites. Using a multi-species approach will allow a broader and more accurate
interpretation of how symbiotic assemblages form, are maintained, and evolve
over time. The collaboration brings together two experts on these systems, Six
from the USA specializing in beetle-fungus symbioses, and Wingfield from South
Africa specializing in Ophiostoma systematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will increase our knowledge of an economically and ecologically
important group of insects - Dendroctonus are the most economically damaging of
North American forest insects but also function as natural disturbance agents
that determine forest structure and composition. The research will also help
identify factors influencing the development, evolution, and maintenance of
symbioses, en ecologically and economically important type of species
interactions. The project involves collaboration between a researcher and four
students from the USA and several top researchers in South Africa. It will aid
the professional development and training of two MS students and two PhD
students including one from a traditionally under-represented group (Native
American). &lt;br/&gt;