* 0434310
* CRA's Committee on the Status of Women in Computing Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Andrew Bernat, Computing Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2010
* USD 415,379.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Special Projects Program - FY04&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNS
0434310, PI's Carla S. Ellis (Duke University), Andrew Bernat (CRA) and Mary J.
Harrold (Georgia Tech.), submitted by the Computing Research Association
(CRA)&lt;br/&gt;Title: CRA's Committee on the Status of Women in Computing
Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Special Project award to the
Computing Research Association's Committee on the status of women (CRA-W) will
provide support to CRA-W to expand and enhance its activities. Funding is
provided to maintain the CRA-W committee and to support new initiative's such as
the long-term tracking of graduate student cohorts, career mentoring mini-
workshops, a reunion of former participants of CRA-W's programs for
undergraduate research mentoring, new projects for women researchers in
industrial labs, joint efforts with the Coalition to Diversifying Computing, a
service called Friends of CRA-W to help principal investigators implement
meaningful diversity plans, and a leadership summit for senior
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Computing Research Association's Committee on
the status of women (CRA-W) has been a national leader since 1991 in positive
efforts to increase the number and success of women in Computer Science and
Engineering (CS&amp;E) research. It is an action-based committee, implementing
projects aimed at eliminating barriers to the full participation of women at all
stages of the research pipeline. CRA-W has had a significant impact on the
Computer Science &amp; Engineering (CS&amp;E) community, directly impacting over
2000 women and indirectly influencing thousands of
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
CRA-W facilitating a broad range of research activities in CS&amp;E. CRA-W's
commitment to program evaluation will provides important data on what works and
what doesn't work for others interested in starting similar
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this effort lies in CRA-W
providing mentoring opportunities and community building to encourage women in
CS&amp;E research, and to increase the awareness of gender issues across the
CS&amp;E discipline. CRA-W programs address every rung of the ladder of higher
education in CS&amp;E. The networks of women mentoring women that CRA-W builds
across institutions serve an essential function in ameliorating their isolation.
CRA-W programs have a significant impact on institutions and their approach to
including women in the research enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;