* 0434150
* Springboard to Success!
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Kathleen Fisher, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2011
* USD 611,476.00

The Springboard to Success! Noyce Scholarship program aims to open the science
and mathematics education pipeline in middle and high schools in the San Diego,
California area by providing scholarships to support 33 new science and
mathematics teachers. Partnering school districts, Sweetwater Union High School
District and the City Heights Educational Collaborative, include 28 schools with
highly diverse, low socioeconomic populations. The aim is to infuse ethnically
diverse, reform-minded science and mathematics teachers into these educational
systems. Related goals are to build a community of practice among science and
mathematics teachers and prospective teachers, and to enhance and sustain
momentum, energy and knowledge about hands-on minds-on learning. Springboard
Scholars are actively recruited, carefully selected, well educated,
appropriately placed, and strongly supported by collaborative support providers
drawn from the districts and San Diego State University Colleges of Science and
Education. Scholars participate in professional development workshops year-round
during both their student and teaching years. They engage in action research to
monitor and improve both instructional practice and personal growth. They also
attend professional meetings with such groups as California State
University/NASA and the American Association for the Advancement of Science -
Pacific Division. A continuing goal is to promote an understanding of the nature
of science and of science as a process, in addition to as a body of knowledge.