* 0434461
* SGER: Design, Construction and Testing of Prototype Instrument for Contamination-Free Sampling of Crustal Fluids from Deep-Sea Boreholes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* James Cowen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2006
* USD 199,782.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) award to support design,
building and testing of a Downhole Sampler (DS) for ocean crustal fluids;
subsequent versions of the DS will also permit downhole in situ incubations.
Direct collection of fluids at the bottom of the borehole should avoid the
potential changes imposed on the fluid composition during its ascent to the
surface. The DS will be used to study the microbial community structure in the
context of geochemical and physical conditions of the basement crust. The PI, in
collaboration with Craig Taylor's group at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, will demonstrate the feasibility of collecting uncontaminated
fluids from aging, sediment-buried ocean basement crust. Development of a new
sampling device that can collect contamination-free samples from this extreme
environment is a risky endeavor. Accordingly, the team will: 1) Perform
preliminary shore-based borehole simulations; 2) use dissolved, particle and
microbial tracers to test the ability of the inlet system to obtain clean
samples; and 3) compare the chemistry, microbial diversity, and community
structure of pristine crustal fluids at the bottom of the borehole with those
collected throughout the borehole and with seawater in order to establish the
nature and magnitude of any influence of the borehole on the ascending
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work represents a pioneer attempt to
explore the biosphere present in the sub-sea floor. The potential to elucidate
the metabolic processes and ecology of microorganisms with authentic samples
from this vast and unexplored new environment is high, as is the potential for
discovery of novel organisms with new metabolic pathways.&lt;br/&gt;