* 0434875
* Facilities Improvements at the Tiputini Biodiversity Station in Eastern Ecuador
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Bette Loiselle, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2008
* USD 149,000.00

A grant has been awarded to the Tiputini Biodiversity Station (TBS) of Boston
University under the direction of Dr. Thomas Kunz for partial support to enhance
the Station's ability to serve as a base for research and higher education
learning in the Amazonian rainforest. TBS is located in the Amazonian rainforest
on the Tiputini River in eastern Ecuador, adjacent to the Yasuni Biosphere
Reserve. It is a unique field station influenced by its association with the
Andes to the west and the expansive lowland rainforest to east.

The primary goal of TBS is to support research and education that will help
conserve and manage the Amazon ecosystem. Current facilities at the TBS are
inadequate to meet the research and educational goals of the station. Funds will
be used to erect a new laboratory building that will significantly increase
laboratory space for researchers, install a satellite downlink/uplink for
Internet access, construct new housing for long-term researchers, and improve
the transportation system for provisioning TBS with supplies and equipment. All
of these improvements will significantly bolster the research capabilities of
users of the station and will facilitate communication between researchers.

In its nine years of operation, over 200 researchers, including 40 graduate
students, have visited or conducted research at TBS. In addition, over 2,000
university students from North America, South America, and Europe have
participated in courses taught at the TBS by the Universidad San Francisco de
Quito and Boston University. TBS provides unique opportunities for scientists
and students to engage in ecological, evolutionary, and conservation research in
a region with diverse and complex species assemblages, coupled to an environment
that is being influenced by both natural and anthropogenic forces.

