* 0434854
* NeTS-ProWin:    Cognitive Radios for Open Access to Spectrum
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Christopher Rose, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2008
* USD 670,000.00

NeTS-ProWiN: Cognitive Radios for Open Access to
Spectrum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award 0434854&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Narayan
Mandayam, Rutgers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectrum
regulation has traditionally been driven by improvements in technology, from
improved filters to the sophisticated logic and radio techniques that created
the cellular revolution. More recently, however, a new paradigm has emerged in
which regulation has driven technology. A modest regulatory experiment in "open
spectrum" that began in the ISM bands has spawned an impressive variety of
important technologies and innovative uses, from cordless phones and wireless
LANs to meter readers and home entertainment products. Since these systems must
adapt to a wide variety of unpredictable conditions, the emerging technologies
called "cognitive radio" offer significant potential benefits in system capacity
and service quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation begins with the
forward-looking assumption that a perfect cognitive radio exists and can
configure itself to any transceiver type. Under this assumption, a number of
exemplary cognitive strategies are studied to identify the approaches that offer
the greatest benefit at the least "cost". These strategies include: (1)
discovery of available spectrum, (2) information to support efficient operation,
(3) negotiation in situations of conflict, (4) coding for efficient sharing, and
(5) domination in situations of conflict. Because these strategies are
technologically diverse, their costs are measured against the common metrics of
hardware and protocol complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is carried out
using a combination of fundamental analysis, computer simulation and physical
emulation using testbeds developed at WINLAB. The results will identify the
potential benefits and costs of a diverse set of design strategies, and will be
disseminated via a workshop for practitioners in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;