* 0434910
* Enhancement of Research and Education Facilities at the University of Kansas Field Station
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2004,12/31/2007
* W. Dean Kettle, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2007
* USD 323,538.00

A grant has been awarded to University of Kansas Field Station and Ecological
Reserves (KSR) under the direction of Dr. Bryan Foster, to construct a multi-
purpose building and modest visitor housing at KSR. The multi-purpose building
will enhance the KSR environment in three inter-related areas: 1) research, 2)
education, and 3) health and safety. Research space in the proposed building
will provide a general-purpose laboratory, a laboratory for wet chemistry, and a
commons space (library, station archives/reference materials, computer
laboratory) for resident and visiting researchers. The multi-purpose building
will provide a physical setting for scientists to undertake innovative research
that addresses complex environmental issues. The multi-purpose building will
also provide basic accommodations for resident and visiting users of the field
station. Improvements include a dedicated kitchen area and ample
restrooms/showers. Two small sleeping cabins will accommodate the demonstrated
need for housing an ever-increasing use of KSR by visiting scientists and
students. Collectively these improvements will provide flexibility to
accommodate a wide range of current and future uses, and promote the wellbeing
of users by providing a safe and efficient work environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KSR also supports an active program of teaching and
outreach. Teaching initiatives have grown recently and the new multi-purpose
building will allow groups of students and visitors to engage in instructional
programs in a more appropriate environment. Educational initiatives at KSR reach
students of all ages (K-12 short courses, undergraduate classes and individual
research experiences [including the NSF program Research Experiences for
Undergraduates], graduate research and education, and public workshops). KSR is
actively involved in bringing underrepresented groups into science; in
particular, faculty and students at Haskell Indian Nations University
increasingly use our facilities. KSR also promotes science infrastructure by
providing research facilities and archived data sets to scientists both in the
region and nationally. Research results produced by these scientists are broadly
distributed through the scientific literature, and by novel approaches of public
outreach and internet dissemination. Finally, KSR research addresses many topics
of societal concern; examples include spread of invasive species, ecosystem
restoration, risk assessment of transgenic crops, and pesticide effects on
aquatic communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;