* 0434148
* California State Polytechnic University, Pomona Robert Noyce Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Claudia Pinter-Lucke, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2010
* USD 592,917.00

The goal of the California Polytechnic University, Pomona Noyce Scholars Program
is to increase the number of qualified mathematics and science teachers,
particularly those from underserved groups, serving in middle and high schools
in high-need districts. In order to accomplish this, Cal Poly Pomona is
strengthening its infrastructure for recruiting STEM undergraduates, community
college transfer students, and career-changers into teaching. The objectives of
the project are to prepare sixteen new credentialed mathematics and science
teachers for high-need schools during the course of the grant period, as well as
to have eight candidates in the pipeline by end of the grant period. All of the
Noyce Scholars are obtaining a single-subject teaching credential and begin
teaching in a high-need district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program focuses on
three major types of activities: recruitment, retention, and support of the
Noyce Scholars. Recruitment focuses on current Cal Poly Pomona STEM students,
STEM students from community colleges who will transfer to Cal Poly Pomona, and
STEM professionals. These recruitment activities attract those who might
otherwise not have considered the teaching profession, particularly those from
underrepresented groups. Retention and support activities include early field
experience, monthly seminars, active academic advising, and on-line discussion
groups for the cohort of Noyce Scholars. These research-based retention
strategies ensure that Noyce Scholars successfully obtain their bachelor's
degrees and/or single-subject teaching credentials. With coordinated support
from Cal Poly Pomona and three high-need districts, Noyce Scholars refine their
teaching skills while completing two years of teaching in high-need middle and
high schools. &lt;br/&gt;