* 0434087
* Pacific Northwest Center for Oceans and Human Health
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 04/30/2010
* USD 4,026,968.00

ABSTRACT OCE-0434087&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-NIEHS Research Center of
Excellence in Oceans and Human Health at the University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past decade has seen a dramatic increase in
the economic and human health repercussions of harmful algal blooms in U.S. West
coast waters. The overall goal of the Pacific Northwest Center for Human Health
and Ocean Sciences is to elucidate the relationships between marine processes
and public health consequences, by focusing specifically on the toxic diatom
Pseudo-nitzschia. The Center will be composed of a multidisciplinary research
team that includes researchers from universities as well as state and federal
government agencies. Studies will be conducted on Pseudo-nitzschia dynamics and
human impacts in two major representative ecosystems, the Puget Sound Estuary
and Washington coastal waters. All fishery closures to date in Washington State
have occurred along the coast where human settlement is limited. In Puget Sound,
where many more people could potentially be affected, no shellfish closures have
yet occurred, although low-levels of domoic acid are commonly detected in
mussels and clams. The Center will explore underlying differences between the
coastal environment in the Pacific Northwest and Puget
Sound.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and support activity of the Center will
encompass four research projects and four facility cores. The Toxic Algae
Research Project will examine the physical, chemical, and biological factors
that promote blooms and toxin release and the genomics of Pseudo-nitzschia
blooms. The Shellfish Kinetics Project will study the toxin levels and
environmental conditions at which acute or chronic health effects become
important. The Mechanisms of Toxicity Research Project will examine the
molecular mechanisms of action of domoic acid and will define potential
susceptibility factors affecting its toxicity such as age, chronic low dose
exposure profiles and genetics. The Human Exposure Research Project will
investigate populations for dietary and consumption behaviors that contribute to
increased exposure and will identify populations that are at potential risk
based on age, cultural practices (Native American populations, Asian and Pacific
Islanders), and geographic proximity to contaminated shellfish. The Biosensors
Facility Core will focus on new technologies to develop portable real time tools
for assessing domoic acid. The Environment Facility Core will use time series
analysis to characterize variations in physical and chemical parameters of the
coastal environment and the Puget Sound Estuary. The Neurobehavioral Assessment
Facility Core will define the effects of chronic low-level domoic acid exposure
on neurobehavioral development. The Informatics Facility Core will provide
platforms and frameworks for data integration, risk evaluation, GIS and data
visualization and community outreach, to allow the Center to share and translate
information across these multidisciplinary arenas and with the external research
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The Center has been designed
in response to the societal need to understand the interactions between ocean
processes and human health. One major impact of the center will be to develop
lasting partnerships among groups concerned with harmful algal blooms, including
researchers at the University of Washington, University of Maryland Medical
School, the Institute for Systems Biology, the Washington State Department of
Ecology, Washington State Department of Health, Northwest Fisheries Science
Center (NOAA) and U.S. EPA Region 10. A second impact is to provide
informational resources and exchange with diverse communities with exposure and
potential health risks from domoic acid. Interactions with numerous groups,
including Native American tribes and Asian-Pacific Islander communities, along
the Washington coast and in the Puget Sound region have already been developed.
A community advisory board with interested and affected parties will be created
to facilitate these exchanges and dialogue about harmful algal blooms. A third
impact is educational in nature. The Center will educate a new generation of
researchers with multidisciplinary training and expertise relevant for issues
affecting oceans and human health. Graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers are included in all Center projects. Undergraduate research at the
University of Washington is highly promoted and labs commonly involve
undergraduates in research projects. A seminar series will be held on a monthly
basis to foster communication between different Center components. Additional
special-topic courses (open to all students) will also be developed from Center
collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;