* 0434672
* US-Gabon Planning Visit: Comparative Phylogeography of Central African Forest Duikers
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Nicola Anthony, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 4,315.00

0434672&lt;br/&gt;Anthony&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a planning
visit to develop an international collaboration with scientists in Gabon on the
patterns of diversity in Central African duikers (small antelopes).
Understanding the mechanisms that may lead to species diversification in
tropical forests has intrigued biologists for more than a century and has
important implications for tropical conservation. Using molecular methods it is
possible to predict what signatures of genetic variation might underlie
different diversification scenarios and distinguish between them. In particular,
the role of ecological gradients, tropical forest "refuges" and river barriers
in promoting speciation have been hotly debated. The purpose of this study is
therefore to test alternative diversification hypotheses by comparing genetic
variation across a suite of forest antelope species. In order to achieve the
broad geographical sampling scheme required for this study, this project will
make use of field collections of dung as a source of DNA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful implementation of such a project depends
heavily on the participation and cooperation of scientists at the partner
institution in Gabon (CIRMF). Through the proposed collaboration, this project
will stimulate exchange of expertise and knowledge between African and U.S.
participants. CIRMF will also serve as an important base for coordinating
sampling and networking with other collaborators within Central Africa. This
study will not only provide important information on the origins of biological
diversity in the Afro-tropics but will also provide a solid database of
information on antelope species distributions. Most importantly, strengthening
the mutual collaboration between the University of New Orleans and CIRMF will
provide opportunities for two-way training, scientific exchange, and technology
transfer between both U.S. and African scientists. &lt;br/&gt;