* 0434500
* RUI:  Fragmentation, Dispersal, and Coalescence in Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2009
* Timothy Halpin-Healy, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2009
* USD 93,000.00

This research is supported under the Research at Undergraduate Institutions
program. The research will explore how statistical mechanical concepts, models,
tools and philosophy can be used to better inform our understanding of dynamical
phase transition phenomena and spatiotemporal pattern formation in agent-based,
stochastic, far-from-equilibrium (spin-flip) models of opinion dynamics,
cooperation and competition. The common thread concerns a statistical mechanical
approach to socioeconomic populations, focusing on fragmentation, dispersal and
coalescence dynamics, as interacting agents evolve and form groups within a
multidimensional ideological, opinion, or strategy space. Dependence upon
network topology and dimensionality, order parameter nature (continuous vs.
discrete) and symmetry, differences between consensus vs. coexistence dynamics,
as well as the robustness and scope of universality classes lie at the heart of
many fundamental questions yet to be answered for these complex, self-organized
non-equilibrium systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the topics themselves, the
intellectual merit of this research is firmly based upon its overtly
interdisciplinary character, tying together various disciplines; providing a
statistical physics approach to socioeconomic agent-based modeling, i.e., the
Minority Game; and the mentoring of undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include the involvement of
undergraduate women from Barnard College; the interaction of this statistical
physics program with complementary research being done at Columbia; and
international collaborations with Leiden and
Oxford.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical research will explore the
applications of statistical physics concepts and tools to social and economic
systems. In particular, so-called agent-based systems will be explored. These
systems are similar to voting populations where independent entities (voters)
are being influenced by agents (advertising, peer pressure). The work will be
performed with a number of groups including ones in England and the Netherlands.
This will create opportunities for undergraduates at Barnard
College.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;