* 0434928
* Collaborative Research:    NeTS - ProWiN:    Programmable/Versatile Radio Platform for the Wireless Networking Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Ender Ayanoglu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2010
* USD 280,000.00

NeTS-ProWiN: Programmable/Versatile Radio Platform for the Wireless Networking
Research Community&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award 0434930&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Babak
Daneshrad, UCLA&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort brings
together experimental PHY researchers from UCLA, networking research from UCI,
and engineering expertise from Umachines to develop a highly flexible radio
platform for the networking community. The availability of such a platform will
spawn innovative and groundbreaking networking research for years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;The main thrusts of this proposal are two fold: (1)
Specification, design, and development of a versatile radio platform with a
fully defined API and a user friendly GUI. Two classes of radio nodes will be
developed. The first is an inexpensive platform built entirely on DSP
processors. This platform can handle bandwidths of a few MHz and can accommodate
one or two antennas. The second node leverages FPGA technology and will provide
real time operation in 25 MHz of bandwidth and can support up to 4 antenna
elements. (2) Networking research carried out by UCI culminating in the
implementation of the resulting algorithms on the developed nodes. The work will
investigate MAC enhancements for both SISO and MIMO enabled nodes such that the
physical layer parameters are controlled through the MAC layer for higher
overall performance (cross-layer design). In addition to providing research
results of great interest to the community, this work will push the nodes to
their limits of flexibility and drives the definition and implementation of the
MAC/PHY interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;