* 0434398
* MSPA-MCS:     3D Scene Digitization - A Novel Invariant Approach for Large-Scale Environment Capture
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Carl Cowen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 07/31/2008
* USD 506,000.00

3D Scene Digitization A Novel Invariant Approach for&lt;br/&gt;Large-Scale
Environment Capture&lt;br/&gt;Daniel G. Aliaga, Mireille Boutin, Carl
Cowen&lt;br/&gt;Purdue University&lt;br/&gt;The simulation of large real-world
environments is a core challenge of computing technology&lt;br/&gt;today.
Applications are numerous and diverse. For example, it would enable students to
pay virtual&lt;br/&gt;visits to famous historical sites such as museums,
temples, battlefields, and distant cities; civil&lt;br/&gt;engineers to capture
buildings and compare them to the original design or to simulations (e.g.,
to&lt;br/&gt;compare as-built models and simulated models before and after a
catastrophe); archeologists to&lt;br/&gt;virtually preserve complex excavation
sites such as trenches as they evolve over time; soldiers and
fire&lt;br/&gt;fighters to train in simulated environments; real estate agents
to show buyers the interiors of homes;&lt;br/&gt;and, people all over the world
to enjoy virtual travel or multi-player 3D games.&lt;br/&gt;Despite tremendous
increases in computational power and storage space, current
acquisition&lt;br/&gt;methods perform quite poorly. Even for small scenes, they
usually fail to adequately capture many&lt;br/&gt;details. Manually created
models, although popular, are extremely time-consuming and
rendered&lt;br/&gt;images are poor representations of reality. Alternatively,
image-based modeling and rendering,&lt;br/&gt;produces photorealistic images but
only in the context of small and/or diffuse environments seen from&lt;br/&gt;a
limited range of viewpoints (e.g., QuickTime VR). Similarly, approaches which
focus on recreating&lt;br/&gt;the geometry of the scene such as the
reconstruction methods developed in computer vision or the&lt;br/&gt;laser-
scanning approaches struggle with complex occlusions, specular surfaces and
large data sets.&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is thus to
develop the algorithms needed to capture and&lt;br/&gt;manipulate visually rich
computer models of large and complex real-world scenes. The
proposal&lt;br/&gt;attacks this research problem with a new hybrid method
combining both geometric and photometric&lt;br/&gt;information contained in the
scene. More precisely, the approach captures a 3D environment
by&lt;br/&gt;densely sampling the space of viewpoints and uses this redundant
data set to extract accurate models&lt;br/&gt;of the surface geometry and the
reflectance properties of the scene. This is in contrast with
most&lt;br/&gt;current approaches where one acquires a sparse set of data and
uses methods to interpolate missing&lt;br/&gt;information. The work replaces
interpolation by the easier tasks of semi-automatic
platform&lt;br/&gt;navigation, data filtering, and working-set management. The
key is the development of highly&lt;br/&gt;effective mathematical data
processing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;The main research contribution of the proposed
approach is the merging of expertise from the&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical and
Computer Sciences to solve a difficult problem in computing technology today.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular, the research makes use of a novel geometry
reconstruction method based on Lie group&lt;br/&gt;theory which was recently
developed by one of the co-PIs. This method uses a set of invariants of
a&lt;br/&gt;group action to eliminate a number of superfluous unknowns normally
included in the 3D&lt;br/&gt;reconstruction problem. These superfluous unknowns
are exactly the ones that make the&lt;br/&gt;reconstruction equations nonlinear.
By removing them, the method ends up with a simple set of
sparse&lt;br/&gt;linear equations involving a minimum number of unknowns which
can be solved sequentially. This&lt;br/&gt;allows the project to quickly and
robustly extract the geometric (and photometric) information of
large&lt;br/&gt;data sets and reconstruct large 3D environments.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will have impact beyond the immediate reconstruction results.
Never&lt;br/&gt;before have researchers had access to such large and dense
samplings of environments. Aside from&lt;br/&gt;publications and making all
software available, the research project will create a public repository
to&lt;br/&gt;store models for subsequent study (e.g., historically significant
locations). The impact of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;work is not an incrementally
better method for capturing environments, but a bold new approach
that&lt;br/&gt;can significantly change how people think about computer
simulation of large environments.