* 0434824
* NeTS-NR:    Using Signal Propagation Emulation to Understand and Improve Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Daniel Stancil, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 08/31/2009
* USD 924,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;NeTS-NR: Using Signal Propagation Emulation to Understand and
Improve&lt;br/&gt;Wireless Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peter Steenkiste,
CMU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0434824&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless networking
has become a part of everyday life, but research aimed at evaluating and
improving wireless protocols is hindered by the inability to perform repeatable
and realistic experiments. Techniques used in wired networks are inadequate for
analyzing wireless networks since the wireless physical layer affects operation
at all protocol layers; moreover, wireless links are variable, error-prone, and
affected by external uncontrolled sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
developing a system that accurately emulates wireless signal propagation in a
physical space. The project is also developing realistic signal propagation
models, and conducting experiments to see how diverse technologies such as WiFi,
Bluetooth, and software defined radios are affected by the physical
layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining many benefits of simulation and real
world experimentation, the emulator can have a dramatic research impact. Since
the emulator can be shared over the network, it can be integrated into existing
testbeds. It can also enable remote groups to compare realistic results.
Moreover, the emulator can aid education by supporting hands-on wireless course
projects in a realistic, "safe" isolated environment. Emulator-based experiments
will significantly improve understanding of how signal propagation affects
medium access control layer performance, and enable the development of improved
protocols. This project will also result in a set of realistic models of signal
propagation. Finally, this project will quantify the relative strengths and
weaknesses of competing wireless protocols in diverse, realistically emulated
physical environments. Project results will be disseminated through
publications, through allowing remote researchers emulator access, and through
educational activities such as course projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;