* 0434899
* A comprehensive planning effort for the development of a grassland field station at the University of Oklahoma.
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* John Snow, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2006
* USD 23,532.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Oklahoma Norman Campus under the
direction of Dr. T.H.L. Williams, to fund a series of three planning workshops
to develop management, operations and administrative plans for Kessler's Farm, a
parcel of land that was recently donated to the University of Oklahoma. The
first workshop will be facilitated by an outside consultant, Dr. Susan A. Lohr,
who developed the planning protocol for the Organization of Biological Field
Stations. With her aid, we will determine which questions are the most important
for us to address in order to develop a common vision for the site that we can
continue to share in the near and long term future. The second workshop will be
held at the Farm, giving any participants a chance to view the property and
then, follow up on break out groups organized during the first workshop. The
final workshop will be held at the University of Oklahoma Biological Station at
Lake Texoma in southern Oklahoma. Chief among the goals of this workshop will be
to determine how to integrate the activities at Kessler's Farm with those
ongoing at the Biological Station. It is our desire to make these facilities
compliment one another rather than compete. In addition, we hope to make viable
strategic plans concerning the role of an advisory board, how to identify and
best interact with outside constituencies, and develop infrastructural planning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This land is the site of a number unique meteorological
and climatological monitoring stations as well as being the location for an
important series of experiments on the effects of global warming on tallgrass
prairie. Kessler's Farm has served as the focal point for the research of
African-American, Native American, physically disabled, Hispanic, and female
students and faculty. Part of the planning effort will be focused on how to
increase the visibility and usage of the Farm by underrepresented groups and to
increase their participation in field-oriented sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;