* 0434046
* Potential and Pitfalls for Sustainable Underground Storage of Recoverable Water
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2005,11/30/2007
* Stephen Parker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Clark C. K. Liu
* 11/30/2007
* USD 50,000.00

0434046 Parker The Water Science and Technology Board (WSTB) of the National
Research Council (NRC) is the focal point for studies related to all aspects of
water resources under the aegis of the National Academy of Sciences and the
National Academy of Engineering. The WSTB's objective is to improve the
scientific and technological basis for resolving important national questions
and issues associated with the efficient management and use of ground and
surface water resources. In carrying out its responsibilities and in serving the
national interest, the Board responds to requests for evaluations and advice
through ad hoc studies concerning specific and generic issues in water
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this context, this project is an effort by
the WSTB to provide advice to the scientific community, water managers, and
water policy/decision makers regarding the use of underground aquifers to store
water temporarily for later beneficial uses. The WSTB formed a committee to
develop a consensus report on key scientific issues related to the use of
underground storage of water. Specifically, the report will (1) provide an
overview of the research and education needs and priorities concerning
sustainable underground storage technology and implementation and (2) assess the
geological, geochemical, biological, engineering, and institutional factors that
may contribute to good or poor performance of such projects.&lt;br/&gt;