* 0434279
* Segregation and Spatio-Temporal Dynamics of Granular Shear Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2008
* Benjamin Glasser, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 01/31/2008
* USD 146,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT - 0434279&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Particulate
processing operations in a wide variety of industries are often poorly
understood compared to their fluid processing counterparts. Product quality and
consistency is frequently threatened by problems such as non-uniform flow and
segregation of constituent components, the latter being especially significant
in pharmaceutical manufacture in which maintenance of a homogenous particle
mixture is critical. Traditionally, heuristic rules-of-thumb have been used to
limit these problems, but these have not reliably predicted flow instabilities
and prevented segregation from occurring during scale-up or commissioning. A
more desirable approach, from either a quality control, commercial, or
regulatory perspective, is the ability to quantitatively predict flow
inhomogeneities and segregation rates from fundamental principles, material
properties and small-scale laboratory tests, and then to engineer processes
accordingly to limit detrimental effects on performance and product uniformity.
While there is a growing theoretical basis for granular flow, this has not yet
been applied widely to non-uniform or unsteady flows which are typical of
industrial situations. Fundamentally, segregation stems from variations in
velocity and flow properties, such asgranular temperature, between adjacent
regions of a system, preferentially driving particles of a certain type to
particular locations. Thus, an initial aim is to numerically and experimentally
characterize the flow instabilities and coherent structures occurring
spontaneously during Couette and Taylor-Couette flows. Couette and Taylor-
Couette flows are perhaps the simplest model geometries encompassing both shear
and physical boundary interactions, essential ingredients of practical flows.
Particle dynamic simulation techniques will be used to model particle properties
and resulting flows will be characterized using Fourier methods and compared to
results from kinetic theory. Experimental flows will be examined using Xray
tomography, Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV), stream sampling, and image
analysis techniques. The subsequent role of instabilities as triggers for
segregation will then be investigated, culminating in calculations of
segregation flux for a given particle species. Computational and physical
experiments will be used to characterize mixing-segregation transitions in terms
of relevant dimensionless groups. Underlying instabilities and spontaneous
inhomogeneity will be examined in archetypal 2D and 3D Couette and Taylor-
Couette flows, utilizing analogies with fluid flows where possible. Mechanisms
of particle segregation triggered by the inhomogeneities will be characterized,
for high-shear flows typical of mixing or transport operations. A parametric
sensitivity analysis will be performed to quantify the role of particle size
distribution, density variations, surface properties and particle aspect ratio.
Initial work will consider spherical particles with work in latter years
allowing for non-spherical particles. Particle shape is rarely considered in
fundamental flow and segregation studies, but non-spherical particles
predominate in industry and are known to strongly influence flow and
segregation. In particular, acicular needle-like morphologies are common in
pharmaceutical crystals and these will be studied experimentally and modeled in
the simulations. The research initiatives in this proposal will be integrated
with educational and outreach initiatives including graduate, undergraduate and
high school research training in particle technology. Training in particle
technology has been recognized as an area of national need but has traditionally
been neglected in the US. A large proportion of the products manufactured within
the US are in particulate form or involve significant particle technology. In
fact, it has been argued that the handling and manufacture of particulates is at
least as important as that of liquids and gases. But the majority of graduating
engineers in the U.S. receive little education in this field. As part of this
proposal, the PI will continue to advance particle technology into the
curriculum at Rutgers. High school students will be given the opportunity for
research experience through the Governor's School of Engineering, which attracts
New Jersey high school students to Rutgers for a high school-university exchange
program. Finally, the PI will continue to target the recruitment of women and
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;