* 0434515
* NeTS-NR: A Novel Technique to Detect Shared Congestion and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Simon Lam, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2008
* USD 350,000.00

Within this project, a novel technique that can be used to detect shared conges-
tion between any two Internet paths is discovered, called Delay Correlation with
Wavelet denoising (DCW). With this technique, a common end point (source or
destination) for synchronization is not needed. More specifically, DCW works
efficiently and effectively for a synchronization offset of up to one second,
which is large enough for detecting shared congestion between any two Internet
paths. Furthermore, DCW works effectively irrespective of whether Random Early
Dis-card (RED) or drop-tail queueing method is used at the point of congestion.
To apply DCW to specific applications, new protocols are designed that specify
how nodes generate probes, collect and process delay samples for Internet paths
with no common end point, and provide the shared congestion detection out-come
to the applications. The protocols include a loose synchronization tech-nique to
limit any synchronization offset between probe sequences to the maxi-mum value.
Protocols are designed for applications that run on overlay net-works with both
tree and mesh topologies with the objective of improving the applications'
performance by removing shared bottlenecks. The DCW technique is expected to
enable the design of protocols that construct overlay networks with improved
topologies where shared bottlenecks are removed. Such applica-tion of DCW will
contribute toward the design of next-generation research net-works and tools for
interdisciplinary collaboration, as well as shared research and education
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;