* 0434684
* Development of a Strategic Plan to Address Field Station Needs for Research, Teaching, Education and Outreach, in Northern New England
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Kathleen Weathers, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 01/31/2008
* USD 24,170.00

A grant has been awarded to the Institute of Ecosystem Studies under the
direction of &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kathleen C. Weathers for the development of a
strategic plan to address field station needs in support of research, teaching,
education and outreach. The geographic focus for this planning grant is northern
New England. Currently, there is no freshwater field station in this region to
serve both the researchers and the wider community through access to facilities
and educational programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of four targeted
workshops will be conducted whose participants will include representatives from
the research and education communities in the northern New England region. The
workshops will be focused on the need for-- and feasibility of --creating a
freshwater field station based at Lake Sunapee, NH. In addition, site visits to
other field stations, and consultations with key personnel from the Organization
of Biological Field Stations (OBFS) will be used to guide the process and
subsequent strategic plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work that will be conducted
with this funding represents a unique collaboration and common vision for
advancing science and scientific understanding for a broad range of participants
and consumers. The PIs are involved in diverse research, educational, and
outreach programs. These efforts include primary research in the social and
natural sciences, K-8 instruction and curriculum development, undergraduate and
graduate training, and outreach through offering public programs and publishing
educational materials. The planning effort will reveal the infrastructure needs
that will better serve the existing collaboration and bring current research to
those who might use it such undergraduates and graduates, research institutions,
and residents of the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategic plan will either
result in a plan for a facility that would serve the needs of the research and
education communities, or, alternatively, point to the strengths, utility and
availability of what already exists, and demonstrate how to build upon the
existing infrastructure. A document will be produced for the supporting
institutions and shared with others in the region. &lt;br/&gt;