* 0434872
* Collaborative Research:    NeTS-NR:    Evolutionary Architectures for Ultra-Broadband Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Arun Somani, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2009
* USD 162,705.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;NETS - Research in Network Technologies
and Systems &lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0435490&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Ramasubramanian, Srinivasan&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0434872&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Somani, Arun&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Iowa state
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0434956&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Subramaniam, Suresh&lt;br/&gt;Institution: George Washington
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: NeTS-NR:
Evolutionary Architectures for Ultra-Broadband Access
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a significant mismatch between core and
access network capacities currently prevalent. In order to stimulate viable
large-scale fiber deployment in the last mile, an evolutionary approach to
building high-capacity access net-works is called for. This project develops
such an approach by providing solu-tions that can evolve starting from lower-
cost wireless-based ones to the ulti-mate fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) solution.
Architectural solutions for metro net-works and neighborhood access networks
that allow high-speed packet switch-ing and provide efficient aggregation
methods to multiplex bandwidth from vari-ous access points are developed. In
particular, an evolutionary path from more cost-effective wireless and free-
space optics-based solutions to FTTH for neighborhood networking is developed.
Solutions ranging from high-speed elec-tronic packet-switching to all-optical
WDM/TDM for metro networking are also investigated. Analytical modeling and
simulation tools to evaluate the perform-ance of the architectures are also
provided. By targeting a critical area in future networking infrastructure
research, the project's outcomes will have immediate and wide practical
implications in network development. The results of the pro-ject will lead to a
roadmap for the development of the next generation access network
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Admela Jukan&lt;br/&gt;Program
Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;Aug 19, 2004.&lt;br/&gt;