* 0434126
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Fetal growth, developmental trajectories, and adult reproductive function
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Peter Ellison, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna E. Lambert
* 09/30/2007
* USD 11,200.00

This study will look at patterns of prenatal and childhood growth, pubertal
development, and adult reproductive function in a modern human population.
Acknowledging that there is great variation in reproductive trajectories both
within and among populations, the current study examines at what point during
development these reproductive trajectories are established and what external
factors shape them. Given recent evidence that early development can have
profound and irreversible effects on adult anatomy and physiology, the general
hypothesis is that reproductive trajectories may be initiated in childhood, or
even prenatal life. More specifically, it is hypothesized that a number of
factors, from age at reproductive maturation to menstrual regularity are
influenced by prenatal and early postnatal growth rates. Most importantly, this
study examines variation in adult gonadal steroid hormone levels, predicting
that these profiles have strong developmental components.&lt;br/&gt;This two
part project will use longitudinal data from Norway to address these hypotheses.
The first part will focus on the relationships among perinatal growth, childhood
development, reproductive trajectories, and ovarian function in a group of
cycling women. A second, corresponding study will examine early growth,
reproductive history, and testicular function in a cohort of men. It is
predicted that in both sexes, size at birth and postnatal growth will be related
to adult reproductive hormone profiles and reproductive histories.
&lt;br/&gt;Both portions of this project will be extensions of ongoing
epidemiological studies. For each female subject, an ovarian steroid profile has
already been created based on radioimmunoassay (RIA) of saliva samples collected
every day for an entire menstrual cycle. Gonadotropin levels and testosterone
levels (in male subjects) have been measured in serum samples. Subjects of both
sexes have previously filled out extensive questionnaires on health and
lifestyle, which will be supplemented, in the current study, by ancillary
interviews on living conditions during childhood and reproductive history. The
birth and childhood growth records of all subjects will be obtained through
national registries and/or the subjects themselves. &lt;br/&gt;From the
perspective of reproductive ecology and physical anthropology, a greater
understanding of the long-lasting effects of early life events may help to
further explain the broad range of human variation and the remarkable plasticity
humans show in response to both short-term and long-term changes in the
environment. The current study also has obvious clinical and epidemiological
implications, including the potential impact of early growth on fecundity and
reproductive cancer risks. Not only will this study promote graduate training
and research but it will foster international and interdisciplinary
collaboration with researchers at the University of Tromso, Norway. The results
of this project will be published in peer-reviewed anthropological and
epidemiological journals in order to disseminate the findings and their
potential implications to a wider audience. &lt;br/&gt;