* 0434930
* Collaborative Research:     NeTS-ProWIN:     Programmable/Versatile Radio Platform for the Wireless Networking Research Community
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2011
* Babak Daneshrad, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Min Song
* 02/28/2011
* USD 900,000.00

This effort brings together experimental PHY researchers from UCLA, networking
research from UCI, and engineering expertise from Umachines to develop a highly
flexible radio platform for the networking community. The availability of such a
platform will spawn innovative and groundbreaking networking research for years
to come. The main thrusts of this proposal are two fold: (1) Specification,
design, and development of a versatile radio platform with a fully defined API
and a user friendly GUI. Two classes of radio nodes will be developed. The first
is an inexpensive platform built entirely on DSP processors. This platform can
handle bandwidths of a few MHz and can accommodate one or two antennas. The
second node leverages FPGA technology and will provide real time operation in 25
MHz of bandwidth and can support up to 4 antenna elements. (2) Networking
research carried out by UCI culminating in the implementation of the resulting
algorithms on the developed nodes. The work will investigate MAC enhancements
for both SISO and MIMO enabled nodes such that the physical layer parameters are
controlled through the MAC layer for higher overall performance (cross-layer
design). In addition to providing research results of great interest to the
community, this work will push the nodes to their limits of flexibility and
drives the definition and implementation of the MAC/PHY interface.