* 0434078
* Acoustic Characterization of the Mesopelagic Boundary Sound Scattering Layer
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Kelly Benoit-Bird, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2008
* USD 181,623.00

The acoustic properties of mid-water biologically induced sound scattering
layers in coastal environment is poorly understood, especially around sub-
tropical and tropical islands in the Pacific, where the bottom slope can very
steep. The sound scattering layer can represent a large acoustic target and can
easily be mistakenly as a false bottom and can interfere with sonar systems. The
sound scattering layer around the Hawaiian Islands is known as the mesopelagic
boundary community (MBC) of micronekton comprising of small fishes, shrimps, and
squids. This layer, like most deep-scattering layers, undergoes vertical
migration. However, the Hawaiian boundary's migration also has a large
horizontal component that is predictable along some coastlines. The project team
will characterize the acoustic environment of the mesopelagic boundary community
by performing 1) multi-frequency acoustic backscatter measurements at multiple
grazing angles at different portions of the layer to account for differences in
density and layer thickness, 2) acoustic, video and oceanographic measurements
to estimate density and species and the relationship of oceanographic conditions
at the same locations of the backscatter measurements, 3) acoustic and
chlorophyll a measurements to estimate zooplankton and phytoplankton abundance
and density at the locations of the backscatter measurements, 4) island scale
spatial and temporal distribution of the mesopelagic boundary sound scattering
layer at various locations around an island, with Oahu serving as a model for
other islands in temperate and tropical Pacific. This research will increase our
understanding of the environment and the characteristics of the mesopelagic
boundary community. The mesopelagic boundary community is an important part of
the coastal ecosystem associated with Pacific and other islands that have steep
bottom slopes and increase understanding of its ecology is important for
preserving, managing and operating in this environment. This community of
micronekton also serves as an important food resource for many commercially
important species including billfish, tunas, and bottomfish and also spinner
dolphins.