* 0434831
* Cedar Creek Natural History Area Science and Outreach Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Clarence Lehman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2007
* USD 285,000.00

A grant has been awarded to University of Minnesota-Twin Cities under the
direction of Dr. David Tilman, to construct a 3600-square-foot research,
outreach and education facility for the Cedar Creek Natural History Area
(CCNHA). The proposed facility will meet the most immediate and crucial needs of
the CCNHA including a large flexible meeting room with movable partitions to
accommodate research, outreach, and teaching needs; a public reception area for
outreach activities; and office space for research and outreach personnel. The
full meeting room would handle scientific symposia, weekly seminars, large
outreach presentations and other gatherings (up to 160 people) that present
facilities cannot accommodate. Much of the time the room would be divided, by
partitions, into three rooms (each being 530 square feet) that would provide dry
laboratory space for such research needs as plant sorting and soil preparation,
and classroom and small meeting room space for outreach and educational
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new facility will play a significant role
in training the next generation of scientists, in educating teachers and
journalists, and in communicating the results and implications of research
results with the general public. The increasing relevance of ecological science
to understanding and managing a human-dominated planet demands a synthesis of
research, education and outreach. The new Cedar Creek facility will allow and
encourage this synthesis by providing space for public outreach activities,
space for training teachers and journalists, and space for enhancing the
experiences of the of 60 to 70 undergraduates interns who train at Cedar Creek
each year. All of these individuals, who would gain hands-on knowledge of
science, would carry their experiences into their lives and careers, enhancing
the role of science in their endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;