* 0434298
* Collaborative:MSPA-CSE: Analysis and Detection of Transient Dynamics in Ecological Systems
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Kevin Gross, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2009
* USD 132,271.00

Many of the traditional approaches in ecological theory are based on the
paradigm that natural ecosystems return to stable states. Thus, traditional
approaches to environmental problems draw on the large body of mathematical and
statistical techniques for analyzing such systems. These approaches, however,
have clear limitations. Just as ecologists emphasize that long-term experiments
yield different results from short-term experiments, theory needs to take the
role of time scales into account, and look beyond an emphasis on stability. In
the context of this proposal, the PI's will develop the mathematical and
statistical tools to understand the role of transient dynamics (as opposed to
dynamics connected with stability) in ecological systems.

This study will both aid our basic understanding of real ecological systems, and
refine old and open up new approaches to environmental management. To cope with
the often sudden and large impacts that humans can have on ecosystems, there is
growing interest in management strategies that change as managers learn and as
an ecosystem is beset by new shocks. Implementing adaptive management, however,
requires a far more sophisticated understanding of how short-term, observed
dynamics of a system generate long-term patterns that ultimately determine
sustainability. Students will also receive important interdisciplinary training.