* 0434222
* MSPA-MCS: collaborative research: Statistical Learning Methods for Complex Decision Problems in Natural Language Processing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Michael Collins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 181,886.00

Pattern classification problems that arise in natural language processing
applications, such as parsing, machine translation, and speech recognition, are
more complex than those commonly addressed with statistical learning methods.
The broad goal of this research project is the design and analysis of
statistical learning algorithms that are suitable for these problems. The
research is focused on the following questions, which are motivated by
characteristic properties of complex pattern classification problems in natural
language processing: methods for multiclass classification with desirable
statistical and computational properties; methods for structured classification,
where the predicted variables come from a large set with a rich structure (for
example, predicting the parse tree of a sentence); the extension of these
methods to problems with hidden variables, that is, where some relevant data is
not observed; and complex nonparametric models for these problems, in
particular, computationally efficient nonparametric Bayesian methods based on
hierarchical Dirichlet processes. The methods developed will be validated
empirically on parsing, machine translation, and speech recognition problems.

The research project is aimed at the development and analysis of statistical
learning methods for complex decision problems, such as those that arise in
natural language processing. A key goal of research in natural language
processing is the development of automated systems, such as translation systems
and dialogue systems. The most successful approaches involve the use of
statistical methods to exploit language data, such as a text corpus. However,
the decision problems that arise are very complex. A good example is the problem
of parsing, or recovering the syntactic structure underlying sentences in a
language. For such problems, the set of candidate decisions is very large, and
possesses considerable structure. This research project is aimed at developing
computational and statistical methods that are suitable for complex decision
problems of this kind. Successful methods are also likely to have a significant
impact in other areas of computer science, including computer vision and
bioinformatics, because similar complex decision problems also arise in these
areas.