* 0434102
* Tunable Infrared Photodetectors for MASINT Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* J. Scott Tyo, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2008
* USD 562,816.00

Spectral imagery has emerged in the past decade as one of the most powerful
tools to be applied to the problem of measurement and signals intelligence
(MASINT). A conventional imaging sensor measures the radiance over a broad range
of wavelengths at every pixel in a scene. A spectral sensor provides more
information to the observer by measuring the radiance in a number of spectral
bands across an interesting region of the spectrum. The infrared detectors
proposed here represent a revolutionary change in sensors for spectral imagery
and other MASINT applications. As discussed below, the spectral response can be
controlled and adapted simply by changing the bias voltage of the FPA. This
spectral agility will allow two-color, multispectral, and low-resolution
hyperspectral imagery to be performed with the same detector, and the spectral
sensitivity, bandwidth, and number of bands can be independently controlled at
will. A novel, normal incidence mid-infrared quantum dot (QD) detector based on
intersubband transitions is at the heart of the new technology. These nanoscale,
self-assembled detectors have shown a broad response with voltage bias dependent
tunable spectral characteristics. In this effort, the team emphasize 1)
controlling the spectral response and tenability of the QD detectors, 2)
understanding the performance characteristics of arrays of the QD detectors, to
include noise and pixel-to-pixel nonuniformity, and 3) how to use this new class
of sensor to perform adaptive spectral imagery The team includes students from
under-represented groups at a major minority-serving institution.