* 0435631
* Reaching Science and Special Education Teachers: On-Line and In-Person
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* Barbara Sprung, Academy for Educational Development
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 09/30/2005
* USD 99,973.00

Reaching Science and Special Education Teachers: On-Line and In-Person is being
developed by the Educational Equity Center at the Academy for Educational
Development (EEC/AED) to provide vital information and teaching strategies
around inquiry-based science for students with disabilities. The target audience
is K-4 science and special education teachers. The overarching goal is to enable
students with&lt;br/&gt;disabilities in grades K-4 to fully participate in
science, learn skill-building activities, and gain positive attitudes about
science that may influence later school and career choices.&lt;br/&gt;The
project is a collaboration with the Council for Exceptional Children (CEC) and
Science Education for Students with Disabilities (SESD), a National Science
Teachers Association (NSTA) Associated Group. Core activities include
professional development seminars offered on-line and at national conferences.
The seminars build on an NSF-funded, accessible, standards-based science
activity program that includes modifications for students with disabilities.
Seminars include strategies, activities, and resources to help participating
teachers provide essential science skills and impart in students with
disabilities - and their parents - a iacan dola attitude about STEM, beginning
in the earliest grades. Further outreach and dissemination to teachers and
parents is being conducted in partnership with The American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the National Information Center for Children
and Youth with Disabilities (NICHCY) at AED.&lt;br/&gt;This project is providing
science and special education teachers with the tools to bring inquiry-based
science to students with disabilities, beginning in the early grades. As a
result, students with disabilities will have a better chance of doing well in
science in the upper grades, and in using science and technical skills in all or
some aspect of their future careers. It is also advancing knowledge across the
fields of science and special education. Through a unique combination of on-line
and in-person professional seminars, it is bringing information about the needs
and capabilities of students with disabilities to science educators, and
information about the importance of science to special educators. Project
leaders and advisors have expert qualifications in terms of science education,
special education, inclusion, professional development,&lt;br/&gt;parent
involvement, and equity; and staff and advisors include people with
disabilities. Evaluation is being conducted, and the field is being kept
informed about lessons learned. This project is reaching thousands of science
and special education teachers through collaborations with national
organizations with extensive&lt;br/&gt;outreach: CEC, SESD/NSTA, AAAS, NICHCY,
among others. EEC/AED will take full advantage of the enormous number of
teachers and parents that can be reached through these national and regional
organizations, and the variety of resources, both on-line and in-person, of the
organizations that will provide direct access to the target audience.