* 0435812
* Workshop: Curation of Terrestrial Scientific Cores, Samples and Collections
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Steven Goldstein, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of terrestrial cores,
samples and other rock material is critical for&lt;br/&gt;conducting many
avenues of geologic research. Most academic researchers have access
to&lt;br/&gt;space where cores and samples can be stored during the initial
stages of research and&lt;br/&gt;sampling but lack an adequate facility where
these materials can be permanently preserved&lt;br/&gt;and accessed by the
greater research community. A one-day workshop will bring
together&lt;br/&gt;geoscientists working with terrestrial cores, samples,
collections, and other geologic&lt;br/&gt;materials that have been acquired as
part of academic research projects. The primary goal&lt;br/&gt;of the workshop
is to visit a public-sector, state-of-the-art sample repository
where&lt;br/&gt;space is currently available to the academic community and other
researchers for long-term&lt;br/&gt;storage, curation, and easy access to rock
material and other collections. Through the&lt;br/&gt;workshop, participants
will identify the needs of the research community and prioritize&lt;br/&gt;the
facilities, equipment, and metadata storage that would best suit the different
types&lt;br/&gt;of geologic material to be curated. By establishing a list of
priority needs and major&lt;br/&gt;issues facing academic researchers, an
effective plan for meeting those needs can be&lt;br/&gt;formulated.