* 0435178
* RCN: Biodiversity Mechanisms of Ecosystem Regulation in the Global Environment (BioMERGE)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Shahid Naeem, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Russell
* 05/31/2008
* USD 384,584.00

Biodiversity represents a complex and rapidly changing feature
of&lt;br/&gt;ecosystems that is currently under intensive investigation by two
distinct&lt;br/&gt;groups of scientists; those that study its distribution and
those that&lt;br/&gt;study its function in ecological processes. Understanding
the&lt;br/&gt;environmental consequences of widespread changes in biodiversity,
however,&lt;br/&gt;requires bringing these groups together. BioMERGE (Biotic
Mechanisms of&lt;br/&gt;Ecosystem Regulation in the Global Environment) will be
a&lt;br/&gt;research-coordinating network that will foster the merger of these
two&lt;br/&gt;groups. It will develop electronic networks to coordinate the
sharing and&lt;br/&gt;dissemination of scientific findings among participating
scientists. It&lt;br/&gt;will also sponsor a series of workshops that will
periodically assemble&lt;br/&gt;core participants to resolve emerging
theoretical and empirical issues,&lt;br/&gt;develop analytical tools, evaluate
and recommend scientific protocol, and&lt;br/&gt;identify future priorities in
biodiversity research. BioMERGE will also&lt;br/&gt;serve as an information
gateway for both scientists and non-scientists&lt;br/&gt;alike by providing non-
technical consensus papers, bibliographies,&lt;br/&gt;glossaries, and summaries
of important findings.&lt;br/&gt;