* 0435041
* NeTS - ProWiN: Collaborative Research: Exploiting Flexible PHYs in Networks: Prototype and Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 09/30/2007
* USD 100,000.00

Wireless communication and networking is increasingly prevalent in everyday
life. This project focuses on exploiting the substantial number of degrees of
freedom that are increasingly available at the physical layer to design and
build multihop wireless networks with enhanced capacity, robustness, and
usability. Our central objective is to identify how to best leverage these
tradeoffs and experiment with complementary medium access control (MAC)
protocols that are capable of doing so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is an
integrated one that focuses on cross-layer algorithm design and implementation.
The focus is three fold: one, the development of a multi-hop wireless network
prototype testbed - Hydra; two, the design and implementation of adaptive
physical layer (PHY) modulation and coding schemes that significantly increase
PHY flexibility; and three, the design and implementation of novel medium access
control (MAC) algorithms that efficiently exploit the flexibility offered by
next-generation PHYs. Our approach crosses the boundaries between both the
physical layer and the networking layers and between theory and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perhaps the greatest impact of our work comes
from designing and building a working prototype. This allows us to generate
results that are extremely well grounded in physical reality, taking us away
from the simulation-oriented approach that currently dominates wireless
networking. These results will help to enable more effective wireless networks,
especially those where data takes multiple wireless hops. We will disseminate
our results through the production of students as well as the usual publication
venues.&lt;br/&gt;