* 0435373
* NeTS-ProWiN:    Implementation Techniques for Last-Mile Wireless Mesh Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Tzi-Cker Chiueh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

NeTS-NR: Implementation Techniques for Last-Mile Wireless Mesh
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tzi-Cker Chiueh, SUNY at Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0435373&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The explosive growth
of IEEE 802.11 wireless LAN (WLAN) technology has prompted a rethinking of how
metropolitan-area mobile wireless network services should be designed and
implemented. Specifically the cost-effectiveness of 3G cellular networks is
being called into question owing to their gargantuan initial licensing cost. In
contrast, wireless mesh networks (WMN) that leverage 802.11-based WLAN hardware
or the emerging 802.16 wireless broadband access standard (WiMAX) do not incur
any licensing fees because they operate in the unlicensed spectrum. Moreover,
the hardware/software components of wireless mesh networks are relatively
inexpensive since their success in consumer and enterprise market segments
creates economies of scale and significantly brings down the manufacturing and
development cost. This project is developing, implementing, and evaluating a
novel wireless mesh network architecture called Hyacinth that is specifically
designed to support last-mile broadband Internet access. Hyacinth features
several unique innovations that are not present in other WMNs. First, Hyacinth
significantly increases the aggregate throughput of a WMN by supporting multiple
WLAN interfaces per WMN node, each operating at a distinct radio channel.
Second, Hyacinth supports a host-transparent network-layer handoff scheme that
preserves continuity of network applications as end hosts move across different
subnets, without requiring any modifications to end hosts. Third, Hyacinth
improves the aggregate throughput of each WMN node by equipping each WMN node
with an array of access points and dynamically balancing their load. Fourth,
Hyacinth's routing protocol has built sufficient redundancy into route updates
such that compromised nodes that lie can be detected and isolated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;