* 0435640
* Access Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) in Idaho
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Michael Odell, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of Access STEM in Idaho is to extend the efforts put forth by the
Northwest Alliance University of Washington's Disabilities, Opportunities,
Internetworking, and Technology (DO-IT) project to increase the representation
of people with disabilities in STEM academic programs and careers through the
following objectives: (a) Recruit high school and college students with
disabilities into STEM career paths;(b) Train and Retain students by
establishing a mentoring program at the College of Southern Idaho to support and
encourage students with disabilities to enroll in STEM careers as they
transition from high school to post&lt;br/&gt;secondary education; (c) Recruit
and Train STEM faculty at the College of Southern Idaho, to&lt;br/&gt;increase
the number of individuals with disabilities in their STEM programs; (d) Train
secondary&lt;br/&gt;educators to support and encourage the inclusion of students
with disabilities in high school level&lt;br/&gt;STEM courses, and to assist
with the facilitation successful transition from high school
to&lt;br/&gt;college.&lt;br/&gt;People with disabilities are underrepresented in
STEM careers. Further, access to postsecondary education and to the
accommodations that facilitate success in college level classes and especially
in STEM fields are problematic for youth with disabilities. The lack of access
extremely limits the career prospects for individuals with disabilities. The
proposed project will utilize research-based curriculum and other resources
developed by the Northwest Alliance DO-IT program to effectively change post-
secondary outcomes for students with disabilities. Specifically, transition
services that guide students toward STEM careers will dramatically increase the
number of students in Idaho obtaining post-secondary educations in STEM fields.
The implementation of a training program that fosters accessible facilities,
activities, and&lt;br/&gt;technologies will greatly improve students' abilities
to fully participate in STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;The building blocks established
in Idaho through the Idaho Interagency Council on Secondary Transition are fully
incorporated into the design of the proposed project.Each component of the
project will be evaluated in relation to the states transition plan which will
create a mechanism for sustainability of project activities. In effect, this
project lays the foundation for transition services to postsecondary education
for all students with disabilities in Idaho. As previously mentioned, the
service blue print that will be evaluated through this project will provide
other states with an effective transition model. With Idaho's rural
infrastructure, Access STEM in Idaho, along with its many collaborators, will be
able to replicate the training and mentoring program in other regions of the
state. In collaboration with the Northwest Alliance and the use of their
curriculum and training materials, videos, and a searchable Knowledge Base
accessed through their project website, a system of statewide support can be
established. At the completion of year one, the Access STEM in Idaho will apply
for continuation of NSF funds to support a statewide program. Access STEM in
Idaho will work with the Northwest Alliance to create and update new materials
and resources and project outcomes will add to the Northwest Alliance's
objectives to enhance the scientific and technological understanding nationwide.