* 0435752
* SGER: Development of Accessible Arctic Education for Elementary Students and the Public in the Arctic River-Delta Experiment (ARDEX)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Juanita Urban-Rich, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 12/31/2005
* USD 25,340.00

The scientific and educational objectives of this Small Grant for Exploratory
Research project are to: examine the horizontal and vertical distribution of
grazing zooplankton in the Mackenzie River and at its freshwater/saltwater
interface; examine the fate of zooplankton derived DOM and CDOM associated with
the Mackenzie River; develop a website that features video and digital images
from the field project; initiate a school pen pal program involving data
exchange (on topics such as temperature, light, seasons, animals, etc.) between
the Sir Alexander MacKenzie School in Inuvik, NWT Canada and the Helen Keller
Elementary School in Franklin MA USA; create and present hands-on activities on
Arctic life and processes to students at Helen Keller Elementary School and the
James J Chittick School during the Excellence in Science, Technology and
Mathematics Education (ESTME) week.

The Arctic is often viewed as a harsh, inhospitable place that is deserted and
remote. In reality, it is a highly dynamic area that supports a large amount of
marine life and is home to many indigenous people. While scientists need to
study this region in order to understand, model and predict the effects of
global warming on this fragile and important ecosystem, future scientists
(elementary students) and the public need to become more aware of this region
and to learn about Arctic life and processes in order to protect this ecosystem
and understand its connection to the world. This project will initiate a new
program on accessible Arctic education for the public and elementary students.

Little is known about zooplankton processes and inputs to dissolved organic
matter (DOM) in the near-coast environment. This project will provide the first
information on fine-scale distribution of grazing zooplankton and zooplankton
inputs to dissolved organic matter in coastal Arctic waters. The potential
changes to Arctic shelves resulting from loss of ice coverage could change the
dynamics of dissolve organic matter cycling, making this region sensitive to
climate change.