* 0435173
* Virtual Networking - Enabling Network Service Innovation
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Jonathan Turner, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 12/31/2005
* USD 250,000.00

Proposal Number: 0435173 PI: Jonathan Turner Institution: Washington University
Title: Virtual Networking - Enabling Network Service Innovation

Abstract:

A recurring problem with communications networks is that as they grow and become
more widely used, they become resistant to change. The Internet is now becoming
subject to network ossification, making it difficult to deploy new capabilities
to meet emerging needs. The advent of high performance network processors and
advanced configurable logic devices now make it practical to virtualize the
Internet, allowing multiple virtual networks to co-exist within the same
physical infrastructure. This project is investigating the requirements for
virtual networking architectures and the design options for realizing them.

The expected results of this work include analysis of major issues that affect
the design of virtual network substrates. Options by which resources are
allocated from the network substrate to virtual networks are being explored. The
program is also investigating alternative approaches to virtualizing end-systems
and design issues for virtual data links. In addition, the program is exploring
architectures for virtualized routers. Virtualization places new requirements on
network processors to enable different virtual routers to share resources in a
single device, without interference.

Network virtualization has the potential for eliminating the recurring problem
of network ossification and enabling continuing innovation in core network
technologies and services. It can have a dramatic impact on the nation's
information technology infrastructure, allowing much more rapid introduction of
new capabilities as new needs arise.