* 0435016
* The Science Knowledge and Education Network Building a User Base around Scientific Publications: Editing Online Content and Annotating Scientific Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Richard Bonney, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 01/31/2007
* USD 548,275.00

This project is developing an open-source infrastructure to create a knowledge
and education network - a new and powerful application, called a Scientific
Knowledge and Education Network (SKEN), for building dynamic collaborative
communities centered around primary scientific references. The underlying goals
of SKEN are to expand traditional, content-based scientific information into a
community-based information exchange and to provide an innovative mechanism for
blending science knowledge with opportunities for formal and informal science
education. This transforms primary scientific references into "living"
publications that include the most current information on their topics and allow
continuous annotations of the content through community input from both
researchers and members of the public. Scholarly authors and editors vet and
edit any new information before uploading it to the primary content. Educators
can also use SKEN to locate information for their teaching, as well as to post
teaching resources and strategies back to the community. Using advanced
information technologies SKEN is moving primary scientific resources from
restricted content distribution points (bricks and mortar libraries) to
ubiquitous availability over the Internet. It is also decreasing the time
required to update these scientific resources, and improving access, search, and
archival capabilities. By ensuring that all scientific communities implementing
the SKEN architecture become part of the NSDL infrastructure, this project
provides easy cross-fertilization of scientific disciplines.