* 0435328
* NeTS-NR: Strategies to save energy in the internet
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Suresh Singh, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Schopf
* 08/31/2008
* USD 376,990.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Network Technologies and Systems
(NeTS)&lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Review Analysis and
Recommendation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0435328&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Suresh Singh &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Portland State University&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Strategies to Save Energy in the Internet
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
makes a case for using sleeping as a way to reduce the energy consumption of
internet devices. The benefits of doing so include, reducing energy needs which
will promote a more global deployment of the internet, making the internet more
reliable in the presence of unreliable power supply, and enabling disaster-hit
portions of the internet to continue functioning for longer periods on the
available UPS power (Uninterruptable Power Supply).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach for reducing the energy consumption proposed here is to use packet-
level information to put hardware components within switches and routers to
sleep. The focus is on energy-conservation within the context of an
organization's Autonomous System (AS) which provides many energy-saving
opportunities. The research challenges include developing algorithms for
sleeping, maintaining network-level QoS (Quality of Service) despite sleeping,
and analyzing the impact of sleeping on current internet
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;The methodology used to study these problems will rely on
measurements, simulation, and prototyping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of
this work will be to reduce the energy consumption by internet devices
nationwide by between 35% - 55%. In addition, the new technology will enable
American manufacturers of internet equipment to expand their market abroad where
energy costs a far more than in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected
results of this work include specific sleeping algorithms that can be directly
employed in future internet devices, a prototype device that demonstrates the
key concepts, and research papers published in major venues for internet related
research.&lt;br/&gt;