* 0435327
* Collaborative Project: Assessing the User-base and Expanding the Usability/Reach of the Analytical Sciences Digital Library through Developmental Workshops
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Cynthia Larive, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harry Ungar
* 05/31/2005
* USD 585,115.00

This collaborative project, involving experts in analytical science, library
science, and intelligent Internet search, is enhancing the usability, value,
scope of content, user base, and organizational self-sufficiency of the
Analytical Sciences Digital Library (ASDL). A broad assessment of current
usability, content, and practices of the ASDL is being conducted that will serve
as a guide to reform and enhancement efforts. The usability of the collection is
being streamlined through reorganization of contents based on concept
hierarchies. New software tools are being provided for automated data harvesting
and intelligent metadata collection, resulting in increased editorial staff
efficiency. The breadth of the ASDL collection is being enhanced through
development of new content areas including The Virtual Laboratory and Online
Articles, a resource describing effective strategies for integrating cutting-
edge research into the classroom. National and regional user workshops are
planned to demonstrate effective applications of electronic resources in lecture
and lab courses and expand the user community. A special focus of user workshops
is on innovative pedagogical approaches incorporating problem-based and service
learning methodologies. Finally, the project is forming new partnerships with
related NSDL collections to both broaden its user-base and address
multidisciplinary applications. The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in
the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) is providing
significant co-funding of this project in recognition of the value of this work
in advancing the larger educational goals of MPS.