* 0435633
* SGER:  A Survey to Study the Impact of the Madrid Terrorists Attacks on the Spanish Population
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Tom Smith, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2005
* USD 69,408.00

SES-0435633 Kenneth Rasinski National Opinion Research Center

On March 11th, 2004 Islamic terrorists exploded multiple bombs on four Spanish
trains killing 191 people. The attached occurred just before the parliamentary
elections and seemed to have a profound effect on them. In this Small Grant for
Exploratory Research (SGER) the PI will conduct a survey in Spain to gauge the
public's attitudes about the March 11, 2004 train bombings in Madrid. The PI
will complete a national random digit dialing (RDD) survey of the population of
Spain. The survey seeks to answer four major questions: (1) how did people learn
about the events and how did they use mass and interpersonal communications in
its aftermath? (2) what specific reactions did people have in direct response to
the events? (3) what was the general psychological response of the people in
Spain, and (4) how were attitudes, beliefs, values, and political behavior
affected by the events. Results will be compared to the 2001 National Tragedy
Study conducted by the National Opinion Research Center (NORC), and through an
over-sampling of residence of Madrid, results will be analyzed relative to
proximity to the event.

The study has broader impacts in that it could potentially help us better
understand the impact of terrorist violence on the various demographic groups in
society and the role that proximity plays in the level of stress experienced
after traumatic events These findings could contribute to the development of
more effective social support systems and treatment for persons experiencing
post-traumatic stress syndrome.