* 0435221
* Optimization of the Electrical and Dielectric Properties of Hydrogen Bonded Solids for Fuel Cell and Other Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Sossina Haile, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2007
* USD 413,000.00

The goal of this research is to elucidate the correlation between hydrogen
bonding, phase transitions and electrical properties in solid acid sulfates,
selenates and phosphates. These compounds exhibit numerous structure types, in
which the extent and type of hydrogen bonding vary dramatically. Moreover,
dramatic changes in properties accompany structural phase transitions. A broad
range of experimental techniques will be employed to characterize the materials
(X-ray and neutron diffraction, IR, Raman, NMR and impedance spectroscopy, and
thermal analysis) and will be complimented by computational simulations to
predict phase transition behavior a priori. These comprehensive studies will
guide efforts to (1) control the temperature at which the transitions occur, (2)
increase the conductivity in the superprotonic phases and the spontaneous
polarization in the ferroelectric phases, and (3) to synthesize hypothesized
structures with desirable hydrogen-bonding features. Ultimately, room
temperature superprotonic conductors and ferroelectrics may be achieved. The
breadth of tools to be utilized, the relative ease with which the materials can
be synthesized, and the high level of public interest in energy technologies,
renders this an ideal system for training the next generation of materials
chemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to advance a fundamental understanding of a class of materials known
as solid acids. This understanding will enable the optimization of properties
and the development of new superprotonic conductors and ferroelectrics with
enhanced performance. Proton conductors have applications in humidity and
hydrogen sensors, fuel and electrolysis cells, and high energy density
batteries, and ferroelectrics as capacitors and in electro-optical devices. Fuel
cells, because of their relevance to a sustainable energy future, are the major
drivers for this research. Solid acid compounds are a radical departure from
traditional fuel cell materials. They offer potential benefits in terms of
reduced complexity and cost of the fuel cell system. However, their
incorporation into demonstration fuel cells is in its infancy, and consequently
the materials are of too great a risk for industrial laboratories. On the other
hand, the relative ease with which solid acid compounds can be synthesized as
well as the broad range of characterization tools that will be employed in this
work, render this project ideal for training students from the high school level
through the post-doctoral scholar level. Student training ranging from short
visits by high-school students, to senior theses by undergraduates, to in-depth
training of doctoral students will be pursued. The combination of fundamental
science, important technological consequences, and strong educational outreach
justify federal support for this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;