* 0435059
* Collaborative Project: Superimposed Tools for Active Arrangement and Elaboration of Educational Resources
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Lillian Cassel, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2007
* USD 89,804.00

This award and Award No. 0435496 constitute a collaborative
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and scholarly research, by their very
nature, involve scanning, reviewing, and sometimes intensely studying resources
about a subject. Libraries, both conventional and digital, tend to provide
services only at the level of complete documents and collections of complete
documents. Students, instructors, and researchers rarely treat these "complete"
resources in a uniform manner. Textbooks and published papers are not
necessarily used in their entirety. Sections are not necessarily covered with
equal emphasis or in the order in which they appear. Resource materials are not
necessarily used verbatim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Superimposed tools," such as
those built by the investigators, allow a user to easily select passages in a
variety of base document types (e.g., MS Word, PowerPoint, Excel, HTML, XML,
PDF), place them on a scratchpad tool, label them, and arrange them into user-
defined groupings and provide annotation. The key functionality in these tools
is the ability to select an item (which includes a reference) and return to the
original source using the original base application and see the selected passage
highlighted. Separation of the notes from the source allows free recombination
and reuse in innovative ways. The links are always there so that a user can
return to the source context as needed, but the annotations and other marks are
separate entities, independent of the source material, and can be combined in
any way that supports the user's goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSDL Targeted
Research project is evaluating faculty and student use of superimposed tools in
undergraduate and graduate computer science classes, including both traditional,
textbook-based classes as well as research-oriented, paper-based classes. The
tools are being used by the investigators, their colleagues, a high school
teacher, and their students. The major goal of the project is to evaluate
whether the use of superimposed information supports more effective teaching and
learning. The investigators are also developing digital library services that
allow superimposed artifacts to be deposited, indexed, searched, and used along
with original library resources. Using and elaborating information at
subdocument granularity should support reuse of educational materials by other
instructors and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific original contributions
of this project include (1) extending the scope of digital library facilities to
support user tasks beyond the point of simply locating and retrieving resources;
(2) enabling the creation of digital library collections that are more precisely
targeted at given educational needs by including subdocuments as well as
complete documents; (3) supporting the capture of post-retrieval work with
digital library resources (comparison charts, concept maps) as explicit, derived
documents that can in turn be "value-added" resources in the digital library;
(4) capturing elaborations that enhance the understanding of digital library
resources in educational settings; and (5) supporting easy customization of such
resources by other faculty, students, and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;