* 0435370
* NeTs-ProWin:    High Performance Cognitive Radio Platform with Integrated Physical and Network Layer Capabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Michael Bushnell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,200,000.00

NeTS-ProWiN: High Performance Cognitive Radio Platform with Integrated Physical
and Network Layer Capabilities&lt;br/&gt;Award 0435370&lt;br/&gt;Bryan Ackland,
Rutgers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University, Georgia Institute of Technology
and Lucent Bell Laboratories&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to build a high-performance experimental cognitive radio platform based on a
novel network-centric architecture for software defined radios. Cognitive radio
bands under consideration by the US FCC represent a new approach for co-
existence between wireless devices based on intelligent adaptation to the
observed radio frequency (RF) environment. Dynamic adaptation capabilities of
cognitive radios range from frequency agility to more complex collaborative
approaches in which radio nodes self-organize into an ad-hoc multi-hop network.
In this project, we are developing an FPGA-based experimental platform which
incorporates a number of cognitive radio capabilities including frequency
agility, software-defined modulation, programmable etiquette and MAC protocols,
and ad-hoc network routing. The hardware architecture contains a mix of software
programmable and reconfigurable components, and incorporates a flexible packet
processing engine for high-speed (~50 Mbps+) link and network layer
functions.&lt;br/&gt;This project is a team effort involving the Wireless
Information Networks Laboratory (WINLAB) at Rutgers University (cognitive radio
systems, SDR, and low-power VLSI), Georgia Institute of Technology (agile RF
front end) and Lucent Bell Laboratories (flexible radio platforms). The research
program has the following thrusts: (1) system-level investigation of cognitive
radio spectrum sharing scenarios, (2) design of agile RF transceivers for
efficient reconfiguration of frequency, bandwidth and power, (3) architecture,
design and validation of baseband and protocol processing modules for a
cognitive radio with integrated PHY and networking capabilities, and (4)
development of experimental cognitive radio platforms for use in system
prototyping and field evaluation of cognitive radio usage scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;