* 0435964
* The 2005 International Conference on Preconditioning Techniques for Large Sparse Matrix Problems in Industrial Applications; May 19-21, 2005; Atlanta, GA
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Michele Benzi, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 11,300.00

The innermost computational kernel of many large-scale scientific applications
and&lt;br/&gt;industrial numerical simulations is often a large sparse matrix
problem, which typically&lt;br/&gt;consumes a significant portion of the overall
computational time required by the simulation.&lt;br/&gt;Many of the matrix
problems are in the form of systems of linear equations, although
other&lt;br/&gt;types of problems, such as eigenvalue calculations, can occur
too. A tremendous impact&lt;br/&gt;will be made if the performance of these
sparse matrix solvers can be improved.&lt;br/&gt;A traditional approach to
solving large sparse matrix equations is to use direct&lt;br/&gt;methods. This
approach is often preferred in industry because direct solvers
are&lt;br/&gt;robust and effective for moderate size problems. However, the
unprecedented pace&lt;br/&gt;of the advance in technology has led to a dramatic
growth in the size of the matrices&lt;br/&gt;to be handled. For example, the
storage requirement for three-dimensional simulations makes&lt;br/&gt;direct
methods prohibitively expensive. Iterative techniques are the only viable
alternative.&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, iterative methods lack the robustness of
direct methods. They often fail&lt;br/&gt;when the matrix is very ill-
conditioned. This is the reason for the tremendous current&lt;br/&gt;interest in
preconditioning techniques for large sparse matrix problems:
preconditioners&lt;br/&gt;dramatically improve the robusteness and performance
of iterative algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In spite of much progress on
preconditioning techniques over the last few years,&lt;br/&gt;iterative solvers
are still not always completely reliable and efficient. The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;conference, the fourth in a series of biannual meetings on
preconditioning, intends to&lt;br/&gt;address the complex issues related to the
solution of general sparse matrix problems&lt;br/&gt;in large-scale real
applications and in industrial settings. The issues related to &lt;br/&gt;sparse
matrix software that are of interest to application scientists and
industrial&lt;br/&gt;users are often fairly different from those on which the
academic community is focused.&lt;br/&gt;For example, for an application
scientist or an industrial user, improving robustness&lt;br/&gt;may be far more
important than finding a method that would gain speed. Memory usage
is&lt;br/&gt;also an important consideration, but is seldom accounted for in
academic research on&lt;br/&gt;sparse matrix solvers. As a last example, linear
systems solved in applications are&lt;br/&gt;almost always part of some
nonlinear iteration (e.g., Newton) or optimization loop.&lt;br/&gt;It is
important to consider the coupling between the linear and nonlinear parts,
instead&lt;br/&gt;of focusing on the linear systems alone. The speakers of this
conference will discuss&lt;br/&gt;some of the latest developments in the field
of preconditioning techniques for sparse&lt;br/&gt;matrix problems. The
conference will allow participants from academia, industry
and&lt;br/&gt;government labs to exchange findings in this area and to explore
possible new directions&lt;br/&gt;in light of emerging paradigms, such as
parallel processing and object-oriented programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;