* 0435141
* NeTS-ProWin:    Collaborative Research:    Dynamic Spectrum MAC with Multiparty Support in Adhoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Koushik Kar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2008
* USD 105,000.00

NeTS-ProWiN: Collaborative Research - Dynamic Spectrum MAC with Multiparty
Support in Adhoc Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0435306&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Saswati Sarkar, University of
Pennsylvania&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major advances
in dynamic spectrum management and the inevitable deregulation of large portions
of the radio spectrum will revolutionize future wireless networks, services, and
applications. This will lead to an era of spectrum efficient cognitive radios
that will enable the deployment of radically different radio architectures,
algorithms, and protocols over the next decade. This project is studying the
design of a new programmable media access control (MAC) layer for this new
environment. The MAC must regulate how future programmable radio devices can
efficiently interact with each other using spectrum-aware communication
algorithms. In our study, we model the MAC design as decision problems using
tools from decision sciences such as stochastic control, optimization, graph
theory and estimation theory. We validate the design of the MAC through an
experimental implementation consisting of programmable radios. The expected
results from the research include the design of a programmable MAC system that
can enable a class of new applications, including enhanced reliability
communications and spectrum-efficient group communications. The resulting
implementation of the proposed programmable MAC platform and its software will
enable the development of new intelligent spectrum-aware algorithms and
applications. The results of the research will provide a set of foundation
algorithms that can be used by the community developing new spectrum-aware radio
systems. The research facilitates several life-critical activities e.g., search
and rescue missions and disaster relief operations. The research will also
enrich the education curriculum of the participating institutions and foster the
participation of under-represented groups in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;