* 0435297
* NeTS:ProWiN: Programmable Radio Platforms for Highly Dynamic Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Dirk Grunwald, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2008
* USD 997,141.00

NeTS:ProWiN: Programmable Radio Platforms for Highly Dynamic
Networks&lt;br/&gt;Award 0435297&lt;br/&gt;Patrick White, Stevens Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A promising approach for reducing spectrum
congestion in wireless networks is to introduce programmable radio platforms
equipped with Software Defined Radios (SDR) that can apply cross-layer as well
as cross-network optimization to maximize performance over changing RF
environments. These programmable radios can independently adjust a variety of
communications parameters including, modulation, power-level, and antenna beam
pattern. They can also load-share traffic as well as integrate the individual
capacities of available wireless networks to meet instantaneous performance
requirements and improve coverage. While these capabilities are highly
desirable, they create new challenges for the wireless network designer, since a
programmable radio has increased capability to influence not only communications
in which it is directly involved but also communications between unrelated
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;How should programmable radios adapt their communications
parameters to maximize performance while at the same time, minimize
interference? This project addresses this question at several levels. First, we
define new sub-layer structures within the physical layer for synchronizing
pair-wise performance. We introduce primitives, ''adjectives and adverbs," for
integrating software radios with higher OSI layers. These primitives define the
environmental sensing and channel parameter adjustments that will be supported
in an SDR. Finally, we define rules (i.e., the etiquette) that should be adopted
and enforced to encourage ''proper behavior" by groups of programmable radios to
minimize the effects on unrelated communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;