* 0435593
* International Conference on Multiscale Methods and Partial Differential Equations; August 26-27, 2005; Los Angeles, CA
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Thomas Hou, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2005
* USD 9,999.00

The International Conference on Multiscale Methods and Partial Differential
&lt;br/&gt;Equations will be held at UCLA on August 26-27, 2005. The objective
of this &lt;br/&gt;conference is to bring together researchers, students and
practitioners with &lt;br/&gt;interest in the theoretical, computational and
practical aspects of multiscale &lt;br/&gt;problems and related partial
differential equations. The conference will &lt;br/&gt;provide a forum to
exchange and stimulate new ideas from &lt;br/&gt;different disciplines, and to
formulate new challenging multiscale problems &lt;br/&gt;that will have impact
in applications. Despite considerable progress in a &lt;br/&gt;wide range of the
sciences, and a growing awareness of the importance &lt;br/&gt;of multiscale
approaches, currently there is fragmentation in multiscale
&lt;br/&gt;methodology, its rigorous analysis and its applications. There is an
urgent &lt;br/&gt;need to develop systematic multiscale analysis and
computational&lt;br/&gt;methods that can be applied to a wide range of practical
problems. This &lt;br/&gt;effort poses new challenge to the theory of partial
differential equations. &lt;br/&gt;By bringing together analysts, experts in
multiscale modeling,&lt;br/&gt;and computational scientists, we can identify the
key issues in multiscale &lt;br/&gt;mathematics and common themes of various
multiscale problems arising &lt;br/&gt;from different disciplines. This provides
a unique opportunity to make &lt;br/&gt;significant advances in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances of computational sciences in the past few
decades have resulted &lt;br/&gt;in an increase of several orders of magnitude
in computing power. &lt;br/&gt;Modeling and simulations of physical problems in
a narrow range of &lt;br/&gt;scales have been quite successful. However, to
solve complex &lt;br/&gt;physical problems which involves a wide range of
spatial or &lt;br/&gt;temporal scales remains to be a major challenge in many
scientific &lt;br/&gt;disciplines. These problems are of vital importance to our
national&lt;br/&gt;interests, affecting our policy and technology advances in
areas such as &lt;br/&gt;environmental science, energy, biology, materials
science, and &lt;br/&gt;information science. Multiscale analysis, modeling, and
simulation is&lt;br/&gt; an emerging new research area which has already made
significant &lt;br/&gt;impact in many scientific disciplines. There have been
many exciting &lt;br/&gt;recent, but problem specific, advances in multiscale
analysis, modeling &lt;br/&gt;and simulation. Up to now, most work on multiscale
modeling and &lt;br/&gt;computation has been developed within an individual
discipline. &lt;br/&gt;Breakthroughs in specific domains could be applicable in
a broader &lt;br/&gt;context, but remain isolated. As a result, multiscale
descriptions are &lt;br/&gt;nowhere near their potential level of impact,
including in education &lt;br/&gt;and industry. One of the main purposes of our
multiscale conference &lt;br/&gt;is to integrate these isolated efforts and
diverse developments. The &lt;br/&gt;conference will also provide a special
opportunity to connect applied &lt;br/&gt;mathematicians with domain experts in
multiscale modeling and computation. &lt;br/&gt;This will help bridge the gap in
research and knowledge transfer &lt;br/&gt;between mathematics and other
application disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;