* 0435912
* SGER: Construction of 'Deep' Paleoclimate Community Climate System Model (CCSM) Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Matthew Huber, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/2005
* USD 31,374.00

This grant will support the PI to explore, demonstrate, and document the process
of performing fully coupled Community Climate System Model - 3 (CCSM-3)
investigations of 'deep' paleoclimates, periods in Earth's past when boundary
conditions--i.e. topographies, vegetation distributions, trace gas
concentrations, orbital parameters--were substantially different than modern.
The PI will work to inform the paleoclimate community how to most effectively
take advantage of the CCSM for paleoclimate simulations. He will document
potential pitfalls in the code. He will describe how to set up boundary and
initial conditions, and will test two or more of the accelerated spin-up
techniques that have been developed for paleoclimates. The work will be
documented with a technical report, a web page, and a web 'blog' of the daily
experiences of setting up these experiments. In this sense, the PI will provide
an "outreach" service to the paleoclimate community

Broader impacts include the entrainment of the paleoclimate community more fully
into the CCSM as a community modeling facility. Over 100 climate scientists,
beyond those at the host institution, the National Center for Atmospheric
Research, NCAR, use the CCSM. However, the number of university paleoclimate
scientists that use the CCSM is relatively low; most use the model for
contemporary climate studies. A graduate student will be supported to help with
the project. As a further deliverable, the PI will make himself and his graduate
student available for approximately four on-site hands-on workshops to non-NCAR
scientific groups interested in using the CCSM-3 for paleoclimate studies.