* 0435663
* Research into Best Practices for Description of Science Content within Digital Talking Books
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Corinne Kirchner, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2008
* USD 294,088.00

The WGBH National Center for Accessible Media (NCAM) proposes to research and
document effective practices for providing meaningful descriptions within
Digital Talking Books (DTBs) that serve post-secondary students, professionals
and scientists who have visual impairments or blindness. The project unites NCAM
with the American Foundation for the Blind (AFB), Recording for the Blind and
Dyslexic, Inc. (RFB&amp;D) and the American Printing House for the Blind (APH)
in a collaborative effort to develop research-based guidelines for effective
descriptions of non-text science content.&lt;br/&gt;Project partners will
explore and document current practices used within DTBs to describe science-
focused images, charts, graphs, diagrams, illustrations, equations, and other
graphics. The work will build on descriptive approaches developed for online
science content that emerged from previous NSF- and U.S. Department of
Education-funded projects. Scientists and professionals with visual impairments
will contribute strategies, such as individual preferences that they ask
assistants and readers to follow when describing images. Through a two-stage
Delphi survey with 30 sighted and visually impaired respondents, these collected
practices will be enhanced, refined and synthesized. Researchers will then use
these practices to create representative descriptions for selected science
images and evaluate their effectiveness with 60 visually impaired adults.
Project deliverables include: A research report that presents a synthesis of
effective practices as defined through this study and the results of evaluation
of these practices with users with visual impairment and training materials for
Digital Talking Book providers that summarize best practices and provide images
and sample descriptions with opportunities for practice.