* 0435677
* Literacy Accessibility for Biology (LAB):  Improving Outcomes for Students with Learning Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Judith Zorfass, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2008
* USD 299,978.00

The proposed project is a collaboration across two centers at Education
Development Center, Inc.: the Center for Family, School, and Community (FSC),
which has a long history of meeting the needs of students with disabilities, and
the Center for Science Education (CSE), which has a long history of creating
secondary school science course materials. The proposal is to develop and test a
literacy intervention designed to improve access to 9th and 10th grade biology
for students with learning disabilities who struggle with reading and writing.
At the core of the intervention is a set of scientifically-based literacy
strategies, supported by the software program, Draft:Builder. A powerful
assistive technology tool, Draft:Builder was developed in FSC with funding from
the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Special Education Programs. The goal
is to help students organize information through outlining; extract information
from reading by taking notes; elaborate ideas for writing; and synthesize
information by creating a draft of text. By improving their literacy skills,
students will better understand the biology concepts. Over three years, EDC will
develop, test, and refine the literacy intervention to be used with Insights in
Biology, a curriculum developed at CSE with funding from the National Science
Foundation. The intervention includes various instructional materials: lesson
plans focusing on reading and writing, templates to expand the use of
Draft:Builder, and assessment tools.