* 0435452
* NeTS - ProWiN: A Programmable Wireless Platform For Spectral, Temporal and Spatial Spectrum Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2012
* Joseph Carey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,027,000.00

NeTS - ProWiN: A Programmable Wireless Platform For Spectral, Temporal and
Spatial Spectrum Management&lt;br/&gt;Award 0435452&lt;br/&gt;Dirk Grunwald,
University of Colorado at Boulder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is producing
a robust, affordable and highly mutable platform for experimenting with each of
the core technologies that can improve spectral efficiency. The effort combines
mature, off-the-shelf RF transmission components; an open-source software radio
development methodology based on experience with commercial software radio
architectures; a novel, low-cost commercial phase array antenna system; novel
waveforms designed for ease of experimentation; and an integrated simulation and
deployment system based on widely-used open source software. Although individual
components of the system can be customized by individual research groups, the
resulting system is planned to operate in the 2.4GHz ISM-band spectrum.
&lt;br/&gt;The project is also establishing a small testbed for development and
testing, although the focus is on developing a kit to be replicated at different
institutions. The use of commercially available RF components and development
environments reduces the cost of the deployed systems, and insures that other
researchers can easily acquire the equipment needed to develop their own
testbeds. &lt;br/&gt;This research is developing a platform for experimentation
in many different aspects of programmable wireless networks, allowing other
researchers to focus on software, algorithms and policies for such systems. The
project is also developing novel media access protocols and RF predistortion
methods appropriate for exploiting phased-array antennas. These efforts will
improve the utility of the system to others who wish to exploit the phased-array
antenna.&lt;br/&gt;