* 0435684
* VROOM: Visualizing the Real Operations Of Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,968.00

Mathematics is a visual language that poses major barriers to blind students
considering careers in science, engineering, technology or mathematics (STEM).
The learning challenges are further attenuated by federal law, parental
advocates and educators who seek better tools and techniques. Presently, there
is a dwindling supply of teachers properly trained to serve the blind students
seeking STEM careers. As a result, there is a spiraling gap between the number
of blind students needing training and those adequately trained to provide the
requisite instruction.&lt;br/&gt;Phase One of the Project VROOM will produce a
workable Math 101 (Introductory Algebra) curriculum under the guidance of an
interdisciplinary team mathematicians, engineers, instructional technologists,
and special educators. Phase Two will field-test the Math 101 curriculum during
a six-week summer workshop for blind high school students. Finally, Phase Three
will evaluate the effectiveness of the Math 101 curriculum and disseminate the
results to stakeholders concerned about educating blind students. The ultimate
project outcome will be the creation of an evidence-based Math 101 curriculum,
one that is&lt;br/&gt;technologically appropriate for the blind, and ready for
further analysis and research. Formative and summative evaluation measures will
examine baseline and changes in knowledge and attitude among students and
teachers. The formative data will insure the effectiveness of the project during
the granting period and allow for any needed course corrections. The summative
evaluation will judge the ultimate success of the&lt;br/&gt;completed project
using both quantitative (test scores) and qualitative measures (focus groups and
attitude surveys). Six different dissemination strategies will employ a blend of
active/passive and visual/verbal dissemination approaches. The development of
Math 101 and its demonstration through a summer mathematics workshop are unique.