* 0435485
* NeTS-ProWin:      An Open, Low Cost, High Quality Software Radio Platform and Testbed
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Jay Lepreau, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,199,998.00

NeTS-ProWin: An Open, Low Cost, High Quality Software Radio Platform and
Testbed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jay Lepreau, University of
Utah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0435485&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
focused on software radio, with hardware, software, and testbed management
components. It is developing, packaging, distributing to researchers, and
deploying in the Utah Emulab testbed, a low-cost, high-performance, and open
software radio platform, "GNU Radio," and extending the Emulab testbed to
support it. Further development of GNU Radio is a research challenge that will
lead to increased understanding of software-programmable radios: maximizing
programmability while also supporting high performance and reliable operation.
For the hardware, a challenge is keeping costs low while also providing a
powerful device. The project will be an enabler of research in the area of
programmable wireless networks. Further development of GNU Radio hardware and
software, integration of GNU Radio into Emulab (for remote testbed access to
researchers), and the distribution of Emulab systems (for local experiments
invaluable for wireless research due to space sharing limitations) will be a
significant asset to the research community. Public-domain software in
conjunction with inexpensive, flexible, programmable hardware integrated within
a replicable network testbed is critical to the progress of the flexible
wireless systems community. This effort will also produce educational materials
in the form of tutorial articles, sample code, and experiment configurations
that are critical to furthering education and research in this area. This
project contains the elements needed to achieve broad impact on the research
community, industry, and society overall in the area of programmable wireless
radio networks and spectrum sharing..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;