* 0435627
* Accessible Science (ACE): A Trilingual Approach to Science Education for Deaf and Hearing Elementary Students (RDE-DEI)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* David Cocke, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Bilingual deaf and hearing students from non-English speaking homes have limited
access in their native language to develop an interest in science. Since state
competency exams are written in English, their second language, many bilingual
students are left behind in passing state and national science tests. Lamar
University's Chemistry department and Deaf Education Teacher Training program
with the Texas School for the Deaf (TSD), the Alabama School for the Deaf (ASD),
and Ruben C. Rodriguez Elementary (RR) school in&lt;br/&gt;Edcourt, Texas
propose a project with the goal of: providing accessible science teaching and
learning products, compliant with convergent technologies, to teachers and
students using state-of-the-art ASL/English bilingual, bilingual/ESL and reading
comprehension strategies. Project ACE will institutionalize trilingual products
that promote accessibility to science education for students with disabilities
(deaf) and bilingual hearing students learning English as a second language. It
will disseminate trilingual products in American Sign Language (ASL), English
and Spanish text and incorporate best practices in ASL/English, bilingual/ESL
methodologies to a broad audience in special education, bilingual education and
regular education. The main intellectual merit is the exploration of latest
technology and pedagogical practices to the education of disadvantaged and
disabled students at the critical stage of capturing these students for science
careers. Two convergent science laboratory/classrooms at Lamar will be connected
to facilities to be&lt;br/&gt;established at each of the participating
institutions above. These schools enroll significant numbers of deaf and hearing
ethnic minorities from socioeconomically disadvantaged homes thus the project
will also assist in closing the digital divide. The schools will be linked to
each other and to Lamar and contain computer based hardware and software,
wireless networking, multimedia, hypermedia, virtual reality, and interactive
TV. A team of university scientists, deaf education teacher-educators, bilingual
specialists, graduate and undergraduate students, science teachers and media
specialists will jointly develop convergent content that combines
videoconferencing, conventional textbooks, and multimedia on DVD/CD formats, on-
line&lt;br/&gt;laboratory experiments and demonstrations locally and globally
via the Internet and internet based resources. The convergent techniques
emphasizes: problem-based learning, accelerated learning, visual learning,
constructivism and Socratic learning. This is a unique in that it specifically
addresses the English language learning needs of students by incorporating
specific bilingual/ESL and reading comprehension strategies to teach science
content to elementary age students using convergent classroom pedagogy (e.g.
videoconferencing, CD-ROM/DVD, Internet) techniques. Broader Impact: Beyond K-8
bilingual elementary students, the project impacts doctoral, masters, and
bachelor level students and teachers interested in improving science education.
Bilingual/ESL and reading comprehension strategies for the teaching of science
will have broad applicability to the more than 80,000 deaf and hard of hearing
students and 3.2 million English-as-a-second-language hearing students in the
United States. Our project will be an ininclusionl- model for deaf, special
needs, and hearing bilingual students working together. Using current
ASL/English bilingual, bilingual/ESL and reading comprehension methodology,
project staff will develop cooperative science teaching and learning activities,
trilingual science literacy lessons and glossaries in ASL, English/Spanish
writing projects, mentoring activities, qualitative case studies of students'
bilingual science literacy development and ASL to prepare deaf and hearing
students to master the objectives set&lt;br/&gt;by the National Science
Education Standards and the Texas Education Skills and
Development&lt;br/&gt;program for Science. This project is aligned with the No
Child Left Behind Act and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.