* 0435703
* Studies Related to Establishing a Valid Radiocarbon Ventilation Rate for the Glacial Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Wallace Broecker, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2011
* USD 952,445.00

ABSTRACT OCE-0435703

Determining how ocean ventilation rates changed during the last glacial and
deglacial periods is fundamental to reconstructing global changes in ocean
circulation related to major shifts in the Earth's climate. In this project,
researchers at the Lamont-Dougherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University
will attempt to resolve some of the major problems that have confronted
scientists studying these phenomena.

The main objective of the project is to use radiocarbon ages from
contemporaneous planktonic (surface dwelling) and benthic (bottom dwelling)
foraminifera to define the age of deep waters over the period 21,000 - 14,000
14C years before the present time. To this end it will be necessary to make
multiple radiocarbon dates on samples from various depths and locations. Recent
work has suggested that some core locations may be unsuitable for precise
radiocarbon dating due to the presence of secondary carbonate phases forming
within the sediment column. A second theme of this project is to investigate the
presence of these phases and if possible, determine which sites are ultimately
more or less valid for determining ocean ventilation rates. This goal will be
addressed by carrying out dissolution experiments on samples that are known to
yield anomalous 14C ages, the aim being to isolate and date individually the
different phases. Changes in carbon storage and ocean circulation will be
investigated by reconstructing changes in deep sea carbonate ion concentrations
using the foraminiferal shell weight proxy developed by Lohmann (1995). A
further aim of the project will be to use land-based evidence to investigate the
relative timing of events occurring at the close of the last glacial period and
during deglaciation. This work will be based on precise dating of glacial
features and exposure dating of moraines left by retreating glaciers at the end
of glacial times.

Broader impacts: This study should provide answers to some fundamental questions
concerning changes in global climate -- how different was ocean circulation
during glacial time and how, if at all, have changes in ocean circulation
affected climate in the past. The results from these studies will provide
important constraints for paleo- and future climate models.