* 0435846
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Geoarchaeology and Dating Climatic Events in the Middle Rio Negro Valley, Argentina
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Michael Waters, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2006
* USD 11,360.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michael Waters, Ms. Heidi Luchsinger will conduct
archaeological research to reconstruct climate and human behavior during the
Younger Dryas period in Southern South America. Decades of archaeological
research in South America reveal a complex record of human occupation spanning
at least 12,000. In Argentina, although substantial work has been conducted
throughout the Pampas and Patagonia, the boundary area (or ecotone) between
these two regions has been neglected. Archaeologically, ecotones are quite
important because they offer a wide variety of natural resources, making them
attractive settlement locations for prehistoric populations. Ecotones are also
particularly sensitive to climate change. The Rio Negro Valley, is an ecotone
located between Patagonia and the Pampas. Recent archaeological research has
been conducted in the middle valley, however, its landscape and climatic history
is essentially unknown preventing a clear evaluation of the current
archaeological record. For example, little is known about the type of
environments that lured early settlers into this region or forced them to cope
with conditions that created difficulty in procuring food, water, and sufficient
shelter. This dissertation project will investigate a 75 km segment of the
middle Rio Negro Valley in order to reconstruct these landscape and climatic
histories. Results will lead to the potential detection of archaeological sites
even earlier than previously discovered and global climate changes throughout
human occupation. Unlike our modern world, the dynamics of landscape and climate
in prehistory had a much greater impact on human populations signifying its
importance for interpreting past human behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this dissertation project has several components. First, it
joins graduate students and archaeologists from the U.S. and Argentina to pursue
new theories on the peopling of the Americas. The research will be disseminated
at national and international meetings, talks to local archaeology groups, and
publication in both English and Spanish.&lt;br/&gt;