* 0435084
* Collaborative Proposal: Personal Collections: Enhancing the Utility of the NSDL
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Brandon Muramatsu, Eduworks Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2007
* USD 373,500.00

This National STEM Digital Library (NSDL) project develops a service that gives
educators and students the ability to create personal collections of resources
from the NSDL and other digital libraries. To use the current (approximately
230,000) digital resources in the NSDL effectively, educators and students need
to retain them, share them and return to them, just as they do with printed
materials. This project addresses this need by providing the equivalent of a
personal digital library, allowing patrons to store digital library holdings
together with the associated identifying metadata. In addition, the Personal
Collection service enables users to classify resources using personal taxonomies
or organizational schemes, add annotations (such as the suggested citation),
share collections with colleagues in collaborative learning and research
settings, and search colleagues personal collections using metadata. Users can
also create "packages" of resources and learning objects for use by learning
content authoring tools and learning management systems. The service has two
parts, a Personal Collection server, based on Dspace, and a cross-platform
client called Keeper that runs in a user's Internet browser. The design is based
on Internet services architecture and makes maximal use of existing open source
technologies. This project holds the promise of making NSDL collections more
practical to use, and therefore more accessible to educators and students
alike.&lt;br/&gt;