* 0435353
* NeTS - NOSS:Semantic Internetworking of Sensor Systems for Efficient In-Network Information Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Thomas Kunz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 12/31/2007
* USD 762,000.00

Proposal Number: 0435353&lt;br/&gt;PI: Thomas Little &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Boston University &lt;br/&gt;Title: Semantic Internetworking of Sensor Systems
for Efficient In-Network Information Processing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in sensor and computing technologies provide
impetus for deploying wireless sensor networks in diverse applications ranging
from environmental and habitat monitoring, power systems and manufacturing.
Successful realization of such systems hinges on systematic methodologies to
address and resolve bottleneck issues. Sensor network operation and lifetime is
fundamentally limited by energy, a particular concern in environmental
applications that necessitate long-term deployment. The project systematically
interfaces new techniques for data networking and distributed information-
processing to realize scalability and massive energy efficiencies in sensor
network operation. The employed methods include novel semantic routing
techniques and in-network localized distributed inferencing algorithms. A
challenging ecological application, which is representative of the challenges
arising in environmental monitoring, is addressed as proof-of-concept.
Successfully completed project will lead to (1) an enabling technique for
building systems to monitor and understand our environment and thus provide a
framework for evaluating broad policy questions relevant to society; (2) new
techniques and theories to advance the viability of large scale sensor networks
as an engineering challenge; (3) novel, unanticipated insights and technologies
in biology, geography, and engineering, which are bridged by the
interdisciplinary effort; (4) scientific tools for scientists, educators,
students, and like-minded individuals who might apply the results of the
project. The results of the project will be disseminated through scholarly
venues, journal, conference and online publications.&lt;br/&gt;