* 0435577
* Collaborative: US-GLOBEC NEP Phase IIIa-CCS: Effects of Meso- and Basin-scale Variability on Zooplankton Populations in the CCS using Data-Assimilative, Physical/Ecosystem Models
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* Dale Haidvogel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2009
* USD 259,630.00

These studies are designed to elucidate mechanisms that determine how physical
features influence ecosystem processes. The investigators will develop nested
models that encompass phenomena across the entire North Pacific basin -- e.g.,
ENSO and regime shift/PDO-linked features -- and incorporate variability over
interannual to decadal time scales. They will direct special attention to
zooplankton, at both the individual population level (e.g., euphausiids), and at
the aggregated community level and employ advanced data assimilation (e.g., of
the mesoscale surveys) to produce optimal merged data/model products for use by
the GLOBEC NEP synthesis effort. The coupled physical-ecosystem model products
will include dynamically consistent, data-assimilative hindcasts for the region
and time of the CCS field experiments and multi-decadal, basin-scale, nested
calculations (1970-present). With this research, the investigators seek to (i)
quantify how physical features in the California Current System and variability
related to climate change impact zooplankton biomass, production, distribution,
and the retention and loss of zooplankton from coastal regions and (ii) compare
the impacts of climate variability and change (such as El Nino-La Nina cycles
and regime shifts) on marine animal populations (euphausiids) in the CCS and
&lt;br/&gt;CGOA. Both of these respond directly to stated goals of the GLOBEC
NEP synthesis program. In addition, this project will afford the opportunity for
multiple Ph.D. scientists and undergraduate students, working either directly
with the PIs or by attendance at the proposed workshops, to participate in
GLOBEC synthesis. &lt;br/&gt;