* 0435656
* Techniques and Tools to Enhance Blind and Visually Impaired Students Participation in High School Level and General Chemistry Laboratory Classes
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2007
* Thomas Mallouk, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 10/31/2007
* USD 311,848.00

This project seeks to develop tools and techniques that will allow blind and
visually impaired (VI)students to carry out general chemistry laboratory
experiments without the aid of sighted assistants. Specific objectives of this
work include:(1)adaptation of the Addison Wesley Chemistry high school
laboratory curriculum currently used at the Indiana School for the Blind (ISB),
by combining JAWS speech software with Vernier laboratory tools,ID mate portable
bar code readers,and other tools in use at ISB,(2)testing and refining the tools
and techniques at Penn State,Truman State,and ISB,(3)field testing the modified
curriculum in years 2 and 3 of the program at ISB,(4)performing a detailed
assessment of skills,concept learning,and attitudinal outcomes by comparing
study groups with control groups that use sighted assistance,(5)creation of a
guided inquiry integrative laboratory exercise for blind and VI students,and
(6)dissemination of results through publications and exhibits at conferences.
This project team consists of a blind graduate student (Supalo)and a blind
chemistry professor (Wohlers)who will have primary responsibility for the
development and preliminary testing of new tools and techniques.They will
collaborate closely with Roth, a science teacher at ISB,and Greenberg,a chemical
education expert at Penn State,in the field testing and assessment phases of the
program.