* 0435843
* Collaborative Research: Oxidation of Ultra-High Temperature Ceramic (UHTC) Composites in Dissociated Oxygen Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Bridget Rogers, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 452,532.00

This research collaboration between SRI International and Vanderbilt University
will systematically investigate the influence of oxygen dissociation on the high
temperature oxidation of ultra-high temperature ceramic (UHTC) composites and
their constituents. Due to their high melting points and good dimensional
stability under intense aerothermal heating, ZrB2/SiC and HfB2/SiC UHTC
composites are very promising for sharp leading edge and control surface
components of hypersonic vehicles. Research will specifically focus on the
effects of atomic oxygen on (1) the boundaries between passive and active
oxidation regimes, (2) the kinetics of passive and active oxidation, and (3) the
composition, morphology, and optical properties of resulting oxide layers.
Oxidation experiments will be conducted at SRI in a vacuum chamber equipped with
a high-power microwave discharge for producing atomic oxygen and a CO2 laser for
sample heating, as well as in a unique laboratory-scale arc-jet facility. In
situ diagnostics will include laser-based and mass spectroscopic species
detection for monitoring the presence and concentrations of gaseous reactants
and products. Post-oxidation surface analyses will be performed at the
University of Vanderbilt using a variety of characterization techniques to
examine the composition, structure, and optical properties of oxide layers.
&lt;br/&gt;The unique high temperature properties of UHTC composites can enable
hypersonic vehicle designs with sharp leading edges - designs with much greater
flight capabilities than traditional blunt-body hypersonic craft. The results of
this study will advance the fundamental understanding of UHTC oxidation behavior
in dissociated oxygen environments and help pave the way for the application of
UHTC components on hypersonic vehicles. The collaboration between SRI and
Vanderbilt will also generate significant educational and research opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, who will participate in all phases of
the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded with AFOSR (6.1).