* 0435095
* NeTS-NR Collaborative Research: Multi-Layer Dual-Homing Survivability for the Next-Generation Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Jianping Wang, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2006
* USD 148,000.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;NETS- Research in Network Technologies and
Systems &lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0435105&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Jue, Jason
P.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas at
Dallas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0435095&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Jianping Wang&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Georgia Southern University
Research and Service Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NeTS-NR
Collaborative Research: Multi-Layer Dual-Homing Survivability for the Next-
Generation Internet&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates multi-layer survivability schemes for the next-generation
networks, which are expected to be deployed over a wide range of underlying
physical network infrastructures, from wireless networks in the ac-cess to
optical networks in the core. An important issue in designing such net-works is
to develop effective survivability schemes that can continue to carry critical
traffic in the event of network failures. Traditionally, different survivabil-
ity mechanisms have been implemented at various layers, independently. This
project investigates the survivability schemes in which survivability mecha-
nisms may be implemented simultaneously at multiple layers within the net-work
in either a coordinated or independent manner. The work focuses primar-ily on
multi-layer dual-homing techniques in the wireless and IP layers, protec-tion
schemes in the optical layer, and the effective integration of these schemes. By
establishing appropriate models and developing new algorithms, the project will
provide insights into the trade-offs between coordinated and independent
survivability schemes with respect to cost, complexity, and service levels pro-
vided in the wireless and IP layers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Admela
Jukan&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;Aug 4,
2004.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;