* 0435389
* NeTS: ProWiN: Wireless Spectral Interference and its Impact on Dynamic Network Connectivity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Cynthia Hood, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 09/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

NeTS: ProWiN: Wireless Spectral Interference and its Impact on Dynamic Network
Connectivity Award 0435389 Dennis Roberson, Illinois Institute Of Technology
Abstract The increasing density of wireless devices and radiating sources
generates significant aggregate interference adversely affecting network
performance. There is a strong motivation to thoroughly understand the
interference phenomenon and adaptively adjust a wireless network to mitigate its
effect. The research objective is to codify the emission from several devices
that produce electromagnetic interference in the 2.4 GHz (and potentially 5 GHz)
unlicensed band. A three-prong methodology is employed: (1) development of a
theoretical model of the interfering signal in the temporal and spectral
domains; (2) the validation of the interference model via computer simulation;
(3) physical experimentation to verify and enhance the accuracy of the previous
results, which in turn augment the experimental work. For the devices
considered, the interference temperature is determined as an outcome. The
aggregate effect on wireless network throughput is measured and related to the
interference temperature. These results suggest that techniques can be developed
to improve network connectivity. Temporal, spatial, and spectral scales can be
advantageously used in adaptive algorithms to flatten interference and assist in
the development of underlay networks, such as ultrawideband. This research will
have broad impact and allow the technical community to better understand how to
use the available network resources. Network performance improvement can result
in significant cost saving to the wireless industry. An important impact will be
on U.S. government communication policy. The education and training of graduate
and undergraduate students will be enhanced by this research. The results will
be disseminated via public demonstrations, symposia, seminars, and publications.