* 0435043
* NeTS-NOSS: PARIS: A Framework for Privacy Augmented Relaying of Information from Sensors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Wade Trappe, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 08/31/2007
* USD 500,337.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing privacy for sensor networks is an
important problem that is complicated by the fact that it is easy for
adversaries to observe communications between sensor nodes. A first line of
defense for protecting sensor communications is cryptography. However, these
methods cannot address the complete spectrum of privacy issues in sensor
systems. Specifically, security solutions are inadequate for protecting the
privacy of contextual information surrounding a sensor application, such as the
source's location, or the time at which a measurement was made, or even the size
of sensor data packets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
development of a framework for providing three critical types of contextual
privacy to sensor communications: source location privacy, temporal privacy, and
traffic privacy. The project takes the viewpoint that the existing network stack
can be modified to protect privacy while maintaining desirable levels of
resource-efficiency. This investigation will enhance the privacy levels achieved
through the development of new routing protocols involving the use of directed
random walk techniques to obfuscate the data source, the modification of the
structure of sensor messages to prevent traffic analysis attacks, the
introduction of delay in the delivery of messages to reduce temporal correlation
attacks, and the introduction of modifications to physical layer communications
and the sensor topology to prevent the localization of a communication source.
Through dissemination of the research results in both archival publications and
new curricula, this project will advance the development of sensor applications
by addressing critical privacy issues before sensor systems become a communal
asset. &lt;br/&gt;