* 0435033
* Genetic Data Collection Capability for the Romberg Tiburon Center, San Francisco State University
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Edward Carpenter, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 10/31/2008
* USD 206,667.00

A grant has been awarded to San Francisco State University (SFSU), under the
direction of Dr Cynthia Cohen to provide funds for a capillary DNA analyzer for
sequencing and fragment analysis and a real-time PCR machine for the Romberg
Tiburon Center (RTC) as part of an ongoing plan to develop the joint-use
Molecular Genetics Laboratory for RTC resident and visiting scientists and
students. The requested equipment will greatly enhance current capabilities for
nucleic acid analysis onsite at RTC and move RTC's molecular capabilities
significantly forward to a modern laboratory for marine molecular research at
scales of organization from the subcellular to ecosystem. Real-time PCR will
allow immediate analysis of gene expression and changes in community
composition, and sequencing and fragment analysis capability will open doors to
RTC users in ecological and evolutionary genetics, molecular evolution, and
phylogenetics. Capillary DNA analyzers and real-time PCR machines are becoming a
regular part of modern molecular biological laboratories as their versatility
and expediency have been proven in numerous environmental scientific studies.
Access to these sophisticated molecular techniques will significantly enhance
current work at RTC in microbial ecology, invasion biology, population biology,
biological oceanography, symbioses, ecosystem function, and life history
studies.