* 0435515
* NeTS - Collaborative Research - NR: Over-Probe: A Toolkit for the Management of Overlay Networks with Mobile Users
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* M.Y. Sanadidi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2008
* USD 660,000.00

NeTS - Collaborative Research - NR: Over-Probe: A Toolkit for the Management of
Overlay Networks with Mobile Users&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mario Gerla,
UCLA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0435515&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
project is to develop efficient path probing and topology management schemes for
overlays that support mobile users. Overlays facilitate the deployment of
functions not available from the commercial Internet (e.g., multicasting, QoS-
aware routing etc.). While conventional overlays so far have connected
stationary users, the overlays of the future must support also mobile customers.
There is need for hybrid wired and wireless overlays that include wireless
segments and even "opportunistic" ad hoc networks (e.g., networks of cars in an
urban environment).&lt;br/&gt;To respond to such needs, this project develops
OverProbe, a new toolkit that includes the innovative probing technique CapProbe
and works for both wired and wireless overlay links. OverProbe evaluates
"virtual link" quality very rapidly. Speed is critical in wireless since the
user at the end of the path may move across different type of wireless media
(e.g., 3G, 802.11, Bluetooth, CDMA, etc.) within minutes. Besides frequent
monitoring of wireless connectivity, the toolkit assists mobile users in soft
handoff without breaking TCP connections. The research also includes the design
and evaluation of scalable, hierarchical overlay structures (using "backbone
overlays").&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will help promote new
services among the mobile community, from telecommuting, to e-commerce and
entertainment. Key results include: (1) A set of path probing methodologies and
tools (Over-Probe toolkit). (2) A two level overlay and proxy architecture. (3)
OverProbe implementation in PlanetLab and WHYNET.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;