* 0435626
* SGER: A Novel Dinosaurian Tissue Exhibiting Unusual Preservation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* John Horner, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2006
* USD 60,301.00

ABSTRACT The Museum of the Rockies 2003 summer field season yielded a
Tyrannosaurus rex that is full of surprises. This dinosaur possesses a novel
tissue type on the internal (endosteal) surface of the femur that has potential
physiological and phylogenetic significance. It is structurally distinct from
other fossil bone types, and may be the functional analogue of avian medullary
bone, a specialized bone type that serves as short term storage for calcium
reserves used in the formation of eggshells. This ephemeral bone tissue is not
produced by extant reptiles or mammals, but forms in response to increased
estrogen levels produced by ovulating female birds. If subsequent analyses
confirm that this novel tissue is analogous to avian medullary bone, it will be
the first objective means of assigning gender to a dinosaur, and provides
additional information regarding the reproductive phase of the animal. The
hypothesis regarding the origin of this new tissue will be tested by subjecting
samples to various chemical, microscopic and molecular analyses, as avian
medullary bone tissue is distinct from other bone types in living birds both
structurally and chemically. For example, extant medullary bone has increased
concentrations of acid mucopolysaccharides and sulfated glucosaminoglycans over
other bone types, and responds in a distinct manner to high iron diamide (HID)
staining. However, the presence of this novel tissue is not the only surprise
observed in this dinosaur specimen. Upon demineralization of the bone,
characteristics were revealed that were utterly unexpected, and again, never
reported for bone tissues of this age. The demineralized matrix of the new
tissue was elastic and stretchy, and had the capacity to be dehydrated and
rehydrated many times without losing this characteristic. Demineralization of
cortical bone also revealed the matrix to be fibrous and highly oriented,
consistent with demineralized collagen in extant bone. Additionally, upon
complete demineralization, pliable branching vessels were revealed within the
cortical bone that are indistinguishable from those similarly recovered from
extant bone after demineralization and collagenase digestion. The dinosaur
vessels possessed microstructures consistent with red blood cells retained in
treated vessels from ostrich bone, and these microstructures contained internal
contents reminiscent of nucleated red blood cells. Finally, demineralization of
the cortical bone liberated microstructures possessing external projections
similar to filipodia, which are virtually identical to osteocytes observed after
demineralization of cortical bone from extant birds. These microstructures also
possess internal contents. This project will pursue chemical, molecular and
microstructural analyses of these exceptional tissues. These dinosaur tissues
have great potential to elucidate previously unsuspected aspects of molecular
diagenesis, tissue/molecular preservation and processes of fossilization, not to
mention the potential to independently test existing phylogenetic hypotheses and
evolution. The risk of this project is more than balanced by the potential, and
therefore seems to fall well within the intent of SGER funds.