* 0435155
* Collaborative Research: NeTS-NR: Ultra-Broadband Optical Wireless Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Chunming Qiao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 08/31/2009
* USD 249,999.00

National Science Foundation NETS - Research in Network Technologies and Systems
CISE/CNS

ABSTRACT

Proposal Number: 0435341 Principal Investigator: Liu, Qingchong Institution:
Oakland University

Proposal Number: 0435155 Principal Investigator: Chunming Qiao Institution: SUNY
at Buffalo

Proposal Title: Collaborative Research: NeTS-NR: Ultra-Broadband Optical
Wireless Communication Networks

This collaborative research project undertakes a multidisciplinary approach to
optical wireless communications (OWC) networks and focuses on the first/last
mile between the existing fiber-optic backbone and many homes and small of-fice
buildings. The project aims at developing novel OWC networking and
communications theory and techniques including those at the physical layer that
overcome the scintillation (variation in light intensity) caused by the at-
mospheric turbulence in OWC networks through sub-carrier modulation and coding,
and those at the link and network layers that take into consideration the unique
capabilities and constraints of OWC when designing optimal topol-ogy, survivable
routing, and innovative dynamic reconfiguration algorithms to mitigate the
negative effects of heavy or dense fog, as well as reduce the per link cost. As
a result of the project effort, an OWC ring network will be built, running
multimedia applications. The success of the project is expected to pro-vide an
affordable ultra-broadband first/last mile access, enable new multime-dia
applications to be delivered to residential homes and small office buildings,
and serve as a stepping stone to the integration of heterogeneous technologies
based on radio frequency (e.g., Wireless Local Area Networks, WLAN, and cellu-
lar networks) and fibers.

Dr. Admela Jukan Program Director, CISE/CNS Aug 5, 2004.