* 0435339
* Computer-Assisted Content Standard Assignment and Alignment
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Elizabeth Liddy, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 02/29/2008
* USD 709,129.00

This project provides a mechanism for improving the ability of teachers to
locate science and math resources that will support their standards-based
instruction, no matter what state they are in or where a resource was developed.
Two services for are available for NSDL collection providers and Pathways
Projects. The first is a Computer-Assisted Standard Assignment recommender tool
that suggests to a human cataloger 1 to 5 of the most relevant national content
standards appropriate for a learning resource. The cataloger accepts, edits, or
rejects these suggestions and the tool adds them to the resource's metadata
records. These vetted assignments are learned by the system in order to inform
future standard recommendations for increased accuracy. The second is a
methodology and tool that automatically creates a crosswalk between math and
science state standards and their national counterparts. This results in an
automated mapping between state and national standards, whereby the national
standards function as exchange standards. This mapping facility is then
incorporated into the search capabilities of educational resource repositories
such as NSDL so that teachers can search for resources using either their home
state standards or the national standards. As a result, educational resources
can be easily shared from anywhere in the country once a translation between
state standards is facilitated. Any state standard can be mapped to any other
state standard, while at the same providing a mapping between any state standard
and the national standard.