* 0435217
* PRISMS- Phenomena and Representations for the Instruction of Science in Middle Schools
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Francis Molina, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Standard Grant
* David Matty
* 12/31/2009
* USD 897,266.00

The Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance (MMSA) is working with AAAS Project
2061 to systematically identify and describe web-based phenomena and
representations to determine whether they are aligned with state and national
content standards, informed by cognitive research, and likely to improve the
quality of middle school science instruction. The resources are being assembled
into a collection called PRISMS (Phenomena and Representations for the
Instruction of Science in Middle Schools), designed to increase the amount of
quality K-12 science educational content accessible through digital libraries.
Using Project 2061's curriculum-materials analysis procedure, the PI and
colleagues are working with middle school teachers to analyze approximately
1,000 science and mathematics and technology items connected to science
benchmarks, for their alignment to middle grades content standards and for the
quality of their instructional support for teachers. The PRISMS collection
provides pointers to aligned items available online, along with rich
descriptions and assessements of their instructional effectiveness. PRISMS also
includes teacher-prepared annotations detailing classroom experiences with using
the phenomenon or representation, suggested modifications to make the item more
effective, and questions that can guide its instructional use. The collection
expects to be enriched over time by additional teacher input on the usefulness
of the resources. Both the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) are providing significant co-
funding of this project in recognition of the value of this work in advancing
the larger educational goals of MPS and EPSCoR.