* 0435348
* NeTS:ProWiN:     Dynamic Intelligent Management of Spectrum for Ubiquitous Mobile Networks (DIMSUMnet)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Paul Kolodzy, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 899,995.00

NeTS-ProWIN: Dynamic Intelligent Management of Spectrum for Ubiquitous Mobile
Networks (DIMSUMnet)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paul Kolodzy, Stevens Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award
0435348&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current spectrum
allocation rules set by Federal Communications Commission (FCC) have lead to an
artificial spectrum scarcity, even though large swaths of spectrum remain
underutilized. The new paradigm of Dynamic Spectrum Access shows promise of
alleviating this and ushering in new forms of networks. However, most current
research on this topic has focused on highly opportunistic, uncoordinated
spectrum access for peer-to-peer ad-hoc
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research takes a pragmatic viewpoint
that coordinated dynamic spectrum access techniques to allocate spectrum on an
on-demand basis can be quite beneficial in cellular and Fixed Wireless Access
(FWA) networks. This effort addresses the following research problems in this
context: (1) Develop a comprehensive understanding of spatio-temporal spectrum
usage in existing cellular networks using extensive spectrum measurements in the
urban and rural settings. (2) Develop models for spectral utilization and
quantify improvements in spectral access efficiency and utilization. (3)
Research spatial data representation structures, scalable spectrum servers, and
spectrum allocation sharing/trading policies that are required to support
efficient dynamic spectrum access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create
a body of RF spectral measurements to determine the locality of spectrum
utilization (in time and space). Additionally, the data analysis will lead to
new models of spatial-temporal-spectral correlation for urban and suburban
environments. Finally, characterization of RF dynamics will be characterized in
order to drive choice of spectrum management control parameters leading to
optimal application of dynamic spectrum allocation. In summary, this research
will result in fundamental contributions to the science of coordinated spectrum
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;