* 0435478
* NeTS - NR:     Protocols for Flexible and Efficient Frequency Spectrum Utilization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Jean Walrand, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 449,820.00

NeTS - ProWin: Flexible MAC Protocols for Configurable Radios Jean Walrand, UC
Berkeley Award 0435478

Abstract

Wireless devices are proliferating and have widely different data rate,
communication range, and power requirements. Currently, such devices use
incompatible communication protocols, which limits their connectivity and
restricts the set of applications. We are designing a flexible family of
protocols that enables vastly different devices to communicate while preserving
their individual requirements. The protocols use an OFDM physical layer. Faster
protocols use more parallel channels in parallel. To enable large network
utilizations, the devices transmit on pseudo-orthogonal sequences of multiple
channels. The protocols select the sequences and perform the necessary
rendezvous functions. We use simulations to evaluate the characteristics of the
protocols and guide the selection of design parameters. The protocols developed
in this project enable very different wireless devices to communicate. They
result in backward-compatible systems and should spark the development of new
applications that exploit these new communication capabilities. The expected
result of the project is a new family of MAC communication protocols validated
through extensive simulations. These protocols can be implemented with
configurable OFDM radios currently being designed by the industry.

