* 0435749
* Collaborative Research: Determinants of male reproductive success in natural spawns
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Philip Yund, University of New England
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Goad
* 12/31/2005
* USD 162,812.00

Proposal OCE 0117623&lt;br/&gt;PI - Paul Rawson, University of
Maine&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Determinants of male reproductive
success in natural spawns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary: This proposal is an
extension of previous work aimed at understanding the effects of reproductive
biology on patterns of life history evolution in a colonial marine tunicate,
Botryllus schlosseri. The project will test five hypotheses about factors that
may determine male reproductive success in natural spawns of this colonial
invertebrate. The five hypotheses specifically aim to explore the effects of
timing of sperm release, relatedness of mates, population density, and
allocation to male function on fertilization success in field and experimental
populations of Botryllus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has shown that
there is a narrow temporal window in which fertilization can result in a viable
embryo, and there may be a gametic incompatibility system. Furthermore,
fertilizing sperm are generally the product of nearby colonies; colonies exhibit
variation in sperm production, and high levels of sperm production only increase
local reproductive success when sperm competition
occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This preliminary information suggests that male
reproductive success in natural populations is a complex function of timing
relative to the reproductive cycles of other colonies, gametic compatibility,
sperm production, and population density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will consist of field and laboratory studies, with preliminary work
focused to maximize the information yield of a suite of nine polymorphic
microsatellite loci. These genetic markers will then be used to assay paternity
in natural spawns and test the series of five hypotheses about the determinants
of male reproductive success.&lt;br/&gt;