* 0435382
* NeTS-NR:     A Measurement-Driven Approach to Internet Protocol and Systems Design
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Bruce Maggs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,547,525.00

Proposal Number: 0435382&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bruce Maggs&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Carnegie Mellon University &lt;br/&gt;Title: A Measurement-Driven Approach to
Internet Protocol and System Design&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sheer size and complexity of the Internet today has
made it difficult for network researchers to evaluate the impact that protocol
changes may have on its operation. The basic problem is that it is difficult to
deploy new protocols widely enough for testing purposes. In response, this
project uses a novel approach (Measurement-Driven Protocol Design) that combines
large-scale measurements of the Internet with the design of new protocols.
Large-scale measurements enable accurate emulation- and simulation-based
evaluation of protocol behavior and, thus, are the key to doing the "what if"
analysis for many protocol designs. This measure-to-evaluate approach enables
the project to make significant contributions to the areas of protocol and
system design. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project develops this new methodology
as part a number of specific research thrusts that, in combination, push the
state-of-the-art in both standard IP and overlay routing. Specifically, the
project expects to make the following major contributions: 1) novel designs for
wide-area IP routing incorporating techniques for diagnosing inter-domain
routing problems and inter-domain traffic engineering, 2) significant
improvements to overlay routing through new streaming multimedia overlay designs
and reflector networks optimizations, and 3) optimization of access networks'
performance and availability using a novel combination of overlay and IP routing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the methodology and protocols
developed, a significant fraction of the measurements made as part of this
research will be made available for research and education. In order to make
them available, this project also explores anonymization techniques for network
measurements. &lt;br/&gt;