* 0435676
* RDE-FRI : Indoor/Outdoor Blind Navigation and Awareness System for Blind Students
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Abdelsalam Helal, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 07/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Even in an ideal academic setting in which a University has unlimited resources
to reduce the challenges in the classroom, blind students will miss out on the
numerous educational opportunities outside the classroom. This project proposes
a navigation and location determination system using an RFID tag grid. The
retail industry has developed a low cost tagging system to electronically
monitor products from manufacturing, warehouse and to the consumer. The design
requirements to satisfy the needs of the retail industry are low cost per unit,
reliable, powerless and the ability to transmit a wide range of data. By
leveraging advances in RFID technology it is feasible to develop a system that
utilizes RFID tags as a location based information grid. Each RFID tag is
permanently installed under carpet, wood floors, behind trim in hallways, along
sidewalks and as part of any pedestrian path. Each RFID tag is programmed upon
installation with its X,Y coordinates and information describing the
surroundings. This allows for a localized information system with no dependency
on a centralized database or wireless infrastructure for communications. For
under $1 per tag it is possible to store 250 bytes of information that can be
read as the user approaches the tag. Using proposed compression and flexible XML
based protocols, an RFID grid in a room can store a complete inventory and
location of the room objects and information about neighboring rooms. Upon entry
into a room the RFID tags at the door provide a summary of the room's content
and the location of each object. This information is then read into the
student's cell phone or PDA and when the student needs to find the electrical
outlet, telephone, desk, vending machine, etc., the system - knowing its current
location based on the RFID tag coordinates - can give the path to the object
through voice prompts.