* 0435719
* Collaborative Proposal: Fostering Cross-Disciplinary Relationships and Early-Career Development to Advance Interdisciplinary Research on Climate Change and Impacts
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Ronald Mitchell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 02/28/2010
* USD 141,591.00

Climate-change research involves complex interactions and feedbacks between
physical, chemical, geological, and biological processes. Insights from human
ecology, economics, sociology, political science, and other social sciences also
must be integrated if we are to understand and mitigate global changes. The
Dissertations Initiative for the Advancement of Climate Change Research,
DISCCRS, fosters cross-disciplinary interactions across the natural and social
sciences and facilitates early-career development for Ph.D. graduates embarking
on interdisciplinary, socially relevant careers dedicated to understanding and
mitigating climate change and impacts. The transition from student to
professional one is a difficult one, and is particularly so for those engaged in
interdisciplinary work. After years of disciplinary specialization, graduates
interested in complex environmental systems such as climate change and impacts
need to quickly develop collaborations across disciplinary and institutional
boundaries. DISCCRS helps new professionals make such links--connections that
might take years to develop otherwise. DISCCRS will improve the ability of new
professionals to conduct interdisciplinary research and communicate results in a
societally relevant context. Though difficult, such research often produces
breakthroughs and insights with enormous potential benefits to society, results
that would not be identified through strictly disciplinary efforts. This project
builds on the success of a 2002-2004 pilot DISCCRS program, which fostered
interdisciplinary communications across the natural sciences (physicists,
chemists, biologists, mathematicians, modelers working with atmospheric,
terrestrial or aquatic systems). The goal of the proposed program is to
incorporate the social scientists to complete the integration of all researchers
focused on improving our knowledge and ability to mitigate climate change and
impacts.