* 0435675
* RDE-FRI: Classroom Accommodations for STEM Educators with a Disability
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Karen Milchus, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2007
* USD 199,907.00

This project will examine the workplace accommodation needs of K-12 and
postsecondary science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) educators with
disabilities. Workplace accommodations have typically been examined on a case-
by-case basis. While there are numerous examples of successful and effective
solutions that meet the needs of individual employees, there has been little
effort to aggregate these case studies to examine trends, understand what works
and for whom, and develop more universally applicable accommodations. This
project will build on the resources of CATEA's Rehabilitation Engineering
Research Center (RERC) on Workplace Accommodations and Southeast Disability and
Business Technical&lt;br/&gt;Assistance Center (SE DBTAC) to investigate the
strategies and technologies that might help a person with a disability enter
STEM education, return to work after acquiring a disability, or to counter the
difficulties in performing work tasks due to aging. This project will use
surveys and focus groups to research the accommodation needs of K-12 and
postsecondary STEM educators who have a disability, and address assistive
technology that will fill these needs. Project staff will then use this
information to develop fact sheets, policy briefs, and a web course to assist
educators and school administration, and to provide recommendations for future
product development that addresses common workplace accommodation needs. The
project will make&lt;br/&gt;use of organizations such as NSTA, AAAS, and ACS to
recruit educators with disabilities and disseminate the results. The
availability of effective accommodations not only allows students with
disabilities to pursue&lt;br/&gt;careers within STEM education, but
accommodations for educators may also prove to be effective with their students
with disabilities.