* 0435870
* Halomethane gas exchange in northern Alaskan coastal ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Robert Rhew, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2008
* USD 291,034.00

Coastal ecosystems are believed to be globally important sources of methyl
halides (CH3Br, CH3Cl, and CH3I) to the atmosphere, but fluxes from the arctic
coastal zone have not yet been measured. CH3Br and CH3Cl are the dominant
carriers of bromine and natural chlorine to the stratosphere, where they
catalyze the destruction of ozone. CH3Br is also a widely used agricultural
fumigant whose use is regulated by international agreement. CH3I is involved in
tropospheric ozone chemistry and aerosol production and is a potential
replacement fumigant for CH3Br. Our understanding of the tropospheric budgets of
these compounds remains out of balance, with major uncertainties about the
magnitude of biosphere-atmosphere fluxes. The biogeochemical cycles of these
halomethanes must be understood in order to assess how halogen loading in the
atmosphere will respond to changes in public policy, land use, and climate. The
proposed project will a) determine whether arctic coastal terrestrial ecosystems
are significant sources or sinks of atmospheric methyl halides and chloroform;
b) examine the environmental and biological controls on their fluxes; and c)
help understand and possibly predict the potential effect that climatic change
in the Arctic will have on the overall fluxes of these compounds, based on their
biogeochemical controls. Flux chambers will be deployed in coastal tundra
ecosystems near Barrow, Alaska, in 2005 and 2006. Air samples will be analyzed
by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry for the halomethanes and the inert
tracers SF6 and F-113, and the sampling strategy will address the expected
spatial and temporal variability of the fluxes. CO2 fluxes will also be
measured. This work will complement the prior research of the principal
investigator (P.I.) on halomethane fluxes in temperate coastal ecosystems. This
project will provide scientific training and thesis research opportunities for a
doctoral graduate student and 3-6 undergraduate students. The students and P.I.
will present results at regional and international geoscience meetings, and
results will be published in peer- reviewed journals. Ilisagvik College students
from Barrow, Alaska, will be invited to participate in the field research, and
two students will be invited to UC-Berkeley to learn the associated laboratory
analytical techniques. In concert with the Barrow Arctic Science Consortium, the
P.I. and students will participate in science outreach classes at northern
Alaskan schools and community centers.