* 0435694
* Collaborative Research: Self-Organization of Vortices as a Contributing Mechanism for Tropical Cyclogenesis
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* James Kossin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2008
* USD 204,023.00

Tropical cyclones pose a very significant threat to life and property, and
affect many people in many places around the globe. Progress towards better
understanding of their structure and evolution thus has the potential for
directly impacting society on a number of levels. The study of tropical cyclones
may arguably be separated into three categories: motion, intensity change, and
genesis. Progress has been made toward understanding the former but measurably
less progress has been made towards better understanding of the latter two
processes. This research will address certain aspects of tropical cyclone
genesis and has the potential to significantly advance scientific knowledge and
ultimately predictive skills in regard to tropical cyclones.

The genesis process is not yet rigorously and universally defined, but most
would agree that it comprises a variety of events, such as formation of a low-
level vortex from a mid-level vortex, and formation of a warm core thermodynamic
structure from a cold core structure. This research will concentrate on the role
of vortex merger in these processes. There have been a number of previous
studies that strongly support the idea that the merger of multiple smaller
vortices into a larger "parent" vortex is a key part of the genesis process.
Presently, however, the details of how the merger process affects the specific
structure of the resulting parent vortex have not been well studied or
documented.

By uniquely applying concepts based on probabilistic solutions in two
dimensional turbulence, this work will explore and document a method for
predicting the exact structure of a parent vortex formed by multiple merger
events. The method predicts the parent vortex structure based solely on
knowledge of the combined circulation and energy of the smaller vortices that
formed it. The method demonstrates that certain configurations of small vortices
will merge to form a smaller, more intense parent vortex than other
configurations that have the same total circulation. This is an important
feature since the ability of the parent vortex to maintain itself and intensify
further into an incipient tropical cyclone can depend strongly on its structure.

Since small-scale vortices are typically formed within clusters of cumulonimbi,
and thus can be remotely measured to some degree, the results of this work might
offer predictive insight into which cloud clusters have a better chance of
undergoing tropical cyclogenesis.