* 0435679
* RDE-DEI: MoCap ASL for the Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Scott Whitney, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2007
* USD 100,000.00

RDE-DEI: MoCap ASL for the Sciences addresses the issue of access to high-
quality science materials for deaf students as well as their teachers,
interpreters, and family members. The project will impact society and the
educational system by reducing current language comprehension barriers
experienced by deaf individuals that prevent them from learning and being taught
scientific concepts effectively. Motion capture, American Sign Language (ASL)
materials will allow deaf students equal access to science concepts and the same
opportunity as hearing students to develop the interests and skills needed to
pursue a career in science. Motion capture, or mocap, will also remove
technology-related barriers, especially the limited capacity&lt;br/&gt;of low-
speed internet connections and the sacrifices of hand-coded animations. The
intellectual merit of the project is demonstrated by the unique application of
motion capture (currently used for developing games and movies and studying
kinematics in medical and physics research) to the development of a library of
science vocabulary and lessons through the animation of three-dimensional
avatars. Project objectives are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1. Reproduce, using motion
capture, Classroom of the Sea and Succeed-HI science lessons (5) and vocabulary
currently available only in video format. &lt;br/&gt;2. Determine optimal
conditions for comprehension of motion-captured ASL animations (background
color, contrast, frame rates).&lt;br/&gt;3. Compare learning which deaf middle
school and high school students acquire through motion-capture-generated ASL
animations versus QuickTime videos of live signers.&lt;br/&gt;4. Compare the
ability of beginning ASL college students to reproduce signs accurately after
watching videos produced from live signers versus motion capture
animations.&lt;br/&gt;5. Compare comprehensibility of QuickTime videos of live
signers with motion capture-generated animations by measuring deaf students'
delays and accuracy in identifying the English word that corresponds to the
sign.&lt;br/&gt;6. Disseminate results.