* 0435701
* U.S.-Hungary Theoretical and Experimental Physics Investigation of the Application of Perturbative QCD to RHIC Measurements
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Brian Cole, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 48,034.00

The goal of this U.S.-Hungarian research project headed by Brian A. Cole of
Columbia University and his partner, Gabor Papp of Eotvos University, is to
apply perturbative quantum chromodynamics (pQCD) calculations to data from
experiments at the Brookhaven Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) facility.
This will be accomplished by bringing together a team of U.S. and Hungarian
physicists with experimental and theoretical expertise to clarify issues
associated with the application of pQCD to the study of nuclear collisions.
Their goal is to produce sound baseline calculations against which heavy-ion
data can be tested for novel experimental signatures. Results are expected to
extend the range of problems for which pQCD can be applied and tested. Success
should produce fundamental quantitative information from high-momentum transfer
scattering processes and contribute to our understanding of the interaction of
quarks with matter. This will interest astrophysicists and cosmologists as well
as the nuclear physics community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in theory
and heavy ion nuclear science fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe
to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence. Broader impacts include the introduction of U.S.
students and post docs to the international nuclear physics community through
work at the Hungarian institution and their direct involvement in the project's
efforts to improve the discovery potential of RHIC.