* 0435454
* NeTS-NR: Creating a Wirelss Sensor Net Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* David Culler, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,500,000.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) will benefit
society by accelerating scientific research, increasing productivity, and
enhancing security. Candidate solutions to particular scientific challenges,
ranging from device design to distributed algorithms, exist with various assumed
requirements, constraints, and relationships between the components. However,
there is no consensus on an overall sensor network architecture. Deployments
take a narrow vertical slice to achieve a operational network. The objective of
this project is to formulate and evaluate a comprehensive WSN systems
architecture, encompassing general design principles, broad functional
decompositions, and detailed interfaces by which pieces fit together.
&lt;br/&gt;The approach recognizes that the ``narrow waist" of this architecture
-- playing the role of IP in the Internet architecture -- is a best-effort
single-hop broadcast. The primary method for articulating the essential
abstractions is iterative cycles of (candidate collection, design, integration,
evaluation) with the outcome presented to the community for analysis to
establish the right compromises between generality and performance. This process
will articulate consistent programming interfaces that encompass collection,
aggregation, dissemination, neighborhoods, data centric storage, and attribute-
based routing over multiple link layers. The architecture will be tested on
cross-cutting aspects of efficiency, coordination, power, management, and
security. It should embrace heterogeneity and allow for application-specific
optimization within a consistent framework. &lt;br/&gt;Creating a successful
architecture for WSNs will reduce development effort, allow greater synergy and
interoperability, enable more rapid innovation, and greatly broaden the sphere
of applications from national security to scientific research and ecosystem
management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;