* 0435546
* Preparing the LTER Network for Collaborative Science, Education and Synthesis: A Planning Proposal
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2004,02/29/2008
* James Gosz, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/29/2008
* USD 1,135,461.00

As human-induced environmental change continues, society is facing an increasing
array of pressing environmental challenges. Answers to these complex challenges
must be informed by coordinated, long-term, interdisciplinary research.
Following a very successful two decades of science, training and outreach, the
Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) Network is poised to address a set of new
initiatives to be pursued in response to these environmental "Grand Challenges."
It is this background that sets the stage for intensive Network-wide planning
activities that started at the last LTER All-Scientists Meeting (September
2003), and that would continue under this proposal for another 24 months. This
planning effort has three specific objectives: (1) Develop a plan for LTER
network-level science, technology, and training, (2) Explore alternative
governance, planning and evaluation structures for managing LTER Network
science, and (3) Envision and plan for education, training, outreach, and
knowledge exchange activities to link LTER science with application
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This planning activity will create
the framework necessary for the&lt;br/&gt;LTER Network to (1) increase the scale
and scope of activity needed to address a number of ecological Grand Research
Challenges, (2) achieve a higher level of coordination and complementarity among
the research sites, (3) incorporate new, enabling technologies into LTER
research, (4) broadly train the next generation of ecologists, and (5) improve
and increase the exchange of knowledge between science, managers and policy
makers. In doing so, the LTER Network will actively pursue a new level of
collaboration, synthesis and integration to address challenging ecological
questions now and in the future.&lt;br/&gt;