* 0435669
* A rapid assessment technique for quantifying change in land cover and carbon balance in arctic tundra
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Patrick Webber, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 12/31/2005
* USD 43,513.00

Funds are provided to develop and verify a technique to rapidly assess decadal-
scale change in land cover and carbon balance in arctic tundra. Recent and
persistent changes in climate in the Arctic are amongst the most dramatic on the
globe. Understanding how changes in ecosystem productivity interact and
potentially offset the balance and stability of the Arctic soil carbon reservoir
is of utmost importance to global change science. Subtle changes in plant
species and communities, which underlie land cover change, have increasingly
been related to dramatic shifts in ecosystem function, such as the exchange of
carbon across the land-atmosphere boundary. Land cover change represents a time-
integrated response and shift in the competitive interaction between species
responding to an altered biological, chemical and/or physical state. This
project will utilize newly acquired satellite imagery to derive extant land
cover maps and retrospectively construct land cover maps from historical air
photos and declassified military spy imagery. Empirical spatially, and land
cover, explicit models of ecosystem carbon balance will be run over the time
series of land cover maps to indicate probable decadal-scale changes in carbon
balance. Ground truth for derived products will result from observations at the
former site of the International Biological Program near Barrow, which remains
relatively intact and where an extensive research history of decadal-scale
changes in ecosystem structure and function exists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;