* 0435575
* Voting, Voting Risk and Vote Counting
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Linda Camp, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 9,999.00

This grant will support a symposium on the risks of voting and vote-counting in
the United States. Technologists, election officials, political scientists and
other experts will attend and will develop consensus on best practices and open
questions based on a comprehensive review of voting and voting
technology.&lt;br/&gt;Elections, and enfranchisement of citizens, are a
fundamental part of democracy, yet the nature of how elections are to be fairly
conducted differs widely between (and even within) countries. New voting
technologies appear to offer ease of access with the removal of barriers to
voting for those who can not read a printed ballot, or who are physically
disabled, home-bound or at remote locations. Other benefits may include near-
immediate results, ability to perform more complex balloting schemes (such as
instant runoff voting), and immunity from certain types of election fraud. Such
promises have on occasion proven not to match actual performance, and the risks
of undetectable election fraud and equipment failure may result in
disillusionment of voters and disenfranchisement of
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This topic combines issues involving design for
development as well as design for democracy. The results of the symposium will
include a set of organizational and technical recommendations to ensure the
reliability of the systems implemented in each domain, considering the cost and
need for reliability in different environments. The discourse will provide
perspective on the interaction between democratic systems and adoption of voting
equipment. Specific immediate design questions will address how the systems can
be most effectively constructed and deployed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium
will provide: i) concrete recommendations for evaluation of secure and reliable
voting technology, and ii) theoretical contributions to the understanding of the
interaction of technology adoption and governance. The results of this
examination will be disseminated in multiple channels.