* 0435628
* Anticipating Extreme Hurricane Winds in the United States Using Bayesian Hierarchical  Models
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* James Elsner, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/2008
* USD 465,041.00

The PI will analyze and model available records of coastal hurricane activity
(1) to provide more accurate and relevant estimates of the probability of
extreme hurricane winds in the United States on annual to millennial time
scales, and (2) to develop the computational means to analyze and simulate the
variability of extreme climate events. The modeling and analysis tools will
derive from extreme value theory and methods of Bayesian inference. Data will
come from modern records, collated historical accounts, and geological sediment
cores. Coastal hurricanes are a serious social and economic concern to the
United States. Strong winds, heavy rainfall, and storm surge kill people and
destroy property. Destruction from a hurricane rivals that from an earthquake.
The PI will advance the use of extreme value theory in analyzing climate data by
putting the analysis into a Bayesian framework. The research will provide
cutting-edge science to the problem of hurricane risk assessment. Steps to be
taken to achieve the grant goals include: (1) Assign probabilities to hurricane
landfall events during the first half of the 19th century, (2) Generate samples
of annual hurricane wind speed excedence distributions for coastal segments
conditioned on values of climate indices, (3) Compare Bayesian predictive
probabilities with probabilities from other hurricane wind models, (4) Examine
the utility of adding spatial information into the wind speed model, (5) Examine
the El-Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO)
coastal hurricane linkages using the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR)/National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) reanalysis data, and
(6) Develop software for calibrating geological records of extreme hurricane
activity. The overarching goal is to create an accessible set of analysis and
modeling tools for climate research that makes use of Bayesian simulation
technology. Bayesian simulation techniques have yet to infiltrate the climate
analysis and prediction communities. An objective of the research will be to
expand this new technology and make it accessible to the climate community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts will include strengthening the science
to better assess the risk of a natural disaster in the face of climate change.
The PI will train graduate students and promote climate education of the public
by disseminating data, models, and forecasts over the Internet. Results will be
relevant to the private (re) insurance industry and to government funded
emergency management. By advancing and promoting a shift in thinking away from
using the computer to generate analytical solutions to using it to generate
samples of the solution space (simulations), a large impact on climate science
is anticipated. Results will challenge and ultimately improve the way statistics
is taught in the climate and related sciences. The goal is to make Bayesian
simulation a routine component of analysis and prediction in climate science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the Climate Variability
and Predictability Program (CLIVAR).