* 0435282
* NeTS-ProWiN - Collaborative Research:    Dynamic Spectrum MAC with Multiparty Support in Adhoc Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Andrew Campbell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 07/31/2006
* USD 389,999.00

NeTS-ProWiN: Collaborative Research - Dynamic Spectrum MAC with Multiparty
Support in Adhoc Networks

Award 0435306

Saswati Sarkar, University of Pennsylvania

Abstract

Major advances in dynamic spectrum management and the inevitable deregulation of
large portions of the radio spectrum will revolutionize future wireless
networks, services, and applications. This will lead to an era of spectrum
efficient cognitive radios that will enable the deployment of radically
different radio architectures, algorithms, and protocols over the next decade.
This project is studying the design of a new programmable media access control
(MAC) layer for this new environment. The MAC must regulate how future
programmable radio devices can efficiently interact with each other using
spectrum-aware communication algorithms. In our study, we model the MAC design
as decision problems using tools from decision sciences such as stochastic
control, optimization, graph theory and estimation theory. We validate the
design of the MAC through an experimental implementation consisting of
programmable radios. The expected results from the research include the design
of a programmable MAC system that can enable a class of new applications,
including enhanced reliability communications and spectrum-efficient group
communications. The resulting implementation of the proposed programmable MAC
platform and its software will enable the development of new intelligent
spectrum-aware algorithms and applications. The results of the research will
provide a set of foundation algorithms that can be used by the community
developing new spectrum-aware radio systems. The research facilitates several
life-critical activities e.g., search and rescue missions and disaster relief
operations. The research will also enrich the education curriculum of the
participating institutions and foster the participation of under-represented
groups in engineering.

