* 0435019
* Collaborative Research:    NeTS-NR:   High-Performance Next Generation Networking Technology and Systems for Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Randy Katz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2006
* USD 133,000.00

This project investigates the Next Generation Network Technology and Systems
geared towards high-performance internetworking across heterogeneous networks.
The proposed approach adopts an overarching architecture across the subnetwork
boundaries while taking into account the the underlying technologies such as
wireless, satellite, opti-cal, and electrical wireline networks. In particular,
this project explores new networking protocols and programmable network elements
for enhancing end-to-end performance, providing flexible programmability, and
achieving intelligent network control and man-agement. We will investigate the
following four key research topics: (1) design of seg-mented transport
protocols, which can be aware of the underlying network technologies and be
adaptive to various subnetwork domains; (2) design, simulation, and testing of
intelligent programmable network elements (IPNEs), which are middle boxes that
are lo-cated at the boundary of heterogeneous network domains to provide
impedance matching between the diverse networks and to support segmented
transport protocols; and (3) de-sign of intelligent network control and
management (NC&amp;M) system, which will conduct Observe-Analyze-Act to measure
network status, analyze possible implications, and take proactive actions. This
project will place special attentions to simulation studies of seg-mented
transport protocols in heterogeneous networks, the functional design of IPNEs
with programmable/adaptive features, and the development of NC&amp;M system that
works with IPNEs. By addressing these issues, this project will provide flexible
protocols and programmable network elements for high-performance heterogeneous
networks, and set a solid framework for the deployment of the next generation
networking technologies and systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;