* 0435619
* Collaborative: US-GLOBEC NEP Phase IIIa-CCS: Coupled physical/biological dynamics in the Northern California Current System: A synthesis of seasonal and interannual mesoscale varia
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2009
* Timothy Cowles, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2009
* USD 862,994.00

Ecological responses to mesoscale physical dynamics are not limited to a
mesoscale spatial domain. Consequently, an understanding of the linkage to
ecological dynamics over larger spatial scales and longer time scales is
critically dependent upon a characterization of the mesoscale
physical/biological interactions. The investigators propose to evaluate the link
between mesoscale physical dynamics, as driven by local and remote forcing, and
the variability in phytoplankton and zooplankton abundance and spatial pattern
observed across the GLOBEC Northeast Pacific region. The two primary objectives
are to (1) determine the contribution of variability in mesoscale physical
forcing and ocean dynamics to the variability in ecosystem dynamics, as
expressed by phytoplankton and zooplankton abundance, spatial pattern, size
distribution and indices of production and (2) extend this mesoscale
understanding across a larger spatial domain and across longer time scales
through the use of coupled models and other GLOBEC datasets. The investigators
will examine the consequences of variability in forcing on the ecosystem and
develop indices of mesoscale variability in both the physical and biological
properties of the northern California Current. The indices will be related to
changes in energy input into the system, e.g. interannual changes in wind
forcing. Within the GLOBEC synthesis effort, this work will contribute to a
causal understanding of the link between local physical and biological mesoscale
activity to large spatial-scale, long time-scale regional forcing, and will
establish a basis for developing a predictive capability for estimating
mesoscale ecosystem response to forcing. The results will be disseminated
through multi-authored papers, linked websites, and through LiveAccess servers.
The investigators also propose to collaborate with the Oregon Office of Adult
Education.