* 0435582
* RDE-DEI: Enhancing Geology, Chemistry, Biology and Physics Laboratory and Field Experiences for Students with Visual and Physical Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Paul Grogger, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,991.00

Laboratory classes and field experiences in the sciences pose particular
obstacles for students&lt;br/&gt;with disabilities. Most higher education
institutions respond to these obstacles by providing&lt;br/&gt;individual
accommodations to students. While these individual accommodations are valuable
in&lt;br/&gt;addressing the particular needs of each individual student, in this
proposal we seek to make&lt;br/&gt;transformations to the laboratory environment
and to field experiences that will help improve&lt;br/&gt;learning for all
students with visual and physical disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;This approach has been
to assemble a team including science faculty who teach laboratory
and&lt;br/&gt;field experience courses in Biology, Chemistry, Geology and
Physics, special education faculty,&lt;br/&gt;staff from the Disability Services
office, and students with disabilities to work together in&lt;br/&gt;identifying
aspects of the lab environment and field experiences which can be altered to
enhance&lt;br/&gt;student learning. Once improvements to the experiments and
field work have been developed, the project&lt;br/&gt;will introduce these
changes into our introductory classes. In the classroom the project will examine
the&lt;br/&gt;impact of the changes on both accommodation of disabilities and on
student learning. Both students with disabilities and some non-disabled students
will perform experiments using the modified equipment. Changes in their
understanding of content, attitude development and skill mastery will be
assessed. By examining both students with and without disabilities, we seek to
determine the impact on student learning in general as well as on accommodating
students with disabilities. The approach should yield results which will be of
interest to the academic community as a whole.