* 0435206
* NeTS:   PROWIN:   Broadband Optical/RF Wireless Networks with Topology and Diversity Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Christopher Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 08/31/2009
* USD 600,000.00

NeTS-ProWiN: Broadband Optical/RF Wireless Networks with Topology and Diversity
Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award 0435206&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stuart Milner,
Univ. of Maryland - College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical fiber backbones
provide gigabit per second data rates enabling end-to-end multimedia services to
homes, offices, classrooms and even mobile users. However, there is a
significant gap between such backbones and end users both in availability and
capacity. This has been referred to as "the last (or first) mile problem" and
continues to be the greatest obstacle we face in implementing broadband networks
from anywhere to anywhere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, software for
autonomous network reconfiguration (topology control) is being developed, which
will promote survivability (bi-connectedness), scalable autonomous physical and
logical reconfiguration, maximum data rate and maximum availability at all times
and everywhere in a wireless backbone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a unique manner,
reconfigurable optical wireless communications, with up to gigabit per second
transmission rates are used in combination with directional RF communications.
This offers the capability for autonomous physical and logical reconfiguration.
This is referred to as topology control, uniquely combining autonomous backbone
formation with assured, agile, optical wireless and RF links.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative advanced software methodologies and techniques
for topology control are being developed. The software includes: traffic
engineering and reconfiguration algorithms; multi-objective optimization; and
topology discovery, dissemination, and survivability. Software and methodologies
designed to respond to degradation in the network link(s) as well as for network
recovery will include: traffic engineering; multi-objective optimization
techniques with embedded uncertainty modeling; and topology discovery,
dissemination and survivability. Evaluation of the algorithms and software will
be achieved using analytical and discrete event simulation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;