* 0435622
* Climate Change, Vicarious Experience, and the Social Amplification of Risk
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Anthony Leiserowitz, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2005
* USD 98,000.00

Recent research has identified two parallel, interacting modes of information
processing: an analytic, logical and abstract system of symbol manipulation; and
an experiential, emotional and concrete system of images, narratives and
associations. Research has also demonstrated that the experiential system can
have powerful influences on risk perception, decision making and behavior. A
related body of research has incorporated these psychological findings within a
broader theoretical framework, which integrates psychological, social and
cultural processes to understand the social amplification and attenuation of
risk. These studies have identified the mass media as a critical actor in public
risk perceptions, but have focused exclusively on the role of the news media
(e.g., newspapers) in risk communication. To date, there has been no empirical
investigation of the influence of motion pictures on public risk perceptions and
behavior, despite substantial anecdotal evidence suggesting that popular movie
representations of risk can occasionally have a powerful influence on public
risk perceptions and behaviors (e.g., Jaws and The China Syndrome). Motion
pictures, which integrate powerful imagery, strong emotional cues, and
character-driven narrative, work directly on an individual's experiential
processing system. Further, they can become major risk amplification events
vicariously experienced by millions of people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will explore the impact of vicarious experience and the social amplification of
risk at the national scale. Specifically, we hypothesize that The Day After
Tomorrow, a film that depicts abrupt, catastrophic climate change, will
measurably alter public risk perceptions of the likelihood and severity of
climate change impacts and shift public conceptions of climate change from a
gradual, linear warming to abrupt, non-linear and catastrophic change. The
project will test this hypothesis using three national surveys in a before,
during and after treatment design. Results from this study will contribute to
emerging theory on the roles of experiential processing and the social
amplification of risk in risk perception and decision-making. It will also
contribute to our understanding of the influence of mass media on society.