* 0435730
* SGER:  A Novel Thermomagnetic Austempering Process
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Susil Putatunda, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 08/31/2006
* USD 34,979.00

This small grant for exploratory research (SGER) award by the Division of
Materials Research to Wayne State University is to explore a new process termed
"thermomagnetic austempering." It is hypothesized that applying a two-step
austempering treatment within a magnetic field will result in iron-carbon alloys
with high yield strength, fatigue strength, fracture toughness and impact
strength, a combination of properties not normally obtained in structural
alloys. With this award, Professor Putatunda will apply this innovative process
to austempered ductile cast iron (ADI), a material chosen because of its
numerous applications in the transportation, defense and manufacturing
industries. As an integral part of the development of this process, a
thermodynamic analysis of free energy change for the phase transformation of
austenite to ferrite and high carbon austenite has been developed. This analysis
indicates that the driving force for ferrite nucleation should increase under an
externally applied magnetic field, resulting in a very fine-grained
microstructure in the material. The applicability of this analytical model and
the validity of the assumptions made in deriving it will be examined. The
research will establish if thermomagnetic austempering of ADI creates an ultra-
fine grained microstructure with very high carbon content in the austenite
phase. The role of carbon in the development of the microstructures of ADI and
the influence of refined ferrite and austenite on the fracture toughness and
high cycle fatigue strength of ADI will be established. The research will
contribute to advancing the present state of knowledge in ferrous physical
metallurgy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish the feasibility of
the two-step austempering process in a magnetic field and the right combination
of processing parameters that creates a unique microstructure consisting of (a)
a very large volume fraction of fine ferrite and austenite, (b) a very high
carbon content in austenite, and (c) a stable austenite. This unique
microstructure will provide high yield strength, fatigue strength, impact
strength and fracture toughness in ADI alloys. The thermomagnetic austempering
process could have a significant impact in materials processing industries by
providing high-reliability, low-cost engineering alloys with great durability.
Furthermore, it may be possible to apply this new approach to other metal alloys
such as carbon steels, iron-nickel alloys, and nickel-based superalloys to
produce alloys with unique combinations of mechanical properties. Student
training and teaching will be integral part of this process development.