* 0435247
* NeTS-NR: Preemption and Adaptation for Next Generation Multiservice Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Steven Weber, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2009
* USD 282,000.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the combined use of adaptation
and preemption mechanisms in the context of best-effort networks, such as the
Internet, as complementary tools for reacting to the onset of congestion or link
failure. In particular, adaptation is seen as a means of reacting to light
congestion, while preemption is useful for heavy congestion or link failure.
With adaptation, the link bandwidth is dynamically allocated among competing
flows so as to maximize specified QoS metrics, where each stream maintains its
current route. With preemption, however, flows are selected to be re-routed
based on their assigned priority levels. While preliminary adaptation and
preemption policies have each been studied independently, this research project
includes a novel combination of these mechanisms into a robust congestion
control mechanism capable of handling traffic changes of varying magnitude. In
practice, adaptation is essentially a distribution of the excess bandwidth left
over after each stream's minimum bandwidth requirements have been satisfied.
Preemption is appropriate when the congestion level is too great for adaptation
to be viable. Preemption, however, carries a potentially greater impact on
network stability and can cause service disruption for the flows selected for
rerouting. The goal of this research is to study the tradeoffs between
adaptation and preemption both analytically, in simulation, and on a physical
testbed. The conclusion will be a recommendation regarding the optimal
congestion mechanism for various congestion regimes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;