* 0435312
* NeTS-NOSS:    SensorNet Architectures for Indoor Location Detection:    From Resolution to Robustness
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* David Starobinski, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2009
* USD 612,000.00

Proposal Number: 0435312&lt;br/&gt;PI: David Starobinski &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Boston University &lt;br/&gt;Title: SensorNet Architectures of Indoor Location
Detection: From Resolution to Robustness&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to accurately and robustly determine the
location of sensors or targets is fundamental to the operation of sensor
networks. In open outdoor settings, this can be performed with trilateration
techniques used by the Global Positioning System (GPS). However, in indoor or
dense urban environments, such techniques face a wide variety of debilitating
complications, including signal reflections, occlusions, and unpredictable
dependencies (e.g., doors opening and closing). This project is investigating
fundamental performance limits of indoor location detection systems and aims at
prototyping sensor network architectures that approach these limits. The work
focuses on tradeoffs between robustness and resolution of such systems, drawing
on the literature in coding theory, large deviations, and mathematical
programming. Paralleling the development of GPS, the results of this project
could serve as a cornerstone technology for a wide variety of applications,
including tracking of shared equipment, victim disaster rescue, or indoor
navigation for the blind&lt;br/&gt;