* 0435658
* RDE-DEI: Research in Disability Education--Demonstration, Enrichment and Information Dissemination
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Michele Wheatly, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2006
* USD 100,000.00

Creating Laboratory Access for Science Students (CLASS) is an initiative to
promote excellence in the&lt;br/&gt;science education for students with physical
and learning disabilities. Based at Wright State University&lt;br/&gt;(WSU)
CLASS has received two major NSF grants in excess of $1M from DUE (CCLI)
spanning about 7&lt;br/&gt;years. CLASS believes that systemic reform of
inclusive science education must focus on training&lt;br/&gt;educators at all
levels. The central philosophy is that given appropriate accommodation, most
people with&lt;br/&gt;physical and learning disabilities can participate fully
in the scientific endeavor. The focus of past funding has been to develop
inclusive resources for science educators and to offer intensive summer
workshops that promote attitudes and strategies for inclusive, inquiry based
science education. Numerous science educators have come to WSU for the
workshops. Many have returned to their institutions to effect significant
change. Disseminable products have included a widely distributed SourceBook on
CD-ROM and training videos that have been used at professional meetings. A small
grant program has provided funds to classroom educators for adaptive equipment
and programs. These initiatives have also guided curriculum design in
undergraduate science and science education courses at WSU, contributing
substantially to the success of our science majors who have physical
disabilities. This RDE-DEI will expand current efforts to modify curricula. This
process will include making modification recommendations to peer-reviewed lesson
plans from the Ohio Resource Center (ORC) for the full inclusion of students
with disabilities. These recommendations will be made by teams of science, math
and special education majors at Wright State University. Finalized
recommendations will be uploaded to the ORC website and will then be available
for educators across the nation. Also, for educators calling into the ORC with
specific questions regarding education for student with disabilities, resources
will be made available.