* 0435835
* Collaborative Plant Biology in the 21st Century: A Symposium at Colorado State University,  May 20-22, 2004
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Anne Sylvester, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 10/31/2006
* USD 30,000.00

This regional symposium will be held May 20 through May 22, 2004 at Colorado
State University, Fort Collins CO. The symposium will bring together plant
biologists from twelve neighboring states in the Mid West Rocky Mountain region
to discuss strategies for establishing collaborative research projects in plant
genomics. Four invited speakers will present talks that combine a research
seminar with practical tactics for organizing, submitting and managing multi-
institutional and multi-disciplinary projects. The expected 50-70 participants
will have ample opportunity to interact informally during breakout sessions with
speakers, NSF representatives and with each other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the symposium is to initiate discussion and planning for increased
participation in large multi-institutional or multi-disciplinary projects. A
projected outcome of the symposium will be to increase EPSCoR state involvement
in collaborative proposal submissions to NSF. The symposium is not restricted to
EPSCoR state participants, however. The organizers plan to include non-
traditional institutions, such as tribal colleges and other schools providing
education to under-represented groups. Thus, the symposium will serve a broad
group of participants. A web site will be established and maintained following
the symposium to facilitate ongoing planning and communication among
participants.&lt;br/&gt;