* 0435228
* On-Demand P2P Video Streaming:    Integration of Video Coding and Network Application Design
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Keith Ross, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 08/31/2009
* USD 436,000.00

Existing video streaming networks (VSN) rely on a few dedicated servers to store
and distribute videos. Such architecture is very costly, both in terms of server
cost and Internet-connection cost. Failures of a single server can also cause
the collapse of the entire system. This research project investigates a peer-to-
peer based VSN that has the promise to provide low-cost and yet high quality
video on-demand service. The system encodes each video into multiple equally
important sub-streams (called descriptions) and places each sub-stream on a
different peer. When a client wants to see a video, multiple peers act as
servers, each sending a different sub-stream of the video to the client. When a
serving peer disconnects in the middle of a streaming session, the system looks
for a replacement peer that stores the same video sub-stream and has sufficient
surplus uplink bandwidth. The video coder is designed such that there is only a
modest degradation in video quality in the period before a replacement peer is
located. The system design has five interacting components: 1) multiple
description video coding; 2) sub-stream placement; 3) admission control; 4) sub-
stream server selection; and 5) sub-stream delivery. Both analytical studies and
experimentations are conducted to examine the system performance and its gain
over infrastructure-based systems. Successful development of the system will
enable people to, at very low cost, search and view on-demand enormous libraries
of digital video content for the purpose of education, healthcare,
entertainment, etc., thus benefiting the society as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;