* 0435393
* NeTS-NR: Collaborative Research: High-Speed Self-Configuring Networks Based on Cost-Effective Plug-and-Play Optical (PPO) Nodes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Andrea Fumagalli, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2010
* USD 494,694.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;NETS - Research in Network Technologies
and Systems &lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0435393&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Fumagalli, Andrea&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Texas at
Dallas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0435381&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Rongqing Hui&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Kansas Center
for Research Inc&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NeTS-NR: Collaborative
Research: High-Speed Self-Configuring Networks Based on Cost-Effective Plug-and-
Play Optical (PPO) Nodes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project envisions
and investigates a future ad-hoc multi-gigabit network infrastructure connecting
a very large number of inexpensive optical nodes. Us-ers will connect nodes via
already installed fibers by a simple plug-and-play op-eration. An on-board
optical micro-lab, advanced transmission models, and an intensive signal
processing are the key components to design network protocols that are able to
intelligently adjust optical data flows and wavelength selection and to enable
the plug-and-play node operation. The objective of this research is to identify
the required technologies, to study protocols and algorithms, to develop
suitable transmission models, to design and fabricate critical parts of an
integrated optical micro-lab that will make the envisioned scenario a reality,
and to amalgamate all the achieved results for proving the PPO node concept
feasibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Admela Jukan&lt;br/&gt;Program Director,
CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;Aug 5, 2004.&lt;br/&gt;