* 0435259
* NeTS-NR  ROSS.Net:  A Platform for Integrated Large-Scale Network Design of Experiments and Simulation
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2010
* Christopher Carothers, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2010
* USD 500,000.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;NETS - Research in Network Technologies
and Systems &lt;br/&gt;CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&
gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0435259&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator:
Kalyanaraman, Shivkumar&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NeTS-NR ROSS.Net: A Platform for Integrated
Large-Scale Net-work Design of Experiments and
Simulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Performance analysis tools to aid
design, analysis, understanding and operation of networking protocols on large-
scale and in heterogeneous deployment con-texts are urgently needed in
networking research. Though there are popular tools for small-scale analysis and
emerging test-bed facilities, large-scale analy-sis requires tools such as
scalable simulators, experiment design and empirical modeling engines (a.k.a
"meta-simulation" tools). The overall goal of this project is to provide tools
that significantly improve the way networking community de-signs, tunes, and
studies network protocols, especially for target deployment in large-scale,
heterogeneous and time-varying conditions. In particular, the pro-ject develops
an experimentation platform, called "ROSS.Net", with meta-simulation and
simulation capabilities. In order to rapidly interpret system be-havior,
ROSS.Net employs large-scale experiment design tools that allow model-ing and
optimization of protocol response, i.e. a response surface in a large-
dimensional parameter space. The goal is to generate a unified search, optimi-
zation and sparse empirical modeling framework with demonstrated ability to pose
meaningful large-scale design questions and provide "good" models rapidly for
on-line operation. For a researcher to selectively compose a set of experi-ments
resulting in accurate answers to the questions posed by the model de-signer;
ROSS.Net uses reversible computation techniques to enable memory-efficient
optimistic parallel simulation and model construction. The work has immediate
impact in applications broadly in the area of computer systems where large-scale
design is crucial (e.g. operating systems, distributed systems). Particularly,
features like fast-approximation and sparse modeling have poten-tial impact in
areas far from computer networking such as include industrial quality control,
agriculture, and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Admela
Jukan&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, CISE/CNS&lt;br/&gt;Aug 5, 2004.&lt;br/&gt;