* 0436126
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Challenging "Commoner": An Examination of Status and Identity at the Maya Village of Chan, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Wendy Ashmore, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 11,732.00

With guidance from Dr. Wendy Ashmore, Chelsea Blackmore will investigate how
social identity and status varied among commoners at the Maya site of Chan. Chan
is an ancient agrarian village located in the Upper Belize River Valley, 4km
southeast of the minor polity-center of Xunantunich. Excavations will focus on
the Northeast Group, one of several "neighborhoods" characterized by its spatial
coherence and relative separation from other groups at the site. Research at the
Northeast Group will examine how the organization of space within and between
households, (comprising residences, domestic outbuildings, open spaces, and
ritual facilities), and access and control over particular goods and activities
may have fostered more complex social stratification than previously considered.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologically, correlates of social status and identity
are equated primarily with elite goods, activities, and materials. Because these
items are rarely recovered from non-elite sites, commoners are characterized as
a largely egalitarian society of farmers. What this fails to consider is how
commoners are, in fact, socially and economically diverse. Measures of status
differentiation at the Northeast Group will rely on: (1) architectural
construction and elaboration (e.g., investment of materials and labor), (2)
evidence of localizing feasting, bloodletting and other ritual practices (e.g.,
faunal remains, obsidian or chert lances, burned surfaces, censers), (3)
differences in pottery (e.g., plain, decorated, locally produced or imported),
(4) diversity, quantity and quality of other possessions (e.g., obsidian, chert,
greenstone, grinding stones). Excavations will also focus on the collection of
micro-artifacts, plant and pollen remains, and soil chemistry in order to
identify activity areas (open spaces) otherwise invisible on the ground surface.
The distribution of these materials and the organization of space will be
examined in relation to a ritual shrine, posited as the locus of ritual and
social interaction in the neighborhood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
researchers have examined the integration of commoner populations, few studies
have examined how commoner communities are internally heterogeneous and diverse.
If commoners consciously manipulated their status and identity, then mechanisms
of social differentiation may be as important as indicators of social cohesion.
By challenging what archaeologists mean by "commoner", one can begin to unpack
concepts about status and cultural identity, equally applicable to current
social issues as to interpretations of the past. From an archaeological
standpoint, research at Chan's Northeast Group is a crucial testing ground for
neighborhood-level inquiry, which has remained surprisingly underdeveloped.
Beyond interest to social scientists, this project will promote public outreach
to individuals living in Belize and the Untied States. These activities will
include oral presentation and discussion of findings, and sharing of annual
reports from the field seasons with communities located near the site, as well
as others elsewhere in Belize. Dissemination of data to the scientific community
will include publication in refereed journals, annual reports, and presentation
of papers at professional conferences. In the process, Blackmore and prospective
undergraduate assistants will receive training in the methods of fieldwork and
analysis mentioned above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;