* 0436516
* CEDAR: Climatology and Characteristics of Instabilities and Atmospheric Gravity Waves at Low and Mid Latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Richard Walterscheid, Aerospace Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 12/31/2009
* USD 240,000.00

Optical and near infrared imaging data from three sites are used to investigate
the source and characteristics of gravity waves at low and mid-latitudes. Extant
data from sites at the Maui MALT (Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere) Atmospheric
Observatory in Hawaii, at Adelaide Australia, and at Alice Springs Australia are
analyzed, and new data are gathered. The imager at Maui Malt samples extremely
bright OH Meinel emissions near 1600 nm, and is therefore capable of very fast
sampling, achieving a signal-to-noise ration of 100 in one second. This imager
is uniquely capable of capturing fast moving, short period gravity wave
structures, and will be used to examine the possibility of a peak in gravity
wave periods near the Brunt-Vaisala period (nominally five minutes), and the
corresponding possibility of a sharp frequency cutoff for gravity wave periods
shortward of this period. The Maui MALT imager data are also used to
characterize the nature of small-scale instability features in the OH airglow
layer. The relationship of these features to convectively unstable layers as
well as the thickness of these layers is determined, and the morphology and
climatology of these instabilities is characterized. The instruments in
Australia are conventional optical imagers, separated by 1500 km. Data from
these sites are used to examine a possible tropospheric convective source
centered approximately 1300 km north of Alice Springs in Darwin. Due to the
absence of orographic features between Alice Springs and Adelaide, the
Australian imagers offer an excellent opportunity to isolate the role of
tropospheric sources of MALT gravity waves.