* 0436295
* International: Carnivoran Ecomorphology - Were There Any Creodont "Cats"?
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Gregg Gunnell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/29/2008
* USD 17,490.00

Carnivorous mammals serve an extremely important role as natural regulators of
&lt;br/&gt;population growth in other mammals and in enhancing viability within
these populations by removing old and unhealthy individuals. This project will
lead to a clearer understanding of the development of the wide variety of
adaptive strategies adopted by carnivores to fulfill their roles within
ecosystems. Ecomorphological analysis offers a tool, unencumbered by taxonomic
constraint, to look at carnivores (or other groups of animals) as a whole and as
such should be of interest not only to those specifically interested in the
evolutionary history of carnivores but to modern ecologists and natural resource
managers as well. This international research collaboration combines the
strengths of researchers and research facilities in three countries (USA,
Germany, Austria) and will enhance international cooperative efforts between the
institutions involved as well as the researchers. Both undergraduate and
graduate students from the USA and the two European countries will be involved
in all aspects of this research from the initial stages to the development of
final reports. Not only will these students learn how to organize and develop a
research project, they will also learn of the benefits of cooperative efforts
between researchers from a variety of institutions and backgrounds.
Paleontology, like most other endeavors, is greatly enhanced by a global
perspective. This project will promote such a perspective for all researchers
and students involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sedimentary Geology and
Paleobiology Program participated in funding this international research
project.