* 0436627
* U.S.-Mexico:  An International Workshop on the Influences of Air Quality on The Mayan Heritage Sites In Mesoamerica; Merida, Mexico, November 2005
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Timothy Keener, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/2008
* USD 30,000.00

0436627&lt;br/&gt;Keener&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award will
support a research workshop to discuss the degradation of Mayan ruins from the
incursions of air pollution. The workshop, which is being organized by Drs.
Timothy Keener and Mingming Lu of the University of Cincinnati, together with
Dr. Humberto Bravo of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), will
be held in Merida, Mexico in November, 2005. The workshop will discuss the
problems facing these world heritage sites and how researchers with expertise in
air quality science and engineering can bring their expertise to focus on their
preservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mayans created colorful murals and many
other beautiful works of art that still exist as part of their striking ruins.
However, these are now endangered due to the incursions of air pollution. At
some sites, paint is flaking off extensively and stucco surfaces and stone
inscriptions are corroding and crumbling. This devastation is attributed to acid
rain emanating from electrical, industrial and petrochemical plants located
around the Gulf of Mexico and include sources from the United States and even as
far away as Venezuela. The meteorological conditions controlling the transport
and transformation of air pollutants to and around this region are complex and
add to the difficulty of understanding the sources of the problems. The
comprehensive discussion of pollutant emission, transport, deposition and damage
mechanisms will result in better understanding of the integrated impacts of
industrial emissions, meteorological and geological conditions, and the local
socio-economic patterns on the art work. The integration of social economic
factors will lead to better success of future research and adaptation by the
local government. In the long run, the workshop will help better policy making
in balancing industrial development and preservation of historical sites.
Workshop results will be widely disseminated, and may be applicable to the other
parts of the world experiencing similar environmental challenges. &lt;br/&gt;