* 0436441
* Collaborative Research: Approximating Eigensystems of Matrices Used in Spatial Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Michael Tiefelsdorf, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2006
* USD 20,428.00

Collaborative research: approximating eigensystems of matrices used in spatial
analysis.

ABSTRACT: The project investigates theoretical properties of relationship
structures, as well as their usage, whose use has a long-standing tradition in
several disciplines. The social and behavioral sciences focus on, among many
other issues, social networks or spatial linkage structures, whereas more
abstract sciences deal with graph theoretical problems or the algebra of
sizeable matrices. A common theme across the different usages of, and problems
associated with, these relationship structures is the retrieval of their
eigensystems, which allows explicit statements to be made about their underlying
data generating processes. In particular, this project focuses on the properties
of sparse, binary link matrices that encapsulate pairwise symmetric
relationships among spatial objects. Depending upon the underlying spatial
structure, its specification and encoding, the properties of their associated
eigensystems change, with subsequent consequences for data analysis and
interpretation. Accompanying the proliferation of geographic information systems
is a constantly increasing size of these spatial structures. This project seeks
efficient and accurate approximation methods for selected large eigensystems,
and new theorems and conjectures that are associated with these eigensystems of
spatial structures.

In more general terms, phenomena and activities that are geographically
distributed and locationally referenced to the Earth's surface tend to display
map patterns because nearby phenomena have a propensity to attract or repel each
other. The same holds for arrangements of many other phenomena outside the
geographic domain, such as hierarchies in organizational charts, or the
potential transmission pathways of infectious diseases. In the spatial domain
this web of distance-restricted interrelationships, due to local relative
location, complicates conventional data analyses. In 1992 The Economist
described this situation as follows: [correct statistical calculation with
geocoded data] requires measurements in many different places, followed by some
awkward averaging. As computer and data capturing technology allow data to be
collected for more and more as well as smaller and smaller geocoded
observational units, this awkward averaging becomes more complex and difficult,
with an ability to compute it continually outpacing advances in computer
technology. This project aims to help close this gap by further developing the
mathematical theory underlying the awkward averaging involved in correct
statistical calculations.