* 0436264
* GSE/DIS National Girls Collaborative Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Patricia MacGowan, EdLab Group Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2006
* USD 207,190.00

Puget Sound Center for Teaching, Learning, and Technology will replicate the
Northwest Girls Collaborative Project in three regions (California, Indiana, and
Massachusetts) in an effort to strengthen the capacity, impact, and
sustainability of existing and evolving girl-serving science, technology, and
engineering and mathematics (STEM) programs. Through collaboration among
organizations, institutions, and businesses committed to expanding participation
of women in STEM, the existing and evolving projects will have a much greater
chance of maintaining interest and participation of girls in STEM within their
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through replication of the NW model, the project
will accomplish the following objectives: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. Connect
existing and evolving projects, identify gaps and overlaps of services in
support of STEM for girls. &lt;br/&gt;2. Maximize access to shared resources
within projects and with public and private sector organizations and
institutions interested in expanding girls' participation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Invest in long-range planning for addressing gaps and overlaps in service
delivery and long-term sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;4. Strengthen capacity of
existing and evolving projects by sharing research and program models, outcomes
and products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leaders and experts in girl-serving STEM
organizations will share their knowledge via conferences and forums, both in
person and via teleconference and/or video conference, electronic communications
via a listserv newsletter and a MatchMakers program to assist matching needs and
resources. They will employ structured collaborative brainstorming and planning
to develop action plans. Mini-grants will encourage leaders to test and develop
new approaches and to incorporate assessment methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new Collaboratives will be formed with the Society of Women Engineers (for
Massachusetts and New Hampshire), the Edward Teller Educational Center
affiliated with the University of California, and Indiana's Energize Indiana
state-wide initiative (which concentrates industry attention to workforce
development).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A National Champions Board comprised of
individuals from all sectors (education, industry, government, national non-
profit, and media) advises the Collaboratives on all aspects including fund
raising for sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
NorthWest Collaborative model will be transported to three different new
settings and evaluated in those new settings. All the materials developed for
one region will be available and tested and refined in the new settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Typically small informal education
programs are implemented and lose effectiveness or fade away. The model promises
to build a rich regional network, supply significant information, social
capital, and resources. It will strengthen the informal education infrastructure
that delivers STEM education to students, build capital in the local leaders,
attract and commit industry involvement and funding, gain visibility and support
in communities, and ultimately bring more girls into STEM learning and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;