* 0436345
* U.S. -- South America Workshop: Mechanics and Advanced Materials Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Horacio Espinosa, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 11/30/2005
* USD 75,000.00

U.S. -- South America Workshop: Mechanics and Advanced Materials Research and
Education &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Glaucio H. Paulino* and Horacio D.
Espinosa**&lt;br/&gt;*University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign&lt;br/&gt;**Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel support is
provided for US participants (professors and students or post-docs) in a US-
South America Workshop on "Mechanics and Advanced Materials Research and
Education" to be held in Rio de Janeiro City (Brazil), August 2-6, 2004. The
event is supported by the American Academy of Mechanics (AAM) that will
coordinate the selection process of students/post-docs. The workshop will
include an opening short-course on "Mechanics of Advanced Materials" intended
for advanced graduate students, visits to local universities and laboratories,
and a closing short-course on multiscale multiphysics methods. It will be held
immediately prior to the "1st LNCC Meeting on Computational Modeling (August
9-13, 2004), so that participants may choose to attend both events. The workshop
has the objective of promoting a lasting integration of researchers around joint
international programs, and strengthening the scientific and technological basis
of both US and South America. The results of the workshop will be published in a
web-site dedicated to the event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;