* 0436127
* Collaborative Research:  Environmental Variability, Bowhead Whale Distributions, and Inupiat Subsistence Whaling - Linkages and Resilience of an Alaskan Coastal System
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Wieslaw Maslowski, Naval Postgraduate School
* Interagency Agreement
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2009
* USD 359,125.00

The coupling between atmosphere, sea ice, ocean, bowhead whales, and subsistence
whaling by the Native human populations is fundamental to the physical-
biological-human systems of the Northern Alaska Coast. Whale migration routes
and habitat use are determined by zooplankton aggregations, which are driven by
oceanographic conditions, which depend on the climatic regime. Successful
hunting depends on interactions between environmental and societal factors that
vary each year and are driven by forces originating outside the system. This
complex suite of environment-whale-human factors comprises a system that is
vulnerable both to global climate and human generated change. This proposal
seeks to identify and understand the complex linkages, mechanisms, and
interactions within and between the atmosphere, ocean, and human components of
this system. The response and resilience of these components and the system as a
whole to variable forcing by external environmental change will also be
investigated. The work is highly interdisciplinary and focuses on the linked
ocean-human systems of coastal Alaska, concentrating specifically near Barrow,
Alaska. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four distinct yet highly interrelated approaches
to understanding the system are used: 1) Biological and physical ocean modeling
to identify mechanisms of frontal and eddy formation and plankton aggregation,
to describe the effects of environmental forcing from outside on the local
ocean, and to understand longer term, past and future variability in outside
forcing on whaling success, 2) High resolution field sampling to demonstrate
presence of physical features and associated biological concentrations and to
validate modeling, 3) Assessment of the resilience and vulnerability of the
subsistence hunting economy and culture in Barrow, and 4) Retrospective analysis
synthesizing modeled ocean and climate conditions with available information on
whale location, feeding, and harvest success to asses the resilience and
vulnerability of the whale-ocean-human system to environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intrinsic Merit: On the local scale, the results of the
research will provide a greater understanding of the factors influencing a
natural resource, demonstrating linkages between discovery and application to
policy issues of bowhead whale management. The social structure and fabric of
the Inupiat communities are intimately linked to the whaling tradition and are
particularly vulnerable to both environmental change and human-generated
pressures. On the broader scale, the research will address how multiple
physical, biological, and human factors are linked in a complex natural system
that may be critically affected by environmental variability. Biogeochemical and
physical manifestations of climate change in this region (e.g., ice reduction,
changes in marine mammal migration and ecosystem structure) will have
consequences for local human linkages to the Arctic ecosystem by influencing
hunting success, ease of travel, and the relative importance of subsistence and
cash economies and are representative of those of the broader Arctic with
important impacts on global carbon cycling. All these topics are highly relevant
to the Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH) program. This project is
cutting-edge in that it assimilates research of multiple disciplines from
oceanography to social science to address questions that can only successfully
be answered using this multi-faceted, integrative approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The locally relevant science proposed for
this project is of significant interest to the Barrow community and neighboring
villages, to policy makers at the IWC, NOAA, and MMS, and to the broader public.
The interdisciplinary collaborative partnership between academic researchers and
staff at a federal agency and at a regional wildlife management agency is an
investment in human and social capital that enhances the broader research
infrastructure. Climate variability and its effects on access to and mobility
within the Arctic Ocean have broader impacts for global and local commerce and
national security. The proposed high school internship program involves the
participation of native people who are often underrepresented in the fields of
science and technology. Broader involvement of high school students and teachers
through the ARMADA program will communicate to the scientists of the next
generation understanding of field research, of the Arctic Ocean ecosystem, and
of the importance of climate variability to this ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;