* 0436308
* UBM Integrated Undergraduate Research Experiences in Biological and Mathematical Sciences
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2012
* Vincent Cassone, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2012
* USD 1,249,115.00

The rapid advances in biology have necessitated the development of new research
and educational approaches to biological thought that incorporate a strong
foundation in mathematics, physical and information sciences to prepare students
for research that is increasingly interdisciplinary in character. In response to
this challenge, the Departments of Biology, Mathematics and Statistics at Texas
A&amp;M University will develop undergraduate curricula in Biology and Applied
Mathematics that will train biology and mathematics students to speak similar
languages about the natural world. Groups of 10 biology and 10 mathematics
students will be recruited each year from diverse backgrounds to engage in a new
common curriculum that incorporates advanced biological and mathematical
training, a common quantitative biology seminar and research training in a
biological research program such as biological clocks, mathematical ecology and
genomics. The long-term goal of this program is the development of a
quantitative biology major within the Department of Biology and a mathematical
biology emphasis in the Applied Mathematics major. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program will permanently transform the curriculum through research mentoring by
faculty teams in both mathematical and life sciences from across campus,
institutionalize the structure in broader programs by developing new curricula
and disseminate this model of education at Texas A&amp;M and to the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;