* 0436585
* CEDAR: Quantitative Measurements of Lightning-Mesosphere Interactions from Remote Electromagnetic Fields
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Steven Cummer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Farzad Kamalabadi
* 06/30/2009
* USD 192,387.00

The investigators will analyze existing electromagnetic field and video data
associated with transient luminous events (TLEs) in the middle atmosphere to
quantitatively measure parameters related to processes that are directly related
to existing models. Sprites and other mesospheric TLEs are a visual
manifestation of the direct coupling between the troposphere and upper
atmosphere. The study of these phenomena has reached the point where
observations and qualitative understanding are probably sufficient to begin
realistically quantifying their micro- and macroscale effects and their
significance in the larger mesosphere-lower thermosphere-ionosphere (MLTI)
system. Quantitative understanding of TLE internal processes is a necessary
first step towards understanding the effects of TLE-related processes on the
MLTI system; without understanding in detail what happens inside them, it is
nearly impossible to extrapolate their large-scale effects. And there are
aspects of TLE phenomena that are not explained by present models, suggesting
that understanding of TLE internal processes may not be sufficient to evaluate
these effects. The study will focus on the following four science questions: Do
influences beyond the lightning-driven electromagnetic fields, such as gravity
waves and meteoritic dust, play a role in TLE-generating processes? What
electromagnetic field strengths are required to initiate TLE-generating
mesospheric processes? Is there an asymmetry in TLE production between positive
and negative polarity cloud-to-ground lightning discharges? Is there an
identifiable difference in optical emissions or driving lightning parameters
between sprites that do and do not contain sprite current? Answering these
questions will substantially improve quantitative understanding of lightning-
ionosphere coupling processes and, consequently, the ability to predict their
larger scale effects. The study will make use of past experimental measurements
as well as observations to be made with existing instrumentation. Sprites and
TLEs are not only visually spectacular. They are also manifestations of the
complex electrical processes that exist in thunderstorms and link the lower
atmosphere to the upper atmosphere.