* 0436444
* A Review of the National Nanotechnology Program; An Assessment of the Responsible Development of Nanotechnology; An Assessment of the Technical Feasibility of Molecular Self-Assemb
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Gary Fischman, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,390,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0436444&lt;br/&gt;Toni Marechaux, Nat Acad of
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of a formal mandate by Congress , The
National Academies shall appoint one committee with four sub-panels to conduct a
triennial evaluation of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The committee
and panels shall also perform a one-time assessment of the need for standards,
guidelines, or strategies for ensuring the responsible development of
nanotechnology. As part of this effort, the National Academies shall also
organize a workshop to study the technical feasibility of molecular self-
assembly for the manufacture of materials and devices at the molecular scale.
These tasks are intended to evaluate the progress and extent of the multi-agency
program, to recommend new or revised goals and metrics, to analyze the relative
position of the United States in this growing field, and to analyze the impact
of nanotechnology on the U.S. economy. A peer-examined NRC report containing
evidence-based conclusions and recommendations based on the committee's
consensus will be delivered to the Congress on or before June 10, 2005.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this proposed activity is to provide a forum for an independent assessment of
the National Nanotechnology Initiative. In addition to producing a final report,
the study activity itself will provide a forum for national-level discussion and
interaction centered around the most important issues. Within the realm of
nanotechnology, no other forum exists where independent individuals can discuss
these issues in such an open and objective way. National Academies processes
ensure voluntary participation from industry, academia, and
non-&lt;br/&gt;governmental organizations of a type that does not exist
elsewhere. In many instances, such committee activities have resulted in
creative and original concepts that have been used to shape future policy
implementation and new technology developments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study
will be a formal activity of the Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences.
National Materials Advisory Board within The National Academies. The National
Academies is a unique institution within the United Stated dedicated to the
furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.
Strict internal policies and procedures ensure that the National Academies
remains objective and independent in the projects that it undertakes. The staff
assigned to the project are some of the best analysts and writers in the
country, and the and the members of the Board are high-level representatives of
industry, academia, and government who will bring with them many years of
combined experience in a number of related fields. In addition to the National
Materials Advisory Board and staff, a number of other organizations within the
Academies and a large number of members of the Academies will be consulted and
are expected to contribute to the various study activities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The study process will have an impact well beyond the meeting room in
which discussions and presentations will take place. Each member of the
committee, as well as the speakers and workshop participants, will take a new
perspective back to their organization and will use information obtained through
participation to inform future decision making. Ultimately, the broader impact
of the study activity and final report is to bring an objective and independent
assessment to bear on future program activities of the National Nanotechnology
Initiative. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Impact Statement &lt;br/&gt;This study
activity is intended to educate the public as well as funding agencies and other
stakeholders about the larger aspects and potential impacts of the federal
government investment in nanotechnology. The study is designed as a convening
mechanism to facilitate dialogue and exchange information among a committee
representing all sides of the issues. This committee will be balanced for a
variety of factors, including discipline, institutional affiliation, age, race,
gender, ethnicity, and geography, and the committee process will ensure that the
members are free of conflicts of interest or excessive bias. The funding
provided will be used for staff time to nominate the committee, organize
meetings, arrange briefings and other visits; to compensate committee members
and briefers for their travel costs; and finally for photocopying and
distribution of relevant information and printing and distribution of the final
report. This final report is intended to be accessible and useful to researchers
and students; to program managers with responsibilities in health, space,
defense, transportation, and energy; to product developers and business leaders;
and to teachers on all levels. Outreach to the community will be widespread and
the ultimate benefits are a greater awareness of national priorities and
enhanced understanding of the impacts of the development and implementation of
nanotechnology in our society. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;