* 0436511
* U.S.-France Workshop:  Damping of Advanced Materials: Shape-memory Alloys (SMA), Polymer Composites, and Foams   May 10-11, 2005
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Yves Berthelot, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 22,500.00

This proposal requests funding for a workshop to be held at the Georgia Tech
Lorraine campus in Metz, France, on the topic of damping of advanced materials.
This workshop will bring together experts from mechanics, vibroaccoustics, and
ultrasonic characterization to catalyze interdisciplinary work on the damping of
advanced materials such as shape-memory alloys, polymer composites, and foams.
The Georgia Tech participants bring strength in structural vibrations and
ultrasonics, while the University of Metz brings strength in multi-scale
modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The list of participants includes experts in
mechanics, vibroaccoustics, and ultrasonic characterization from eight
universities in the US and from six foreign countries. Papers generated from
this conference will be published in a special issue of the Journal of
Engineering Materials and Technology. The proposal includes funding for four
graduate students and two junior researchers to attend the workshop, and there
is good representation of under-represented groups in the list of participants.
This workshop will catalyze international collaborations between groups who have
typically not collaborated in their research on damping. The workshop has also
received support from the University of Metz and the regional government of
Lorraine in France.