* 0436073
* U.S.-Mexico:  Science Journalism Workshop for Latin American and U.S. Spanish-Speaking Journalists; July 10-21, 2004, San Diego, CA
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Jeffrey Davidow, Institute of the Americas
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 05/31/2005
* USD 18,000.00

0436073&lt;br/&gt;Davidow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award will
provide support for the travel of science journalists from the Americas to
attend the Jack Ealy Workshop on Science Journalism. This award will support six
professionals, three from the U.S. and three from Latin America. The Workshop,
to be held July 10-21, 2004, in San Diego, will provide 15 to 20 experienced
Spanish-language journalists training in science reporting through practical
workshops and presentations by several NSF-supported
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is designed to advance scientific
understanding across the Americas by means of the broader dissemination of
scientific and engineering discoveries through the Spanish-language media. The
goal of furthering and enhancing public understanding of and appreciation for
science and technology in the Latin American and Caribbean regions is a workshop
objective. A second objective aims to improve the communication of science and
technology at the postgraduate level. The activity will join science journalism
professionals with over 40 leading scientists to create a partnership between
the leading professional association of journalists in the region, a prestigious
think tank on Latin America and four outstanding research institutions. Partners
will include the Inter-American Press Association, the Institute of the
Americas, UC San Diego, the Center for Scientific Investigation and Education of
Ensenada (Mexico), the NSF-supported OptIPuter project, and the California
Institute of Information and Telecommunications Technology. It is expected that
the scientists' research will be disseminated in the U.S. and Latin America
through stories filed during and after the program, enhancing scientific and
technological understanding by policy makers, the young, and researchers in
North and South America. The Office of Legislative and Public Affairs and the
Office of International Science and Engineering are jointly supporting this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;