* 0436274
* Nonlinear and Multilevel Longitudinal and Panel Data
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Edward Frees, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2007
* USD 263,876.00

Models of longitudinal and panel data are widely used by researchers in the
social sciences. This project addresses two features that are commonly ignored
by analysts. First, this research will introduce statistical models and methods
to handle data characteristics that are motivated by studies of insurance
claims. Specifically, the focus is on data that (i) are likely to be large
(sometimes referred to as long-tailed), (ii) may be a combination of zeros (for
no claims) and positive values (two-part data) or (iii) may only be available
when they exceed a large deductible (or threshold). Regardless of these
tendencies to be non-normal, longitudinal data still appear as repeated
observations over time and hence tend to be clustered. This project will use
copula-based methods for handling this clustering. Copulas are a tool for
understanding relationships among multivariate outcomes that were introduced in
1959 in the context of probabilistic metric spaces but now are being used in
more statistical contexts, including the insurance and actuarial science
literatures. Second, the research will consider multilevel data, motivated by
studies of school effectiveness within the educational sciences. The project
will introduce robust estimators and tests of certain types of omitted variables
that may arise in multilevel modeling. Procedures that use subject-specific
dummy variables will be initially explored and developed. Further, because this
type of procedure can obscure higher level model information, the research will
focus on augmented or instrumental variable procedures that retain higher level
model information.

Although motivated by insurance and educational sciences, the project will
develop models and methods that can be used in a wide variety of social science
disciplines. To illustrate, economists study wage distributions that may have
long tails, health researchers examine health quality indicators that have two-
part distributions, flood analysts consider high threshold data, and
organizational scientists examine multilevel models. The project also will
provide statistical software and, whenever feasible, illustrative data for other
researchers to use. Longitudinal modeling can be linked to insurance credibility
theory and, for insurance analysts, the appealing aspect of the copula-based
approach is that it links credibility theory to the study of (long-tailed) loss
distributions. Currently, both credibility theory and loss distributions are
core topics in actuarial education syllabi, without any linkage. Results of this
study should generate substantial industry interest. Moreover, particularly in
the educational sciences, multilevel modeling is becoming a standard tool for
addressing complex testing situations such as in studies of school
effectiveness. In longitudinal studies of school effectiveness, as with all
observational studies, questions of omitted variables are common. This research
will provide educational researchers with some new important tools that can be
used to address questions of the effects of school variables on education
outcomes such as student achievement, teacher effectiveness, and per-pupil
expenditures. This award was supported as part of the Fiscal Year 2004
Mathematical Sciences priority area special competition on Mathematical Social
and Behavioral Sciences (MSBS).