* 0436130
* GSE/DIS  POWERFUL SIGNALS:  Transforming the Role of Women and Girls in Science and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Mary Darcy, WAMC Northeast Public Radio
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 10/31/2006
* USD 200,100.00

WAMC/Northeast Public Radio is producing two radio series to be broadcast
throughout the US on WAMC's nationally syndicated radio programs 51%--about and
affecting women, and The Best of Our Knowledge.a show about education,
educational policy, innovation, and research. The first series is nine sound-
rich, feature-length, magazine style radio modules covering innovative gender
equity programs and projects throughout the nation, highlighting successful
methods and strategies for increasing the participation of girls and young women
in STEM education and careers. The second series is three multi-segment "audio-
diary" radio stories which will allow individual young women who have chosen a
course of study in a STEM field or career, or are currently working in such a
field, to tell her own story. Both will also be available for listening on the
Internet (WAMC's Women in STEM website) and distributed nationally to targeted
audiences on compact disc. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies in WAMC's radio programming placing a national spotlight on
specific teaching styles, curriculum designs, pedagogical approaches, and
studies that have contributed to the knowledge base addressing gender-related
differences in learning, and have promoted educational experiences that
positively affect student interest, performance, and choice of careers; and how
these programs and projects have made a measurable impact on the national effort
to increase the participation of girls and young women in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a "storyteller," WAMC anticipates the following broader
impacts associated with this project: &lt;br/&gt;* Reaching and educating a
nationwide audience of radio listeners about the nationwide effort to close the
gender gap in STEM education and careers; &lt;br/&gt;* Reaching and educating a
targeted audience of girls and young women (with a priority emphasis on minority
and disabled populations) who will have the opportunity to learn that STEM
education and careers are possible and within reach; &lt;br/&gt;* Reaching and
educating a targeted audience of parents, educators, academics, institutional
and organizational leaders providing them with stories about model programs and
stories they can use to further their efforts to increase the participation of
girls and young women in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;