* 0436384
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research and Education:  Rheology, Morphology and Modeling of New Inorganic-Organic Hybrid Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Joshua Otaigbe, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2009
* USD 88,390.00

This three-year award for U.S.-Switzerland cooperative research and education
provides U.S. graduate students with the opportunity to gain international and
interdisciplinary research experiences. The investigation of inorganic glass-
polymer hybrid materials involves Professor Joshua Otaigbe and his graduate
students at the School of Polymers and High Performance Materials, University of
Southern Mississippi and Professor Hans Christian Ottinger and his group at the
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich. Inorganic glass-polymer
hybrid materials of this proposal belong to a relatively new class of advanced
materials. Among their enhanced solid-state properties are increased toughness,
high stiffness and strength, flame resistance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
international collaborative effort is to understand the basic physics governing
the thermodynamic behavior and microstructure formation of inorganic-phosphate
glass-organic polymer hybrids. The investigators propose to learn how to control
the processing of the raw phosphate glass and organic polymer into affordable,
structural parts, and to identify the technological potential of this class of
hybrid composites. The modeling approach in this proposal could lead to
processing/structure/property maps for this family of materials and may reduce
or eliminate costly "trial and error" practice that is common in industry. This
is a first step toward establishing rational design principles to guide the
synthesis and processing of new engineering of the new hybrid systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will provide research training to graduate students and advance their careers
through new connections to leading European researchers. Students will
experience how fundamental interdisciplinary knowledge is linked to solving a
practical problem. The project also takes advance of complementary expertise and
excellent research resources at ETH Zurich. The Swiss group is expert in the
rheology, thermodynamics, and computational simulations of polymeric fluids.
They have pioneered a number of theoretical models, numerical tools and novel
rheometers. The research has additional potential for identifying new
applications for inorganic glass-polymer hybrid materials. They could be used as
solid electrolytes in solid-state batteries or polymer electrolyte membranes for
fuel cells or as storage materials for nuclear wastes.