* 0436330
* UBM: Research-Based Interdisciplinary Training for Mathematics and Biology Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Lori Stevens, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 760,001.00

Intellectual Merit: Technological innovation has caused a renaissance in both
biology and mathematics. The discovery of proteomics and microarrays and the
deciphering of genomes has changed the types of information biologists collect
and analyze. Concurrent advances in analytical techniques and computational
capabilities enable researchers to explore hypotheses and evaluate conclusions
with unprecedented power. To use this information there is the need to train and
equip the next generation of scientists with interdisciplinary tools to both
intellectually synthesize mathematical models and implement and understand
technology driven data acquisition. It is also necessary to impart an
appreciation of research culture early, and often, in undergraduate education.
Further, academic excellence requires combining various points of view and the
ability to work among diverse cultural and ethnic populations. It is in this
spirit that this project is initiating interdisciplinary training for
mathematics and biology majors. This program integrates interdisciplinary
courses in mathematics and biology with multi-year research projects. The
training program involves eight faculty mentors from the Departments of Biology
and Mathematics and Statistics who provide teaching and research training linked
to interdisciplinary research in biology and mathematics. The project combines
the strength of the university's biology and mathematics faculty with the
university's commitments to diversity, undergraduate research and
interdisciplinary studies. The integrated, research-based curriculum includes
Calculus for Life Science Students, College Biology, a Mathematical Biology and
Ecology course, and a Seminar series on how Biology and Mathematics combine to
examine hypotheses and analyze data in contemporary interdisciplinary studies.
Thus, the curriculum includes courses that offer entry points for students from
diverse backgrounds with differing knowledge of biology and mathematics. The
program delivers significant extracurricular experiences that ensure breadth of
knowledge and prepare trainees for advanced studies. A capstone course ensures
that students have the opportunity to rigorously and thoroughly analyze their
data, prepare manuscripts, and present papers at annual symposia. Student
retention is enhanced by following practices demonstrated by the American
Sociological Association to enhance retention, graduation and professional
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The training program is designed to
enhance overall educational quality, rigor and diversity by identifying and
training students early in the pipeline. An exceptional aspect of the program is
the four-year mentoring relationship being fostered. Curriculum and research
projects are integrated into the development and critical evaluation of student
research proposals to help students develop ample research expertise at the
undergraduate level. Activities of the training program are being broadly
disseminated via the UBM program website. At the university level, the program
strengthens collaboration among biology and mathematics and statistics
departments in both teaching and research.&lt;br/&gt;