* 0436265
* SGER:  Excitable Vesicles - A New Platform
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Carlo Montemagno, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,417.00

"SGER: Excitable Vesicles - A New Platform"

Electric potential and current are fundamental physical properties through which
cells communicate and process information. As such, they are instrumental in
controlling many physiological processes, including the beating of the heart,
locomotion, and brain function. Using nanotechnology, the investigator intends
to engineer hybrid biotic/abiotic vesicles that mimic the production of voltages
and currents associated with many living cells. It the intention of this project
to use protein technology and artificial membrane engineering to create a new
functional device, the Excitable Vesicle (EV). This device will be the first
incarnation of a new class of intrinsically smart materials where the
"intelligence" of the material emerges out of designed supra molecular
interactions resulting from the molecular composition and structure of the
material.

This multidisciplinary project is ideal for the NSF Small Grant for Exploratory
Research (SGER) program. It provides significant advances in the basic science
and engineering and offers an opportunity for far reaching technological
impacts. This project will incorporate a number of different biological ion
channels into membranes of vesicles formed from synthetic biomimetic copolymers
to create a new, intrinsically active material that is electrically self-
exciting. By mimicking how information is processed in living systems at the
molecular level, it is anticipated that systems of EV's will establish a
platform for investigating the genesis of emergent higher order behavior
associated with large complexes of electrically active cells. These systems will
for the first time demonstrate intrinsic information processing which is a
constitutive element of its fundamental material properties. It will produce a
platform technology for exploring emergent complexity in a physical system and
provides a venue for realizing a long term vision of enabling the creation of
new, inventive technologies, such as the fabrication of artificial neural
bridges, engineered repair of the cardiac pacemaking system, and the
construction of a 3-dimensional, analog bioprocessor. This technology will
establish the foundation for creating materials that are "environmentally
aware", materials that stochastically process information from its surrounding
environment and respond to the information in a complex manner.

Initially the focus will be on proving the fundamentals of EV technology
generation of action potential, repolarization of EV's, and propagation of
signals between vesicles. The project will be facilitated by computer
simulations of EV behavior and will likely culminate with the demonstration of
EV's that can spontaneously depolarize. These tasks support each other in
establishing a platform technology for producing large-scale, integrated
complexes of biotic/abiotic Excitable Vesicles.

The project is supported by the Chemical and Transport Systems 1414 and 1415
programs, as well as the special accounts of the NSF Nanotechnology Coordinator.