* 0436118
* Synthesis and Scaling of Hydrologic and Biogeochemical Data on the North Slope and Coastal Zones of Alaska: A Basis for Studying Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Marc Stieglitz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2008
* USD 677,402.00

Understanding land-ocean-atmosphere coupling is essential for developing an
integrated view of the arctic system, and is a key component of the Study of the
Northern Alaska Coastal System (SNACS) program. As an important contribution to
SNACS, this is an investigation of the linkage between hydrologic variables and
constituent (nutrients and organic matter) fluxes from the North Slope of Alaska
to the Alaskan Beaufort Sea. The overarching goal of the work is to develop a
generalized understanding of discharge-constituent relationships in arctic
basins. The primary question is: What are the relationships between discharge
and constituent concentrations in the three largest North Slope basins (Kuparuk,
Colville, and Sagavanirktok) and have these relationships changed over the past
25 years of rapid warming in the Arctic? Three sub-questions that emphasize
specific spatial and temporal components of the primary question are: 1) What
are the contemporary fluxes of C, N and P from the three largest North Slope
basins to the Alaskan Beaufort Sea. 2) How do discharge- constituent
relationships differ among the 3 largest North Slope basins? 3) How do the
discharge-constituent relationships over the past 25 years inform us about
future changes? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, the group take
advantage of extensive data collected in the Kuparuk River as a core part of the
Arctic LTER project. Researchers have been actively involved in gathering
nutrient and organic matter data and recording discharge in the Kuparuk River
since the late 1970s. The team will use these data to define discharge-
constituent relationships over the open-water season. They will develop transfer
functions for use with an existing hydrologic model (the NASA Catchment-based
Land Surface Model, CLSM) to estimate contemporary and long-term constituent
fluxes from the Colville and Sagavanirktok river basins. This approach is
necessary because we lack sufficient historical data on the Colville and
Sagavanirktok for a direct analysis. Estimates of contemporary fluxes will be
compared to measurements made on the Sagavanirktok and Colville rivers during
Year 2 and Year 3 of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The generalized
discharge-constituent transport relationships that will be defined are needed to
synthesize information now being collected at many locations and at many scales.
For example, at the Arctic LTER site a current BioComplexity project is modeling
hillslope and small catchment hydrology and biogeochemistry. The LTER streams
group is studying nutrient spiraling at the scale of the entire Kuparuk
catchment. At a much larger scale, work supported by the Freshwater Initiative
is quantifying contemporary land-ocean fluxes from the Ob, Yenisey, Lena, and
Kolyma rivers in Russia, and Mackenzie and Yukon rivers in North America.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Education and Outreach will be emphasized throughout the
project. In addition to graduate student participation, the group intends for
REU students (Research Experience as Undergraduate) to participate in Years 2
and 3 of the project, both in the field and in the lab. &lt;br/&gt;