* 0436260
* GSE/DIS  SciGirls - A DragonflyTV Dissemination Project
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Richard Hudson, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2007
* USD 399,539.00

TPT/Twin Cities Public Television, the PBS affiliate station in St.
Paul/Minneapolis, is conducting a novel dissemination project, DragonflyTV
SciGirls. Using a combination of video and print resources, supported with
hands-on training, DragonflyTV SciGirls will provide selected PBS stations and
their local partners the skills, materials, and financial resources needed to
implement an initiative that does not yet exist in the PBS system: a science
encouragement program designed specifically for girls. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The three primary goals of the DragonflyTV SciGirls dissemination
project are: 1. to foster a greater interest in science and the process of
scientific inquiry among girls ages 9 to 12, paying special attention to
reaching girls of color; 2. to provide educators in communities across the
nation with electronic and print media that model authentic explorations of
science that all girls can do, with training to use these materials effectively,
and 3. to increase both the quantity and quality of girls' science encouragement
programs, by leveraging the established power of the PBS outreach system to
engage a wide range of community partners. The project will be guided by an
Advisory Board of distinguished leaders in informal and formal science education
for girls. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At the heart of this dissemination initiative
is DragonflyTV, a half-hour weekly program broadcast on PBS stations covering
approximately 90% of the nation, attracting nearly a million viewers per week.
Since its inception, DragonflyTV has been a unique showcase for girls, ages
9-12. Over half of the DragonflyTV "kid scientists" are girls, with nearly 200
girls featured in our first three seasons. To complement and extend the regular
weekly broadcasts, DragonflyTV also offers inquiry-based outreach resources
including Educator's Guides, children's science journals, Fun Kits, videotapes,
and a rich, interactive Web site (www.dragonflytv.org). &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;SciGirls will capitalize on the full complement of DragonflyTV
resources, disseminating them through a proven model -- the strong, national
network of outreach professionals at PBS stations. DragonflyTV staff will select
and train a cadre of these professionals who, in turn, will facilitate similar
training sessions with their community partners. Local partners might include
schools, after-school groups, libraries, or community youth organizations like
the YWCA, Girl Scouts, or Boys and Girls Clubs. Finally, these partners will use
the unique DragonflyTV resources to energize their programs, giving the girls
they serve the motivation and skills to explore science on their own.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The project leverages a large
national program to produce a smaller science encouragement program designed
specifically for girls. The service structure will include 8-12 local community
program providers as partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The program
will reach the same huge audiences as DragronflyTV, and in addition draw
attention to and demonstrate a program for girls that could inspire similar
initiatives in other communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;