* 0436283
* Tracing Fluxes of Groundwater Through Riparain Food Webs Using Stable Isotopes of Hydrogen and Oxygen
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2005
* John Sabo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2005
* USD 27,000.00

Water table lowering is a common problem in arid regions of the world such as
deserts. One consequence of water table lowering is a change in the abundance
and number of species (called "species diversity") of plants in habitats along
river margins (called "riparian" habitats). While much is known about the
effects of water table lowering on plants, little is known about how the
relative availability or access to ground water may affect the abundance and
diversity of animals in riparian habitats. The goals of this project are
twofold: (1) to develop new tools to quantify the flow of water from sub-surface
(groundwater) and surface (river) sources to animal populations and, (2) to use
these tools to quantify water limitation in animal species occupying desert
riparian habitats along the San Pedro River in southeastern Arizona. The tools
we will develop will be based on traditional applications of stable isotopes of
hydrogen (2H, or D, for "deuterium") and oxygen (18O) to trace water sources
from the environment through plants. Stable isotopes are naturally occurring,
non-radioactive elements with higher mass than the more common, lighter versions
of these elements (1H and 16O, respectively). We will use differences in
naturally occurring concentrations of these stable isotopes in leaves and in
river water to understand the indirect acquisition of water by animals via
consumption of plant material. To do this we will focus primarily on
invertebrates feeding on dead organic matter and their predators. This study
system will allow us to determine the pathways by which water flows through
trees from groundwater to animals inhabiting above-ground habitats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will achieve broader impacts by training two
graduate students and by establishing the basis for applying stable isotopes of
hydrogen and oxygen to the management of groundwater resources.&lt;br/&gt;