* 0436129
* 3rd Annual Microbial Observatories PI Meeting and Workshop: Coordination and Networking in Microbial Diversity Science to be held on September 12-15, 2004 in Big Sky, Montana
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2005
* USD 75,745.00

This award is for support to convene the Third Annual Meeting of PIs involved in
the Microbial Observatories (MO) Program, Sept. 12-15, 2004 in Big Sky, Montana.
The meeting co-organizers are Drs. Mark Young (Montana State University) and
Sarah Boomer (Western Oregon University). The major focus of this meeting will
be to establish new interactions and strengthen existing interactions between
the NSF supported national network of microbial observatories researchers. It is
envisioned that such a network will facilitate collaboration and bring synergy
and synthesis to the participants in the program. Activities at this meeting
will include talks presented by MO-supported PIs, postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific items to be discussed at the
meeting include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Microbial Population Biology -
Emphasizing Quantitative Approaches&lt;br/&gt;* Environmental Genomics and
Bioinformatics - Metagenomics Matured&lt;br/&gt;* Microbial Community Structure
in Natural Environments- Understanding &lt;br/&gt; Microbial Controls on
Biogeochemical Cycling &lt;br/&gt;* Microbial Diversity and Evolution - What
generates and defines it&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will be
attended by all MO PIs, NSF observers, and a subset of postdoctoral fellows from
the Microbiology Postdoctoral program and graduate students directly involved in
MO projects and. Each MO will be required to prepare an abstract to summarize
their group's activities, and an Abstract Book will be produced for all
participants.