* 0436199
* Training Institutes on Interdisciplinary Global Environmental Change Sciences in the Americas
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Marcella Ohira, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 02/28/2007
* USD 330,000.00

This is a proposal to hold a series of two-week Institutes on Interdisciplinary
Global Change Science in the Americas (two every year). The proposed Institutes
contribute to the development and strengthen the local and regional human
capacity to deal with global environmental change issues and their socioeconomic
impacts in the Americas. The Institutes will provide a comprehensive view of the
physical processes driving global change and the socioeconomic consequences of
these changes in the countries and sub-regions of the Americas. The participants
will be early- to mid-career scientists and professionals, particularly policy
and decision-makers. The IAI's science agenda is supported by fostering
multidisciplinary research and communication between natural and social
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This support for IAI Institutes fulfills the
U.S. Government commitment to the Training Institutes program, as offered by the
U.S. delegations to the Tenth Meeting of the IAI Conference of the Parties
(CoP), held in Boulder, Colorado in June of 2003, and reconfirmed at the
Eleventh CoP Meeting, held in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in June 2004.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. Government formally accepted the "Agreement
Establishing the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research" on January
12, 1993 as an Executive Agreement, after the President's Science Advisor signed
the Agreement at the Conference to Establish an Inter-American Institute for
Global Change Research, held in Montevideo, Uruguay, on May 13, 1992. The
original document and the U.S. Instrument of Acceptance are deposited with the
General Secretariat to the Organization of American States.