* 0436042
* 2004 Rustbelt RNA Meeting to be held November 19-20, 2004 in the Lodge at Deer Creek State Park & Resort in Mt. Sterling, Ohio.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Mark Caprara, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 08/31/2005
* USD 5,500.00

The Rustbelt RNA Meeting (RRM) will be held on November 19 and 20, 2004 in the
Lodge at Deer Creek State Park & Resort in Mt. Sterling, OH. The RRM is the only
major Midwest regional meeting of RNA researchers. Approximately 120-140
participants from Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, Kentucky, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, and New York are expected to attend. The intellectual objective of the
RRM is to provide an inexpensive, high caliber, interdisciplinary meeting for
RNA researchers in the Midwest. The field of RNA structure/function and
processing is growing at a rapid pace and RNA processing has proved to be a
critical step in many important biological phenomena such as carcinogenesis and
development. Consequently, research groups need a forum where they can hear and
discuss new results and techniques in all areas of RNA research that can result
in furthering an individual lab's aims. The size and organization of the meeting
has proven to be an excellent environment for active discussions between
research groups, including those between PIs, PIs and trainees as well as
between trainees themselves. Such interactions are more difficult at larger
national meetings. The RRM emphasizes trainee participation and participation of
women investigators. In addition to offering opportunities for interactions with
PIs and other trainees, the RRM provides invaluable experience presenting
research in an educational and supportive atmosphere.