* 0436424
* Travel Reimbursement for Biotransport Workshop Participants
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Kenneth Diller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alfonso Ortega
* 05/31/2005
* USD 59,457.00

&lt;br/&gt;The award funds will support a Workshop on Transport Processes in
Biomedical Systems to be held in Bethesda, Maryland on May 6 and 7.
Approximately 50 participants will travel to attend the workshop from throughout
the United States. Grant funds will be used primarily to reimburse travel
expenses for these participants. Dr. Kenneth Diller of the Biomedical
Engineering Department at the University of Texas at Austin will serve as co-
organizer of the workshop with Prof. Geert Schmid-Schonbein of the Department of
Bioengineering at the University of California at San Diego. This award is to
cover the expenses associated with the reimbursements and with local processing
procedures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop will be to bring
together scientists, engineers, and government funding agencies to discuss basic
research needs and opportunities in the increasingly important technology area
of biotransport. Interactions involving fluid mechanics, thermal transport and
mass transport phenomena in biology and medicine and their impact on cells and
tissues are pervasive in understanding the causes of disease and development of
new prophylactic, diagnostic, and therapeutic protocols for improving human
health. The workshop will include presentations by a number of leading
researchers in these technical areas and will help researchers and funding
agencies to define improved focus areas for future directions of research and
education that will better link transport processes research with medical needs
and advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this Workshop is that
there will be a wide spectrum of participants from throughout the biotransport
and medical communities of the USA who will participate in developing and
learning about the roadmap for future work in biotransport research and
applications. There will be numerous female participants in the meeting. The
Workshop will be co-sponsored by the National Institute for Biomedical Imaging
and Bioengineering of the National Institutes of Health, establishing a new
collaboration between the two agencies in this important area addressing
fundamental bioengineering and health issues. &lt;br/&gt;