* 0436341
* UBM: Interdisciplinary Training for Undergraduates in Biological and Mathematical Sciences at ASU
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* James Elser, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2011
* USD 800,000.00

An interdisciplinary team of investigators carry out an&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate
training initiative at Arizona State University. &lt;br/&gt;The training plan
intimately combines new cross-disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;courses and summer research
programs. The former are constructed&lt;br/&gt;to allow maximal participation
among undergraduate cadres, and&lt;br/&gt;facilitate life science majors to
achieve a minor in mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;and, likewise, mathematics majors to
enrich their education with&lt;br/&gt;a minor in bioscience. The summer research
program is a&lt;br/&gt;competitive enterprise involving at least eight ASU
faculty&lt;br/&gt;members from life sciences, mathematics, and biophysics.
&lt;br/&gt;Research projects span modeling of ecological and
evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;processes through the new lens of stoichiometric
constraints,&lt;br/&gt;bio-economics, chemostat theory, and modeling of
visual&lt;br/&gt;perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project has potential to
make broad impact in both&lt;br/&gt;local and global education environs.
Regarding the former, the&lt;br/&gt;ASU UBM team is truly interdisciplinary,
with members in&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, biology and biophysics, exceptionally
well suited&lt;br/&gt;for interdisciplinary training for undergraduates in
biological&lt;br/&gt;and mathematical sciences. Its collaborative efforts can
provide&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and graduate students of diverse
ethnic/racial&lt;br/&gt;backgrounds with first-hand educational experience
in&lt;br/&gt;cross-disciplinary communication and exploration. As for
global&lt;br/&gt;impact, the proposed holistic approach (involving
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;biology courses at various levels and summer research
projects)&lt;br/&gt;in mathematical biology training can vertically integrate
all the&lt;br/&gt;components in the ASU education system. It is therefore
expected&lt;br/&gt;that this proposed program may yield many invaluable lessons
to&lt;br/&gt;serve mathematical bioscience education and research
nationwide,&lt;br/&gt;enriching the experience for the next generation of
students in&lt;br/&gt;this integrative and interdisciplinary scientific
endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;