* 0436216
* Accomplishment-Based Renewal of the Evaluative Study of Model Institutions for Excellence  Based on MIE Self-Evaluation Template
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Linda Crasco, Systemic Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2007
* USD 995,284.00

Systemic Research, Inc. has been working on a two year NSF grant, Evaluative
Study of Model&lt;br/&gt;Institutions for Excellence (MIE) Based in MIE Self
Evaluation Template (MSET) [HRD-0204166] since September 15, 2002. Systemic
Research has been involved in the MIE program since 1996 as a technical
assistant provider to design, develop, and implement the MIE Self Evaluation
Template (MSET), a conceptual and operational program evaluation instrument. All
MIE institutions have utilized MSET since the beginning of the MIE program to
collect their annual progress data. Based on the collected MSET database,
Systemic Research has compiled, published, and disseminated an Annual MIE Fact
Book to present an overall progress report from the baseline year to the current
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systemic Research, Inc. is seeking 36 months of
funding to continue indicator data collection and to publish annual Fact Books
for the remainder of the program period. MIE Fact Book 2002 includes a decade of
data, through AY 2001-02. For a complete presentation of the program, data is
needed through AY 2005-06, four additional years. The annual Fact Books will be
disseminated in parallel with the MIE institutions' Phase III dissemination
efforts to illustrate overall program progress. In addition, a Program
Achievement Highlights booklet including best practice models will be published
at the end of the third year to coincide with the conclusion of MIE funding.
Systemic Research will continue to provide extensive technical assistance to
individual institutions through continuous communication including onsite
workshops and annual MIE/MSET workshops. The MSET homepage will also be
continued to be hosted in Systemic Research's web site to enhance communication
and dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
assisting with self evaluation by the MIE institutions, an objective of this
proposal is the dissemination of MIE Models and their impact on the
participating colleges and universities. For wide dissemination, all
publications will be available in three different formats; printed copy, CD-ROM,
and web-based publications. The MIE Fact Books and Program Achievement
Highlights with Case Stories booklet will be disseminated nation-wide to present
the impact of the MIE program to Congress, federal agencies, research and
education communities and all interested stakeholders. The outcome reports will
be further disseminated through various national conferences such as American
Educational Research Association, American Evaluation Association, and National
Center for Education Statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;MSET has proven to be an effective instrument for measurement of
student success indicators. MSET will be updated provide common measures of
performance across all MIE projects for the duration of the program. The site
visits and case stories will identify best practice models. The project will
continue to provide extensive technical assistance to participating MIE sites.
Individual institution's Fact Books will be returned to respective institution
for their on-going self-evaluation. The Fact Book (overall and by institution)
will continue to be a successful mode of program dissemination. Annual MSET
workshops will further build capacity on key indicator management and self
evaluation. The finalized MSET Master Database may be used for further analysis
among educational researchers.&lt;br/&gt;