* 0436181
* Participant Travel Support for the Gender Equality and Disaster Risk Reduction Workshop and Training; August 10-12, 2004; Honolulu, HI
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,11/30/2004
* Nancy Lewis, Center For Cultural&Tech Interchg East&West
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 11/30/2004
* USD 24,000.00

Travel funds were awarded to the East-West Center of Honolulu, Hawaii to
increase representation of US and international scholars at the Gender Equality
and Disaster Risk Reduction workshop (Honolulu Hawaii, August 10-12, 2004). The
international workshop provides a forum for information exchange, dialogue and
action planning informed by science-based knowledge in the new field of gender
and disaster studies. While disaster social science has not historically focused
on gender, recent empirical studies demonstrate the practical and theoretical
significance of gender relations in decision-making, gender-specific needs and
capacities in emergencies, and gender as a factor in risk perception and
emergency preparedness. Practical and science-based strategies for mitigating
and reducing social vulnerability to natural, technological and human-induced
hazards will be examined from a gender perspective to develop a more inclusive
and representative knowledge base about social structure and human interaction
in disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women and men from the US and from high-risk
nations in the developing world will share their community-based, governmental
and academic expertise in the new field of gender and disaster studies. This
award enables young and established scholars in the social and natural sciences
to attend the workshop, with emphasis on increasing women's participation in the
historically male-dominated dialogue about hazards, disasters and society. They
will join practitioners and policy-makers from around the world who will present
regional case studies, construct a research agenda and current international
bibliography, and identify "best practices" for engendering risk reduction
initiatives globally and locally. The meeting will is also an important venue
for forging new networks and mentoring relationships between under-represented
women and persons from high-risk nations, building a strong foundation for
research and action collaboration in this area in the future. &lt;br/&gt;