* 0436142
* Symposium FF:      Solid State Chemistry of Inorganic Materials V to be held at MRS Meeting; November 29 - December 3, 2004; Boston, MA
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Jing Li, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 18,000.00

The symposium on the "Solid State Chemistry of Inorganic Materials V" will be a
comprehensive meeting focusing on recent advances in the areas of Solid State
Chemistry. It intends to address important issues concerning fundamental and
practical aspects and to provide participants with opportunities to interact, to
discuss new phenomena, and to exchange new ideas and thoughts on topics in Solid
State Chemistry and their impact on the development and applications of
inorganic materials. The research activities of invited speakers reflect the
multidisciplinary and forefront of these areas. The symposium will also project,
in a dynamic way, the high relevance of solid-state chemistry to materials
science and, of course, the MRS meeting is the proper forum to do
so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this
symposium will be to promote interactions and collaborations&lt;br/&gt;among
researchers, to foster new knowledge and new discoveries in this exciting and
growing field, and to build connections between new researchers (e.g.
undergraduate and graduate students, postdocs) and established individuals of
the community.&lt;br/&gt;It is noteworthy that research programs now prominent
in other symposia at the annual&lt;br/&gt;MRS meetings were incubated previously
in "Solid State Chemistry of Inorganic&lt;br/&gt;Materials." These include
magneto-optical materials, materials for fuel cells, materials&lt;br/&gt;for
hydrogen storage, bio-inspired materials, and organic-inorganic hybrid
materials.&lt;br/&gt;That a joint session with Solid State Ionics has been held
for several years also attests to the broad reach of solid-state chemistry of
inorganic materials into a variety of other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;