* 0436369
* Committee on the Human Dimensions of Global Change
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Paul Stern, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2010
* USD 370,000.00

The scientific study of human-environment interactions is increasingly being
recognized as a coherent interdisciplinary research area, related to but
distinct from conventional environmental science. Environmental science studies
the functioning of the physical and biological systems that are important to
sustaining life on Earth. The emerging research area studies the
interrelationships between these systems and human institutions and activities.
The research area is integrative and interdisciplinary. It is centered in the
social and behavioral sciences, but it integrates knowledge from these sciences
with natural science knowledge to understand the human causes of environmental
change; the human consequences of such change; and the ways in which
individuals, organizations, and social institutions respond to the potential or
actuality of environmental variation and change in pursuing their objectives. To
facilitate research and community-development in the emerging field of human-
environmental interaction, the National Research Council of the National Academy
of Sciences has operated a Committee on the Human Dimensions of Global Change
(CHDGC). This award will provide support for core operations of the CHDGC,
including identification of issues needing research attention and overseeing
studies on these topics; interactions with various federal agencies on issues
requiring scientific analysis of human-environment interactions; contributions
to international research programs addressing human-environment relationships;
and organization of workshops and other ad hoc activities that enhance
scientific contributions to understanding of human-environment interactions but
that might not be requested by federal environment
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continued support for the CHDGC will facilitate
that group's expanding on its traditional role as the primary NRC committee that
spans social and behavioral science fields and looks to involve leading
researchers in those communities in studies of problems related to human-
environmental interaction. The funding will facilitate the conduct of one
special workshop each year to examine specific topics, and it will enable the
committee to examine topics that are not directly related to climate change but
instead to other forms of human-natural system dynamics. Publications resulting
from committee workshops and studies will continue to be major foundations for
future work across a diverse set of fields. The research fostered by CHDGC
activities will continue to directly address environmental topics of great
public interest and concern. The results of committee workshops and studies will
have benefits for land and resource managers as well as policy makers at all
levels of government. The committee's work also will enhance interactions
between social and behavioral scientists and natural scientists and engineers
who already are active in environmental discussions, thereby enhancing the
likelihood that more comprehensively framed and more integrated research
activities will result in the future.&lt;br/&gt;