* 0436054
* Conference: Phytochemical Probes/Substrates Network (NSF Workshop Proposal) to be held in Arlington, VA
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Ikhlas Khan, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2005
* USD 9,716.00

NSF Workshop Proposal Metabolic Biochemistry Program "Phytochemical
Probes/Substrates Network" Ikhlas Khan, Ph.D. NCNPR, University of Mississippi
Support is requested for a one day workshop for the purpose of drawing key
investigators together to discuss the feasibility of bringing the phytochemistry
community together to share resources for plant natural product research. For
researchers in plant molecular biology, biochemistry, plant physiology, and
other fields, the ready availability of phytochemicals that may modulate plant
gene/protein expression, or serve as substrates in biochemical pathways of
interest, would greatly facilitate progress in the fields and open up new
avenues of exploration. It is proposed to create a network of phytochemical
researchers which would catalog the availability of such compounds, and where
feasible, establish a repository for compound sourcing. The network is
anticipated to incorporate the following activities: (1) Creation and
maintenance of a web site to serve as an information resource for researchers
interested in using phytochemicals as probes/substrates in their research; (2)
Generation of a database of investigators and phytochemicals available in their
laboratories, catalogued by various structural classes; and (3) Where feasible,
the establishment of a corresponding phytochemical repository system to
facilitate access to these. To facilitate discussion of this timely and
important topic, a one-day workshop will be held to share information and
discuss logistics for creating this network. A team of 8-10 scientists from
phytochemical disciplines, as well as potential users of such resources, will be
assembled to discuss these ideas.

Broader Impact: Establishment of a phytochemical substrate/probe network will
have high impact on the field of plant biochemistry by increasing
availability/accessability of rare compounds to researchers studying plant
metabolism, molecular biochemistry, functional genomics, proteomics,
metabolomics, pharmacology and pharmacognosy. This is also of importance to
researchers at smaller institutions who may not have ready access, economically
available sources, or infrastructure to support the
isolation/purification/synthesis of needed compounds. The education and training
of students and post-doctoral researchers would also be enhanced by the
existence of a phytochemical substrate/probe network increasing information and
accessability to a diverse bank of compounds.