* 0436985
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Organic-Inorganic Multifunctional Hybrid Nanomaterials:  Spatial Organization of Functional Groups via a Molecular Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Mark Davis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2008
* USD 24,000.00

04369895&lt;br/&gt;Davis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research project between Mark E. Davis of the California Institute
of Technology and Veronique Dufaud of the Laboratoire de Chimie, Ecole Normale
Superieure in Lyon, France focuses on preparing solid catalysts of structural
uniformity. The proposed project is an extension of the U.S. and French
investigators previous work on synthesis and catalytic behavior of mesoporous
silicas containing positioned sulfonic acid groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is
to investigate structure-property relationships of organic-inorganic hybrid
materials where the inorganic component provides surface area and porosity and
the organic groups are organized on its surface. Results from zeolite-based
catalysts suggest strong correlation between nanoscopic/mesoscopic uniformity
and high selectivity. The investigators propose to create structural uniformity
that contains: (1) multiple organic groups in precise arrangement in order to
study the effects of cooperativity; and (2) multiple organic group types to
catalyze multistep reaction pathways.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal adds an international dimension to an
active NSF - NIRT (Nanoscale Science and Engineering Independent Research Team)
research award on zeolite nanoparticles. The U.S. investigator is expert in
synthesis and characterization of organic-inorganic hybrid materials and has
broader experience in catalysis. This is complemented by French expertise in
synthesis and surface organo metallic chemistry. Their efforts will advance
understanding and creation of new catalysts. Catalytic activity is the basis for
the chemistry industry. The project gives a U.S. postdoctoral research and
graduate student an international experience via research immersion at a leading
French institution. The project advances the student's international research
skills and assists with developing international connections for future.
&lt;br/&gt;