* 0436221
* GSE/DIS  Sisters in Science Dissemination and Outreach Project
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Penny Hammrich, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2007
* USD 200,000.00

CUNY Queens College seeks to provide K-12 students, parents, pre-service and
classroom teachers, school administrators, other educators, and the general
public with information promoting the best practices toward implementing gender-
equitable science education. Core material about equitable teaching practices in
science, mathematics, technology, and engineering will be drawn from the PI's
experience with five evaluated science education programs over ten years.
Resource materials include curricula, research findings, and professional
development methods. An interactive website will make resources available
nationally. A teacher-authored quarterly newsletter will communicate reports of
action research. A publication series will feature current research on gender
equity and science education. A book will synthesize teacher research and
academic research. In addition, K-12 educators will be invited to a 3-day Summer
Institute. A "What Works" conference will provide an annual culminating event
with attendees from the national community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regionally,
New York City pre-service and in-service teachers, as well as school
administrators will be invited to attend a 3-day Summer Institute designed to
further equitable teaching practices that enhance student achievement. At the
local level, in New York City Region 3, Queens Borough teachers and school
administrators and community-based organizations will hold one-day symposia to
focus on innovative strategies that promote gender equity in and out of the
classroom. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The proposed project
disseminates findings and methods developed across five successful experimental
programs (all variations of "Sisters in Science") that yielded detailed
curricula and evaluation methods. The PI, as Queens' College Dean of Education,
has the endorsement of the New York City Public Schools Region 3 to provide
professional development workshops for credit to teachers in 75 schools serving
125,000 students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The project brings
together educators and researchers in order to address gender inequalities that
exist within the educational system. It will impact areas of national concern:
the need to foster gender-equitable and inclusive practices in K-12 schools, the
need to promote science and mathematics achievement for all students, awareness
of model approaches to professional development in gender-equitable education,
raised awareness and discussion of the need for change in policies, and,
ultimately, the need to broaden the participation of females in science-based
careers. &lt;br/&gt;