* 0436298
* RUI:    Undergraduate Biomathematical Research Career Initiative at SUNY-Geneseo
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Anthony Macula, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Continuing grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2010
* USD 806,000.00

The Undergraduate Biomathematical Research Career Initiative at SUNY Geneseo is
a research-based program that combines new and revised problem-based curricular
components (e.g., calculus for biologists, modeling biological systems,
biological data analysis, discrete mathematics, graph theory, probability,
statistics and computational molecular analysis) with research activities
(ranging from biomolecular computing to individual-based, evolutionary modeling
of food webs) that push the boundaries of modern techniques in understanding
complex problems. Undergraduate students participate in this training program as
they blend new classroom-based studies with research projects at the frontier of
biomathematics. Jointly-mentored biomathematical research projects are at the
core of the program and these research projects serve as a stimulus for faculty
development and curricular innovation. The opportunity to directly participate
in these research projects serves as an incentive for students and faculty in
the research areas of biomathematics

The Undergraduate Biomathematical Research Career Initiative at SUNY Geneseo
supports a program at Geneseo that brings the continuing commitment of sixteen
students in two related projects and institutes broad, integrated curricular
improvement in the area of biomathematics. The project builds upon the current
strengths of the undergraduate program at Geneseo and the expertise of the four
co-PI's. It increases the number of students trained in mathematics and biology,
and it increases the number of students and faculty performing research at the
intersection of the two fields. It increases the visibility of biomathematics
research at Geneseo and promotes undergraduate biomathematics research in the
western New York region and nationally. This project is jointly supported by the
Division of Undergraduate Education/EHP, the Biology directorate, and the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities/MPS.