* 0436509
* Landscape Dynamics: Models for the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Ralph Abraham, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 06/30/2009
* USD 339,878.00

The project studies a new class of models for complex social systems, based on
evolutionary games with a continuous space of strategies. Here the current state
is the distribution of players on the space of strategies. The payoff function,
called the adaptive landscape, depends on the current state. As each player
adjusts her strategy in continuous time towards higher payoff, the distribution
changes, so the adaptive landscape changes, and the players adjust again. This
adjustment process defines a nonlinear partial differential equation, that is, a
dynamical system on the infinite-dimensional space of current states, with
nontrivial dynamics. Software will be developed, extending agent based modeling
methods to infinite-dimensional dynamical systems. Combining methods from pure
mathematics, economics, and computer science, the project will identify
properties of the adaptive landscape and payoff function leading to significant
qualitative features of the dynamics. These features will be implemented in an
exemplary model of financial markets. Problems from other social sciences, for
example, politics, also will be considered.

New methods from mathematics and computer science provide a great opportunity
for mathematical modeling in the social and behavioral sciences. The project is
aimed at this frontier. With exemplary applications, reusable software, and
computer animated presentations at international conferences, the project will
recruit young scholars to new methods of social science research. The new
methods seem ideal for the simulation and study of major social problems. For
example, a deeper understanding of financial markets will lead to better
functioning markets and better policy. This award was supported as part of the
Fiscal Year 2004 Mathematical Sciences priority area special competition on
Mathematical Social and Behavioral Sciences (MSBS).