* 0436347
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Interactions Among the Environment, the Neuroendocrine and Immune Systems in Fish
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* E. Gordon Grau, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 03/31/2008
* USD 34,980.00

0436347&lt;br/&gt;Grau&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
collaborative research project between Professor Gordon Grau of the University
of Hawaii and Professor Takashi Aoki of the Tokyo University of Marine Science
and Technology in Japan. They will be undertaking a study on interactions among
the environment in relation to the neuroendocrine and immune systems in fish.
Reproduction, development, growth, immune function and environmental adaptation
are regulated to an important extent through the orderly release of hormones by
the neuroendocrine system that, in turn, integrates information from the genetic
code, internal milieu and the environment. It is clear that the neuroendocrine
and immune systems are inseparable tied in teleost fish, as in all animals, to
the regulation of a complex array of metabolic, physiological and developmental
activities, as well as providing for protection against infection and disease.
It is of both fundamental and practical importance that we develop a thorough
knowledge of the manner in which the environment, and the immune and
neuroendocrine systems interact in the regulation of growth, reproduction and
disease resistance of fish. The researchers will specifically focus on the roles
of growth hormone and prolactin in the fish immune system and also on the role
of cortisol in stress and the immune response. The goals of the proposal are to
l) integrate areas of scientific expertise that are typically distinct and
separate from one another in the study of the endocrinology and immunology of
fish; 2) foster personal and professional relationships extending beyond the
proposed work; and 3) develop new methods and concepts in
endocrinology/immunology by exposing young scientists and students to a unique
mixture o knowledge and training not available in a single laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together the efforts of two
laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
project has the potential to develop a new, shared way of addressing questions
of fundamental value to our nation's nutritional and economic well-being that
are best answered by an approach that integrates disciplines which have operated
until now in virtual isolation. Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. The project includes the participation of both
postdocs and graduate students. Results of the research will be disseminated at
scientific meetings and in scientific journals. &lt;br/&gt;