* 0436786
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  DNA Adducts A Novel and Quantitative Biomarker for Soil Nematodes
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Deborah Neher, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 10/31/2004
* USD 11,260.00

0436786 Neher

This U.S.-U.K. cooperative research project between Deborah Neher of the
University of Toledo and Stephen Sturzenbaum of Cardiff University in the United
Kingdom involves investigations of soil nematodes (roundworms) as bioindicators
of soil health and environmental contamination. Neher and her colleagues have
conducted fundamental experiments to test the reliability, cost-effectiveness,
utility and quality assurance of nematode community indices for environmental
monitoring. They plan to use changes in nematode DNA as biomarker for rapid
detection of sensitive genotypes to broad classes of chemical compounds or
specific xenobiotics. The will demonstrate that (1) DNA adducts can be
identified and quantified reliably using XL-PCR in a model nematode,
Caenorhabditis elegans with validation on field-relevant species, and then (2)
quantify concentration-response relationships between contaminant concentration
and DNA adduct formation.

Intellectual Merit: The project applies PAHs (organic chemicals) as xenobiotics
on soil microfauna and an existing biomarker, DNA adducts, to ecological
analysis. This technology can serve as a relatively quick and definitive measure
of relative sensitivity of soil nematode genotypes to chronic exposure to
environmental stressors and contaminants. The objectives are to establish an
independent empirical evaluation of assignments for community indices and
sensitive genotypes (sequences) that could be targeted by molecular probes.

Broader Aspects: Many soils are contaminated with heavy metals worldwide. In
contrast, contaminated sites abandoned by industry are laden with organic
chemicals such as PAHs or a mixture of metals and organics. Currently, nematode
communities are proposed as a national bioindicator of soil health in the State
of the Nation's Ecosystems Report in the U.S. The proposed study will develop
environmental tools that can be used both to monitor soil quality; and quantify
progress of remediation of waste sites and contaminated sediments. The non-
specialist may find this a useful and cost effective tool for implementing
nematode bioindicators within large-scale environmental monitoring programs of
aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. Furthermore, the approach may be appropriate
for studying population genetics and evolutionary change in soil communities.

The project takes advantage of Dr. Stephen Sturzenbaum's expertise in
quantitative PCR and handling extra-long fragments of DNA, two skills essential
to the proposed project. The U.S. PI will master this approach and then U.S.
train graduate students in these tools for evaluating soil ecology.

