* 0436071
* GSE/DIS:  Effective Strategies to Diversify Academic STEM
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Mary O'Connell, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 06/30/2008
* USD 219,829.00

New Mexico State University is assembling leading academic administrators from
four Carnegie Doctoral/Research University Extensive institutions that are also
either a minority serving institution (MSI) and/or an ADVANCE-funded
institution. The working team of administrators will produce a publication
tentatively titled "Effective Strategies to Diversify Academic STEM" and a
Powerpoint presentation. These products will synthesize, in an accessible,
efficient format the rich literature on gender, race/ethnicity and science and
technology to provide concrete strategies for recruiting and retaining diverse
students and faculty-especially women and minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
publication and presentation will be produced over the course of a one-year
writing project. Administrators will learn current research on diversity in
higher education and then form writing groups in preparation for a retreat-style
conference in Summer, 2005. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination will be
accomplished in three ways:&lt;br/&gt;1. All participants will agree to make
presentations at a conference in their field during the 2006 calendar
year.&lt;br/&gt;2. The publication will be sent to the presidents, provosts and
deans at all 151 Carnegie Doctoral/Research University Extensive
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;3. The NMSU ADVANCE web site, www.nmsu.edu/~advprog,
will provide pdf versions of the documents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Deans and department heads play a critical role in bringing
about institutional change within academia. Leaders at these levels must
translate the broad goals and objectives of the institution framed by higher
administration (including governing bodies like boards of regents) into concrete
outcomes by developing strategies to encourage faculty members to behave in
accordance with those goals and objectives. The project emphasizes communication
among a diverse group of administrators and co-PIs to educate each other-and
then their national peers-about how to diversify STEM fields, especially among
the professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately,
the project seeks to bring about changes within the participating institutions
and at all 151 U.S. Carnegie Doctoral/Research University Extensive
institutions. Information developed will be presented at 20 or more conferences
in various disciplines-including higher education administration, and science
and engineering disciplines-reaching broad audiences with concrete research-
based information and strategies about how to recruit and retain women and
minorities in science and engineering at all levels of academia. &lt;br/&gt;