* 0436605
* An International Experience for Undergraduates: Australia Biodiversity and Ecological Research
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* A Joshua Leffler, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 06/30/2008
* USD 114,140.00

Sheppard&lt;br/&gt;OISE-0436605&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
project, "International Research Experience for Undergraduates in Australia
Biodiversity and Ecological Research." The principal investigators are Ursula
Sheppard, University of New Mexico (UNM), and A. Joshua Leffler, Louisiana Tech
University. In Australia, two CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific &amp; Industrial
Research Organisation) facilities (Darwin and Atherton) and the Lizard Island
Research Station, which is part of the Australia Museum, will host the students.
Fourteen undergraduates and one graduate student from UNM and Louisiana Tech
will spend one month in the summer of 2006 engaged in field research and visits
to various ecosystems, including subtropical rain forest, tropical savanna,
tropical rain forest, and barrier-reef islands. This award builds on and expands
upon two earlier grants from the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering that supported a summer institute for U.S. students in Australia.
This new award supports a field research program that teaches the scientific
process, ecological research techniques, and natural history in Australia. It
will focus on training students in biodiversity assessment and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this program is to prepare
students for future research endeavors by teaching the research process from
conception to publication. This goal will be accomplished by starting students
on projects specifically directed by faculty, who will teach techniques related
to field ecology and biodiversity. Students will then progress to more complex
projects designed around specific questions in biodiversity. Finally, students
will design, conduct, analyze, write up, and present a final project of their
choosing. Students will also learn about tropical flora and fauna and various
conservation projects. The program targets undergraduates early in their
academic career, students who are unlikely to have the opportunity to do field
research abroad, and biology and other majors.&lt;br/&gt;