* 0436642
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Carbon Nanotube Reinforced Metal Matrix Composites Experimental and Computational Approaches
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,10/31/2007
* Namas Chandra, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 10/31/2007
* USD 22,500.00

0436642&lt;br/&gt;Chandra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year US-France
cooperative research project between Namas Chandra of Florida State University
and Jean-Francois Silvain of the Institut de Chimie de la Matiere Condensee de
Bordeaux is aimed at developing carbon-copper nanocomposite materials with
advanced thermal properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electronic and power industries require devices
that exhibit adjustable thermal properties and mechanical strength/stiffness to
withstand external and heat induced stresses. Carbon fiber based copper matrix
materials have been widely used in those industries. However, the use of carbon
nanotubes instead of carbon fibers offers opportunities to improve properties of
these materials. The proposal addresses the issue of how to manufacture copper
composites embedded with carbon nanotubes. The investigators propose to use
numerical and experimental methods to achieve this objective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international
partnership takes advantage of combined expertise to resolve the problem of
creating and modeling "extreme" composites with carbon nanotubes. Theory,
modeling and simulations will be carried out at Florida State University, while
the French group will conduct the experimental work. The proposed research will
advance understanding of the thermo-mechanical properties needed to create to
novel materials for use by the electronic and power industries. Education
aspects involve training of US students in the experimental techniques developed
by the French researchers.&lt;br/&gt;