* 0436348
* UBM, RUI: Research-Focused Learning Communities in Mathematical Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2011
* Jason Miller, Truman State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 02/28/2011
* USD 900,000.00

This project is developing a five-year program of extended interdisciplinary
research experiences for cross disciplinary teams of undergraduates mentored by
cross disciplinary teams of faculty from mathematics and biology. Projects
represent a wide array of biological and mathematical subdisciplines and expose
all participants to a broad spectrum of research modes and techniques (i.e.,
molecular, cellular, organismal, and population/community level questions within
biology; and analytic, modeling, visualization, and statistical questions within
mathematics). Each student faculty team pursues interdisciplinary research
questions and engages in a series of programmatic activities designed to foster
both intellectual independence and professional and social interaction within
the cross disciplinary student cohort and to establish long-term collaboration
among mathematics and biology faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The project is motivated by the national need for professionals capable of
working at the intersection of the mathematical and biological sciences. It
makes available a set of long term interdisciplinary research experiences for
undergraduates that address topics at all hierarchical levels of biological
organization. Teams organize and create conceptual maps of microarray data,
study and model plastron respiration in ticks, model the effect of structural
characters of pollen on flight dynamics, improve mathematical models used in
bioacoustic surveys of bat populations, and develop habitat suitability models
for a species of conservation concern. Each of these projects advances knowledge
in the biological sciences. Together, they call upon a wide range of
mathematical and quantitative tools, skills, and approaches. Faculty mentors for
these projects have considerable experience in mentoring and in
interdisciplinary inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The program
advances discovery and understanding in the biological sciences. By creating
resources for and promoting the integration of research and teaching in
mathematics and biology, it provides an invaluable opportunity for faculty to
practice the pedagogy of research and develop their skills mentoring
interdisciplinary student inquiry. By making an exciting area of study available
to more students, the program has great potential to increase enrollment in
mathematics and biology. Partnering with existing programs ensures that
underrepresented groups participate in the program and information is
effectively disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;