* 0436190
* Biodiversity, Buoyancy and Morphological Studies of Non-Antarctic Notothenioid Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Joseph Eastman, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 03/31/2009
* USD 149,563.00

Patterns of biodiversity, as revealed by basic research in organismal biology,
may be derived from ecological and evolutionary processes expressed in unique
settings, such as Antarctica. The polar regions and their faunas are commanding
increased attention as declining species diversity, environmental change,
commercial fisheries, and resource management are now being viewed in a global
context. Commercial fishing is known to have a direct and pervasive effect on
marine biodiversity, and occurs in the Southern Ocean as far south as the Ross
Sea. &lt;br/&gt;The nature of fish biodiversity in the Antarctic is different
than in all other ocean shelf areas. Waters of the Antarctic continental shelf
are ice covered for most of the year and water temperatures are nearly constant
at -1.5 C. In these waters components of the phyletically derived Antarctic
clade of Notothenioids dominate fish diversity. In some regions, including the
southwestern Ross Sea, Notothenioids are overwhelmingly dominant in terms of
number of species, abundance, and biomass. Such dominance by a single taxonomic
group is unique among shelf faunas of the world. In the absence of competition
from a taxonomically diverse fauna, Notothenioids underwent a habitat or depth
related diversification keyed to the utilization of unfilled niches in the water
column, especially pelagic or partially pelagic zooplanktivory and piscivory.
This has been accomplished in the absence of a swim bladder for buoyancy
control. They also may form a special type of adaptive radiation known as a
species flock, which is an assemblage of a disproportionately high number of
related species that have evolved rapidly within a defined area where most
species are endemic. Diversification in buoyancy is the hallmark of the
notothenioid radiation. Buoyancy is the feature of notothenioid biology that
determines whether a species lives on the substrate, in the water column or
both. Buoyancy also influences other key aspects of life history including
swimming, feeding and reproduction and thus has implications for the role of the
species in the ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;With similarities to classic evolutionary
hot spots, the Antarctic shelf and its Notothenioid radiation merit further
exploration. The 2004 "International Collaborative Expedition to collect and
study Fish Indigenous to Sub-Antarctic Habitats," or, "ICEFISH," provided a
platform for collection of notothenioid fishes from sub-Antarctic waters between
South America and Africa, which will be examined in this project. This study
will determine buoyancy for samples of all notothenioid species captured during
the ICEFISH cruise. This essential aspect of the biology is known for only 19%
of the notothenioid fauna. Also, the gross and microscopic anatomy of brains and
sense organs of the phyletically basal families Bovichtidae, Eleginopidae, and
of the non-Antarctic species of the primarily Antarctic family Nototheniidae
will be examined. The fish biodiversity and endemicity in poorly known
localities along the ICEFISH cruise track, seamounts and deep trenches will be
quantified. Broader impacts include improved information for comprehending and
conserving biodiversity, a scientific and societal priority. &lt;br/&gt;