* 0436568
* CEDAR: Sporadic E (Es) Layer Instability and E-F Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Roland Tsunoda, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra G. Fesen
* 05/31/2008
* USD 284,759.00

The investigators will study ionospheric forcing mechanisms originating in lower
atmospheric regions, and the transmission of these effects throughout the
ionosphere. The research will focus on whether an electrodynamic wind-shear-
driven instability of sporadic E (Es) layers is capable of coupling a
significant amount of energy from neutral winds in the lower thermosphere to
electrical energy and ionospheric structure. This sporadic E layer instability,
referred to as EsLI, couples to the Perkins instability in the F layer, and the
growth rate of the coupled system can be around five times the growth rate of
the Perkins instability alone. Midlatitude observations have shown such
phenomenon as northwest to southeast (northeast to southwest) aligned frontal
structures in northern (southern) hemisphere Es layers, the so called quasi-
periodic (QP) E region radar echoes, QP scintillations, F region radar echoes
and spread F, raised bands of F layer plasma, structure in intermediate layers,
and ion rain. The EsLI is implicated in these processes for four main reasons:
(1) it predicts the preferred frontal alignment associated with most of these
phenomena; (2) its wind shear threshold is much lower than the Kelvin Helmholtz
instability, (3) its growth rate is much larger than the Perkins instability,
and (4) it is most likely to dominate the coupled E-F system when the F layer
altitude is high, which is when many of these phenomena are most prevalent. A
field line integrated treatment of the F layer equilibrium configuration with a
vertical gradient in the ion-neutral collision frequency results in the Perkins
instability. Given the recent discovery of large wind shears in the lower
thermosphere (that possibly result from nonlinear gravity wave/tidal
interactions), and the electrojet-like polarization mechanism that is involved,
the EsLI appears to be a much more energetic phenomena than the Perkins
instability on short scales. On longer scales, however, when polarization fields
will map between the Es and F layers, the coupled system of the EsLI and Perkins
instability must be considered. Because of the contribution of the Es layer, it
appears likely that some or all of the midlatitude phenomena listed above can be
explained in terms of this coupled system. To conduct this research, the
investigators will (1) Perform a linear stability analysis of the Es-F-layer
system that incorporates the scale length dependence of electric field mapping;
(2) Perform numerical simulations of the Es-F-layer coupled electrodynamics; (3)
Combine analytical approaches to nonlinear modeling with the results of the
first two tasks to analyze the wavelength dependence of the coupled system,
including the seeding of long wavelength modes, energy cascading, and the
partitioning of short wavelength modes between the E and F regions; (4)
Similarly analyze the system dependence on the altitude and density of the Es
and F layers; (5) Exercise the models using parameters measured for actual
ionospheric events. F-region structure at low latitudes produces radio wave
scintillation, so that the study of this mechanism is important in understanding
space weather effects on communication and navigation systems.