* 0436490
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  Protein Scaffold for Dual Differentiation
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* David Kaplan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Graham Harrison
* 08/31/2010
* USD 25,000.00

0436490&lt;br/&gt;Kaplan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year US-Switzerland
cooperative research project between David L. Kaplan of Tufts University and
Lorenz Meinel of the Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) in Zurich,
Switzerland, addresses studies of novel protein biomaterial matrices. The
objective is to correlate the protein scaffold design structure in 3D silk
biomaterials with drug delivery kinetics to control tissue specific
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will further understanding of a new family of protein based 3D silk biomaterials
that have unique mechanical and biological properties. The investigators will
functionalize silk biomaterials with drug delivery systems in in vitro adult
human stem cells aimed at differentiation for bone and cartilage lineages. They
will address drug delivery kinetics and associated mechanical properties of the
matrices in order to accommodate the specific requirements of both the bone and
cartilage tissues. This will be accomplished through optimization of the 3D silk
scaffolds, control of their porosity and the mode of drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research has potential for creating novel biomaterials for application to bone
and cartilage tissue engineering and formation of bone and cartilage interfaces.
Education is a key component. U.S. students will have an opportunity to interact
in a multidisciplinary program that involves materials science and engineering,
biology and chemistry. They will develop the skills needed to succeed in an
international research environment. In addition the insights from the research
will be included in courses and specialized lectures offered at Tufts University
and ETH.&lt;br/&gt;