* 0436235
* Workshop:  Support of Graduate Students and Postdoctoral Researchers in the Sciences and Engineering, June 17-18, 2004
* EHR,DGE
* 06/15/2004,03/31/2005
* Lara Campbell, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 03/31/2005
* USD 47,181.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) proposes to hold
a workshop addressing the issues surrounding graduate student and postdoctoral
support. This event is part of a series of events co-sponsored by the National
Science Foundation (NSF), the Council of Graduate Schools (CGS), and the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) designed to examine and improve knowledge
and practice in graduate education and research training. Intellectual Merit
There are many who believe that the US is facing a critical shortage of citizens
trained in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields. This
workshop will address this issue by examining the factors that lead students to
pursue graduate education and postdoctoral training in STEM areas, focusing
especially on the critical role that financial support and benefits play in
preparing a technological workforce. AAAS will work cooperatively with the NSF
Division of Graduate Education to organize a two- day workshop to be held at
AAAS headquarters in Washington, DC on June 17-18, 2004. The workshop will
consider the role and impact of student financial support in promoting the
production of more and better prepared US citizens in STEM fields. The
conference will examine the interplay between components of graduates student
support such as mode, duration and amount of stipend, as well as health care and
other benefits. These elements will be considered in relationship to indicators
of student progress such as completion rate, time to degree and time to first
position. The meeting will also explore the economic impacts of graduate and
postdoctoral compensation on the research enterprise and on the domestic
scientific labor market overall. The meeting will involve one hundred
participants including graduate students; postdoctoral researchers; STEM faculty
and deans; labor economists; and representatives from industry and research
funding organizations. It will be held at AAAS Headquarters in downtown
Washington, DC, for convenient access. The information shared at this meeting,
combined with the policy recommendations developed, will significantly advance
knowledge and practice in graduate education. A crucial group of stakeholders
will be empowered to create and disseminate a set of best practices surrounding
mode, duration and amount of student support. Broader Impacts The outcome of the
workshop will be a set of best-practices and identification of knowledge gaps to
be addressed by future research on these topics. It will also help to build a
community of researchers, educators, and stakeholders who will maintain an
ongoing dialogue in this critical area. AAAS will work with NSF to disseminate
these findings broadly. This meeting will advance our understanding of how the
many facets of graduate student support contribute to creating the US STEM
workforce, and it will promote the leadership of a more knowledgeable and
invested set of stakeholders. The best practices guidelines developed at this
meeting will be disseminated widely by the meeting organizers and participants,
and will lead to infrastructure changes that will enhance graduate education
nationwide. The meeting will also address how changes in mode and amount of
support may differentially affect underrepresented groups along racial, gender
or socioeconomic lines.