* 0436183
* Immersive Experience for Mathematics Undergraduates:  Mathematics Advanced Study Semesters Program at Penn State
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Anatole Katok, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

Mathematics Advanced Study Semesters (MASS) is an innovative, intensive, fall-
semester program at Penn State for up to 20 undergraduate students from around
the country, which is supported in the summer by an integrated undergraduate
research program. MASS consists of: three core courses in the areas of
algebra/number theory, analysis/dynamical systems and geometry/topology; an
inter-disciplinary seminar; a colloquium lecture series; and three research
projects per participant. The courses are custom-designed yearly. Engaging
colloquium speakers are drawn from across the country and indeed around the
world. MASS also offers valuable training opportunities to graduate student
interns assisting in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current proposal will
support Penn State's MASS program and MASS-related summer activities during the
2004-5 academic year. MASS will offer participating undergraduate students an
immersive mathematical environment, combining stimulating mathematical training
with an initiation into mathematical research. Most participants will proceed to
graduate study in mathematics or mathematics-related fields. Original course
materials will be prepared for publication by the American Mathematical Society,
and the MASS experience will be described in publications aimed at wide
audiences of professionals involved in university-level mathematical
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;