* 0436244
* UBM: An Undergraduate Biology and Mathematics Training Program at NJIT
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2010
* Amitabha Bose, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2010
* USD 672,514.00

Intellectual Merit: The enormous recent interest in biological research by
physicists, computer scientists, engineers and mathematicians has been inspired
in part by advances in mathematics, computing capabilities, and the realization
that biological systems are often amenable to study as complex dynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This has led to a growing interest in exploring
potential applications of these new tools and ideas within the biological
sciences. On the other hand, almost all disciplines in biology, including
neurobiology, biophysics, ecology, and cellular and molecular biology, have seen
a rising interest and need for cross-disciplinary research with
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are developing an
Undergraduate Biology and Mathematics Training Program (UBMTP) to educate
undergraduate students in an environment in which mathematics and biology are
intimately linked at both the curricular as well as the research level. A
primary goal is to teach students the separate languages of mathematicians and
biologists so that these students will be able to converse with either language,
and to understand both. Students who emerge from this program are able to study
biological problems from an analytic and modeling point of view. They are also
capable of applying mathematical techniques to biological problems and are able
to translate biological questions to mathematical ones, and mathematical answers
to biological ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: While the recent
history of collaboration between mathematicians with experimentalists has proved
fruitful, it has been so short that very few researchers have "grown up" with
the idea that mathematics and biology are, or could be, intimately linked.
Instead, most of the current interdisciplinary researchers began their careers
working solely in either mathematics (or a related area) or biology, and only
switched into the other field at the post-doctoral level or later. While
bringing new and fresh ideas to the other camp, these researchers needed, and
continue to need, a significant time to acquire expertise in their new
interdisciplinary field. This project begins the interdisciplinary training of
students at an early stage of their careers, namely at the undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to enhance the biological abilities of
mathematicians and mathematical abilities of biologists. At a more fundamental
level, the project trains students to recognize how mathematics and biology
complement one another, thereby allowing them to not only formulate novel
hypotheses, but also equipping them with the tools needed to test their
predictions. The training program is based on the following aims:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Conduct targeted recruitment of students majoring in
biology and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;2) Develop a directed interdisciplinary
curriculum for the UBMTP.&lt;br/&gt;3) Train students to conduct independent
research.&lt;br/&gt;4) Foster scientific discussion and
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program brings together 14
investigators from the Department of Mathematical Sciences and the Federated
Department of Biological Sciences, a department that includes not only NJIT
faculty but Rutgers-Newark faculty as well. The faculty of both departments
appear to have a long tradition of interdisciplinary and collaborative research.
The large number of faculty provides broad possibilities for research projects.
These include neurobiology, developmental biology and ecology. Students gain an
in depth experience that spans two academic years and the intervening summer,
providing outstanding continuity. &lt;br/&gt;