* 0436230
* GSE/DIS Reaching Parents of Elementary and Middle School Girls
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2005
* Sally Ride, Imaginary Lines Inc. (dba Sally Ride Science)
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2005
* USD 198,819.00

Imaginary Lines will develop and distribute readable, high quality booklets to
parents of girls in grades K-3 and 4-7, on gender-based factors that diminish
girls' interest in science and engineering. A version will be adapted for
Hispanic parents and published in Spanish. The team will also deliver
informative and practical workshops for parents in both English and Spanish, and
develop an online discussion forum for parents to enable them to ask questions
of experts and exchange ideas and experiences with other parents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imaginary Lines, founded by Sally Ride, runs events
nationally for students and parents to promote interest in science and
engineering. The events will be used to field-test and distribute the brochure.
The grant will leverage the visibility Sally Ride brings to local events to
generate media stories (newspaper, radio, TV) that raise public awareness of
girls/women in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Girls growing up today navigate an
environment that often influences (sometimes quite subtly) their perceptions of
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) and their sense of belonging in
these endeavors. Parents, teachers, and peers can influence them and shape their
attitudes, often subtly discouraging them from STEM activities. Research shows
that 4th - 8th grade is a critical period when girls begin to drift away from
science and math in greater numbers than boys. This is often a result of
societal influences that begin even earlier. In particular, parents can have a
significant effect on their daughters' attitudes toward STEM. To date, little
emphasis has been placed on reaching parents on this topic
specifically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Research shows that
parents can be a significant and early influence on girls' attitudes toward STEM
activities and careers. There is substantial merit in informing parents of
gender issues and offering them practical suggestions to support their
daughters' interests, as this may help decrease the number of girls who drift
away from STEM as a result of societal pressures and perceptions. The effort is
unique in its focused effort to provide practical, research-based information to
parents of elementary and middle-school girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly
qualified team is partnering with Macmillan/McGraw-Hill, a leading publisher of
K-6 science materials, who will print, promote and distribute the booklets and
organize workshops in several school districts, reaching large numbers of
parents from diverse backgrounds. Other partners include COSI-Columbus, CWIT,
and SDSC's Girls are GREAT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The proposed
activity will advance parents' understanding of gender issues and research
findings on children's interest in science and engineering and will provide
practical ways for them to help and encourage daughters to maintain natural
interests in STEM. Ultimately, it aims to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in S&amp;E, especially girls and
Hispanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;