* 0436195
* Collaborative Research in Nanostructure Control via Surfactant Mixing and Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Eric Kaler, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 01/31/2009
* USD 160,000.00

University of Delaware/ University of California Santa
Barbara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT -
0436195/0436124&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much
of nanotechnology is devoted to creating two-dimensional structures on surfaces.
However,&lt;br/&gt;learning the composition-structure-function relationships for
biomimetic self-assembly will lead to nanoscale, three-dimensional vesicle
structures for specific tasks including drug delivery, catalysis, specific
recognition, among others. This proposal addresses the science and engineering
needed to advance the self-assembly of functional nano-containers of polymers
and surfactants, based on our group's expertise with the combining the physics
and chemistry of nanostructures with the self-assembly and specific recognition
processes of biology. The basic theme is centered on the self-assembly of
oppositely charged surfactants and/or hydrotropes into unilamellar vesicles that
can be fixed by polymerization to yield stable, hollow capsules that can be
further functionalized. Specific aims are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Study the
formation and polymerization of vesicles formed from polymerizable surfactants
and&lt;br/&gt;organic and inorganic monomers to best retain the size, shape and
polydispersity of templating vesicles;&lt;br/&gt;2. Modify and control vesicle
properties adding block co-polymers to adjust the spontaneous curvature (size),
bending elasticity (polydispersity) and the steric interactions between vesicles
(stability). In particular, near equimolar mixtures of polymerizable anionic and
cationic surfactants with copolymers that likely create monodisperse vesicle
systems will be formulated;&lt;br/&gt;3. Examine the novel properties of
vesicles formed in mixtures of surfactant and hydrotropes (which are weakly
surface-active, amphiphilic, and highly water-soluble organic salts), and to
probe microstructural changes therein caused by changes in pH or light
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;Project 1 will involve synthesis and formulation carried out
primarily at U. Delaware by Kaler's&lt;br/&gt;group and microscopy
characterization at UCSB by Zasadzinski's group. The formulations needed for
project 2 will be done at UCSB and characterization will be carried out using
light scattering and electron microscopy by Zasadzinski's group, and neutron
spin-echo and neutron scattering by Kaler's group. Project 3 will be initiated
at U. Delaware by Kaler's group and characterized by microscopy done in
Zasadzinski's group. The reduction in time from 3 to 2 years will cause us to
not be able to get as far in the project; however, all of the specific aims will
be examined and the most promising routes
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The self-assembly of
oppositely charged surfactants and hydrotropes opens newareas of biomimetic
structures for exploration, and will likely put the process of vesicle formation
under thermodynamic control. Exploiting thermodynamic control means being able
to determine the size, polydispersity, stability, etc. of vesicles by simple
manipulation of simple, inexpensive detergents. Chemical reactions (i.e.,
polymerization) to fix such structures open new ways to form nanoscale materials
that retain the nanostructure of the template. The proposed work expands and
links these two areas, and will provide both novel experimental observations and
further theoretical understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Impact:
Surfactant formulations, particularly surfactant mixtures, are widely used
in&lt;br/&gt;many industrial processes. The ability to control surfactant
microstructure by mixing surfactants or adding hydrotropes could provide new
organic templates for novel organic and inorganic materials such as polymer
latices and molecular sieves. Manufacturing polymerized vesicles cheaply could
open the way to high-volume usages in printing or agricultural applications.
Work with spontaneous vesicles made of biological surfactants will lead to
useful pharmaceutical applications. Controlling the aggregation and fusion of
vesicles is of crucial importance to drug delivery schemes, as is minimization
of the free surfactant concentration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
scientific aspects of this proposed work will enable discovery of
new&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale surfactant architectures through the development of and
understanding of their thermodynamic and mechanical properties, including the
nature of their equilibrium state. Study of these mixtures has already led to
fruitful reexamination of many of the fundamental dogmas of self-assembly. Study
of both organic and inorganic polymerizations can open ways to make new
materials that could have application beyond those discussed above.
Undergraduate and graduate students involved in this work will be exposed to a
range of characterization tools and appropriate analytical methods, and thereby
be prepared for either academic or industrial work in this area. K-12 students
will be exposed to concepts relevant to this work, including surfactant and
polymer properties and elements of
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statement of Effect of Time
Reduction:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have proposed three specific
aims:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Study the formation and polymerization of vesicles
formed from polymerizable surfactants&lt;br/&gt;and organic and inorganic
monomers to best retain the size, shape and polydispersity
of&lt;br/&gt;templating vesicles;&lt;br/&gt;2. Modify and control vesicle
properties adding block co-polymers to adjust the
spontaneous&lt;br/&gt;curvature (size), bending elasticity (polydispersity) and
the steric interactions between vesicles&lt;br/&gt;(stability). In particular,
near equimolar mixtures of polymerizable anionic and
cationic&lt;br/&gt;surfactants with copolymers that likely create monodisperse
vesicle systems will be formulated;&lt;br/&gt;3. Examine the novel properties of
vesicles formed in mixtures of surfactant and hydrotropes&lt;br/&gt;(which are
weakly surface-active, amphiphilic, and highly water-soluble organic salts), and
to&lt;br/&gt;probe microstructural changes therein caused by changes in pH or
light exposure.&lt;br/&gt;Project 1 will involve synthesis and formulation
carried out primarily at U. Delaware by Kaler's&lt;br/&gt;group and microscopy
characterization at UCSB by Zasadzinski's group. The
formulations&lt;br/&gt;needed for project 2 will be done at UCSB and
characterization will be carried out using light&lt;br/&gt;scattering and
electron microscopy by Zasadzinski's group, and neutron spin-echo and
neutron&lt;br/&gt;scattering by Kaler's group. Project 3 will be initiated at U.
Delaware by Kaler's group and&lt;br/&gt;characterized by microscopy done in
Zasadzinski's group. The reduction in time from 3 to 2&lt;br/&gt;years will
cause us to not be able to get as far in the project; however, all of the
specific aims will&lt;br/&gt;be examined at some level and the most promising
routes identified for subsequent proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;