* 0436249
* GSE/DIS   Disseminating the National Science Partnership Kits
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Dale McCreedy, Franklin Institute Science Museum
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2007
* USD 199,832.00

The Franklin Institute and Girl Scouts of the U.S.A. are disseminating materials
and resources developed for The National Science Partnership for Girl Scouts and
Science Museums (NSP) under prior NSF funding. The dissemination of these
materials and resources targets 1.8 million Brownie (ages 6-8) and Junior (ages
9-11) Girl Scouts nationwide. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
National Science Partnership, a pioneering collaboration, was designed to
address the science learning and teaching needs of Girl Scout leaders, with the
goal of encouraging girls' pursuit of science. NSP provided science activity
kits, coupled with leader training, that emphasized the processes of science, as
well as badge-appropriate science content in physics, chemistry, astronomy,
meteorology, and environmental science. Longitudinal evaluation showed that NSP
was successful in building leader capacity as teachers and learners of science
and cultivated girls' positive attitudes and long-lasting interest in science.
In 2001, NSP was recognized by the Department of Education as one of five
projects nationally for promoting gender equity in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will continue its longstanding
collaboration to dramatically expand dissemination of the four most popular and
effective NSP kits. Leaders will have an expanded menu of training
opportunities, including web-based resources, and all four kits will meet
current badge requirements, as well as align closely with the National Science
Educational Standards. Through the proposed dissemination, the team expects to
engage a whole new generation of girls and leaders in science learning in the
powerful informal all-girl environment offered through Girl Scouting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. NSP has benefited girls and leaders
nationwide since the early 1990s. More than 11,800 leaders and 138,000 girls
benefited from the NSP kit program during its initial five years of federal
support. By providing strong resources for leaders in Girl Scouts, NSP enhances
the likelihood of quality informal science experiences for girls, provides
opportunities for engagement and transformation of leaders into science
teachers, learners, and advocates, and offers program models for the
institutions implementing the program. &lt;br/&gt;