* 0436285
* Development of the NEON Coordinating Consortium (NCC) and Project Office
* BIO,EF
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Jeffrey Goldman, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Cooperative Agreement
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2007
* USD 7,199,827.00

AWARD ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will develop the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) Coordinating Consortium, NEON Project
Office, and preliminary Project Execution Plan. Developing a rigorous Project
Execution Plan for NEON will be technically, scientifically, and socially
challenging. Thus, the NEON Coordinating Consortium and NEON Project Office are
integral mechanisms for facilitating refinement of the NEON conceptual design
into a formal Project Execution Plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of
this proposal will provide a community-vetted Project Execution Plan that will
clearly define the scope, schedule and budget at a level that will allow
construction and operation of NEON. This proposal proposes organizing a National
Design Consortium that will (1) develop the science plan, (2) specify the
required infrastructure to implement the plan, (3) craft and integrate a novel
education program that uses the uniqueness of NEON, (4) develop the details of
the network design, and (5) identify the governance and management structure
that could be used to construct and operate NEON. The National Design Consortium
will be responsible for incorporating the products of the working committees,
the web-based and face-to-face contributions from the broader community, into a
preliminary Project Execution Plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the process
orchestrated by this proposal, the ecological community will take a vital step
in attaining long sought research opportunities and capabilities. In short, this
proposal will enhance research aspirations, embolden future planning horizons,
and transform the scale and scope of ecological research. In part, the
intellectual merit of this proposal resides in the PIs considerable stature,
expertise, and appreciation of the technology, science, and education fields. In
addition, the process developed in this proposal is trustworthy because it
incorporates effective community outreach, a strong advisory board, experienced
consultants, and an efficient meeting and committee plan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has considerable broader impacts as it will
forge new disciplinary alliances; push interdisciplinary scientific,
information, and technological frontiers; and create education and training
opportunities leading to new career paths. As an example, postdoctoral
associates on this proposal will be trained in the design and development of
large scientific enterprises, project management, and collaboratory science,
technology, and education. The inclusion of individuals of different gender,
institutions, scientific disciplines, and underrepresented groups is a
fundamental underpinning of this request. Diversity (demographic, institutional
and scientific discipline) is incorporated at all levels of this proposal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs presented a well-articulated vision for science
education and the development of an integrated science and education plan as a
main deliverable. The plan outlines comprehensive involvement with the education
community, and addresses mechanisms to ensure that participants from minority
serving institutions (tribal colleges, HBCU's, etc.) have access to NEON sites.
Moreover, during the period of the award, compendiums, resource guides,
protocols, models, and directories will be developed to open audiences to NEON's
integrated research and education opportunities and plans. &lt;br/&gt;