* 0436179
* Collaborative Research: Flux and Transformation of Organic Carbon across the Eroding Coastline of Northern Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Chien-Lu Ping, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2009
* USD 740,930.00

Intellectual Merit: Terrestrial arctic ecosystems store 25.33% of the world's
soil organic carbon (OC), and large amounts of the long-sequestered OC is
rapidly released by erosion along the ~2000 km coastline of northern Alaska.
This eroded OC becomes available for biogeochemical cycling and makes a
substantial, but poorly known, contribution to marine ecosystems and to CO2 and
methane emissions to the atmosphere. While crude estimates of the flux of OC
across the eroding coastline have been developed and are known to be affected by
ground-ice stability, little is known about the transformation of terrestrial OC
as it crosses the land/ocean interface. This team hypothesizes that the wave-
washed foreshore zone is critical to the transformation of OC once it is
released from storage through physical dispersion, leaching, and oxidation. How
the bioavailability of OC is controlled by the age, size and composition of the
organic matter, and how these factors relate to geomorphic environments that
have influenced past soil development is critical to quantifying OC
transformation. How much of this OC becomes bioavailable to marine ecosystems
and is released to the atmosphere as it crosses this narrow, transient zone, and
how much returns to long-term sequestration in nearshore sediments is critical
to understanding carbon budgets of the Arctic Ocean and to assessing feedbacks
associated with climate and sea-ice changes. The feedback of greatest concern to
coastal processes is the potential for released OC to: alter biogeochemical
cycling, increase CO2 and methane emissions, contribute to climate warming,
accelerate sea ice retreat, increase fetch and wave energy to exposed coasts;
and ultimately further increase erosion rates and OC flux.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accordingly, this research has four components designed
to: (1) characterize the nature and abundance of soil OC and ground ice in
relation to geomorphic environments, (2) estimate the total OC flux along the
entire coast and develop empirical models to assess the vulnerability of the
coast to increased erosion resulting from decreasing summer sea-ice, (3)
determine the biogeochemical transformation and bioavailability of OC associated
with various dissolved and particulate forms across the land/sea interface
through field study and laboratory experimentation; and (4) integrate results to
the pan-arctic scale through international collaboration. The study will involve
extensive sampling at 50 sites along the entire Alaskan Beaufort Sea coast to
develop precise estimates of erosion and OC flux. Intensive sampling at three
primary sites along dominant coastline types will be conducted to evaluate the
transformation of the eroded OC. Three secondary sites will be added to broaden
the monitoring to other coastline types and to involve local communities in
assessing coastal changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
will provide information critical to understanding the biogeochemical
consequences of coastal changes in northern Alaska and can be used to estimate
pan-arctic coastal OC and sediment inputs through international collaboration.
Results can be used to increase our predictive capabilities in related models
that address the carbon cycle and the arctic climate system. Of particular
relevance will be the characterization of the bioavailability of long-
sequestered OC across a range of soil environments, quantification of ground ice
that is essential to assessing terrain stability in northern Alaska under a
warming climate; and an improved understanding of the role of coastal erosion to
the input of carbon and nutrients to the Arctic Ocean. This project will
integrate research, professional and student training, and community involvement
at Barrow, Nuiqsut, and Kaktovik, in partnership with local village
representatives, the oil industry, and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, to
communicate study results and inform local residents about the coastal processes
that are import to marine ecosystems and their subsistence activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;