* 0437183
* Collaborative Research:    Dynamics for Social Networks Processes:    Comparing Statistical Models with Intelligent Agents
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Negash Medhin, National Institute of Statistical Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Rong Chen
* 08/31/2006
* USD 219,999.00

The goal of this project is to reconcile two methods for modeling change
in&lt;br/&gt;social networks over time: a class of statistical models and
intelligent agent&lt;br/&gt;models. The research contrasts the properties of
these two approaches,&lt;br/&gt;exploring what qualitative dynamic behaviors in
social networks are captured&lt;br/&gt;usefully and interpretably by each. The
primary tools are latent variable&lt;br/&gt;representations and dynamical
systems analysis. The result is a framework that&lt;br/&gt;characterizes the
strengths and limitations of the two classes of models in&lt;br/&gt;multiple
settings, and provides feedback that stimulates refinement of&lt;br/&gt;existing
theories for social networks and development of new
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social network theory has produced a wealth of
paradigms to describe the&lt;br/&gt;nature and evolution of groups of people who
interact, possibly in subgroups,&lt;br/&gt;with one another. Settings in which
social network theory has been applied&lt;br/&gt;range from friend to
corporations to political blocs to religious groups.&lt;br/&gt;Counterterrorism
is one application of particular current importance, in which&lt;br/&gt;the
notion that the network might have latent (unobservable)
characteristics&lt;br/&gt;that are important to its evolution over time is
especially germane.&lt;br/&gt;Currently, however, there is not good
understanding of strengths and&lt;br/&gt;limitations of different models for the
dynamics of social networks.&lt;br/&gt;The researchers on this project, drawn
from the social sciences,&lt;br/&gt;statistics and applied mathematics, are
constructing a conceptual and&lt;br/&gt;operational framework that allows the
principled comparison of different&lt;br/&gt;models in multiple contexts. In
addition to advances in theory and&lt;br/&gt;methodology, the framework enables
social sciences researchers and other&lt;br/&gt;analysts to choose a model whose
dynamic properties are most appropriate to&lt;br/&gt;each
application.&lt;br/&gt;