* 0437258
* Collaborative Project:   RUI -  Development of Statistical Modeling Methods for Analysis of Social and Behavioral Science Data with Nonignorable Nonresponse
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Mortaza Jamshidian, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2008
* USD 168,541.00

RUI - Collaborative Project: Development of Statistical Modeling
&lt;br/&gt;Methods for Analysis of Social and Behavioral Science Data with
&lt;br/&gt;Nonignorable Nonresponse&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Mortaza Jamshidian
and Ke-Hai Yuan&lt;br/&gt;NSF proposals SES - 0407258 and
SES-0437167&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops methods for modeling incomplete data that&lt;br/&gt;arise in social and
behavioral sciences (SBS). The main focus is&lt;br/&gt;analysis of data with
nonignorable nonresponse, using&lt;br/&gt;structural equation models and methods
that take into account the&lt;br/&gt;missing data mechanism. The investigators
study and develop (1)&lt;br/&gt;selection and pattern mixture model approaches
to jointly model&lt;br/&gt;the missing data mechanism and the variation in the
observed data,&lt;br/&gt;(2) methods to segment the data into groups having the
same&lt;br/&gt;missing data mechanism via development of statistical tests of
&lt;br/&gt;homogeneity of mean and covariances, utilization of clustering
&lt;br/&gt;methods as well as latent variable regression models, (3) multiple
&lt;br/&gt;imputation methods that use predictive models for nonignorable
&lt;br/&gt;nonresponse data to impute missing data, and (4) application of
&lt;br/&gt;various types of bootstrap methods that take into account
missing-&lt;br/&gt;ness. The investigators develop theoretically sound
statistical methods, &lt;br/&gt;theories are assessed by extensive simulation
studies, and methods &lt;br/&gt;are examined by application to real data,
specifically the data from the&lt;br/&gt;University of Notre-Dame Adolescent
Parenting Project, an on-going &lt;br/&gt;longitudinal study of teen parenting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators develop statistical methodology for
analysis of data&lt;br/&gt; that are not complete. In social and behavioral
sciences, data are &lt;br/&gt;often collected in longitudinal studies and
through questionnaires. Lack&lt;br/&gt; of compliance of subjects (e.g.,
dropping out of studies and/or &lt;br/&gt;incomplete responses) that leads to
incomplete data is commonplace.&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on analysis of
data that are missing not at random &lt;br/&gt;(MNAR). MNAR occurs when a case
of a variable is not observed due to&lt;br/&gt; the value of that variable being
atypical; for example, a subject does not &lt;br/&gt;submit to a measure of the
level of her depression because she is &lt;br/&gt;unusually depressed. To-date,
adequate statistical methodology to analyze &lt;br/&gt;MNAR data has not been
explored in SBS. The investigators formulate new &lt;br/&gt;models, develop
inferential and computational methods for MNAR data, and &lt;br/&gt;illustrate
the methods with social and behavioral science data sets. In the latter
&lt;br/&gt;respect, the investigators concentrate in applying the methodology to
analyze a &lt;br/&gt;set of data collected by University of Notre Dame which
studies teen parenting. &lt;br/&gt;The analyses are carried out in the context
of structural equation modeling &lt;br/&gt;which has been widely used in a
variety of disciplines including education, &lt;br/&gt;medicine, psychology,
sociology, and other areas related to human behavior.