* 0437181
* U.S.-Costa Rica Dissertation Research:  Operation of Seismic Array at Cerro Mercedes, Costa Rica
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2007
* Vadim Levin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/2007
* USD 9,715.00

0437181 &lt;br/&gt;Levin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program award will
help to support the major part of the PhD thesis of Alissa Henza, under the
supervision of Dr. Vadim Levin of Rutgers University and in collaboration with a
team of scientists from the Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad, headed by
Dr. Guillermo Alvarado of that institute and also at the University of Costa
Rica. The researchers intend to study processes at work on the Earth's mantle
zone that exert control over plate tectonics, volcanic arcs, and strongly
influence the accretion of continents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among numerous
volcanoes of Costa Rica only one, called Cerro Mercedes, is known to
&lt;br/&gt;have produced lavas that carry within them inclusions of rock from
beneath the crust. &lt;br/&gt;Finds of such mantle nodules, or xenoliths, are
unusual in areas of active volcanism &lt;br/&gt;associated with subduction. A
discovery of mantle nodules at Cerro Mercedes &lt;br/&gt;suggests special
conditions at this site. The researchers intend to deploy a small array of
portable broadband seismic sensors in the immediate vicinity of the locality
where xenoliths were found, for the duration of 15 months. Primary aims of the
study based on the data collected by this cooperative effort will be: a) Are
xenoliths derived from the overriding plate or from the supraslab mantle wedge?
and b) Are there depth regions characterized by coherent rock fabric; do
xenoliths come from one of them? The seismological observatory campaign will be
carried out in an area proximate to &lt;br/&gt;Arenal and Miravalles volcanoes
that are major sources of volcanic hazards in Costa Rica. Thus, in addition to
the scientific interest and the student training, the project's broader impacts
will extend to volcanic risk assessment and hazard mitigation by involving Costa
Rican researchers whose primary tasks and expertise reside in those areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;