* 0437919
* Collaborative Research:  Multifunctional Performance of Carbon Nanotube-Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Zoubeida Ounaies, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Jian Cao
* 02/28/2005
* USD 150,828.00

The objective of this research is to develop and characterize carbon nanotubes-
based multifunctional composites that merge structural functions with self-
sensing and actuation. The proposed approach is aligning carbon nanotubes in a
polymeric matrix using an electric field to achieve a high concentration of
inclusions while keeping the composite below the percolation limit. Such
composite, having well-dispersed inclusions, is expected to exhibit self-
actuation and self-sensing capabilities matching those of the best electroactive
ceramics while preserving the strength, environmental resistance and
manufacturability of polymers. The long-range goal is to integrate all of these
functions into a single material during high volume manufacturing processes such
as injection molding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research advances an
innovative design paradigm that composites are optimized for a particular
application by control at the microscale-level during manufacturing. The superb
properties of carbon nanotubes combined with the lightweight, flexibility, and
manufacturability of polymers results in multifunctional structural materials
that have reduced cost, weight, power consumption, and design complexity yet
exhibit superior performance. The impact of such development will spread
significantly beyond structural health monitoring and vibration control in
aerospace applications to medical diagnosis, self-sustainable medical devices,
energy harvesting, high-tech consumer industry and others. Educational benefits
are expected by integrating this research results to enhance existing and new
courses. Educational efforts will have a broad impact on teaching the next
generation of the workforce to utilize modern technology for solving complex
engineering problems. Graduate and undergraduate students trained on this
project will acquire interdisciplinary research experience and research
mentorship skills. &lt;br/&gt;