* 0437139
* Providing Technical Assistance to Grantees and Potential Grantees in the HBCU-UP Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,029,632.00

&lt;br/&gt;The QEM Network will provide technical assistance to grantee and
potential grantee institutions to the Foundation's HBCU-UP Program. Technical
assistance will focus on efforts to: (1) enhance the success of potential
grantees in securing HBCU-UP support; (2) ensure that newly-funded HBCU-UP
projects get off to a strong start; and (3) encourage linkages between and among
HBCU-UP Projects as well as linkages to other NSF- funded initiatives. To help
further the overall goal of the HBCU-UP Program, QEM will conduct proposal
development workshops; provide on-site technical assistance; conduct special
workshops focused on the key components of the HBCU-UP Program; and facilitate
communications between and among HBCU-UP grantees as well as with other NSF-
funded projects. QEM will plan and conduct a special two-day faculty workshop
during year two that is focused on information, resources, and strategies that
support the professional development of undergraduate students majoring in STEM
disciplines at HBCU-UP grantee institutions. QEM also will plan and conduct a
two-day STEM faculty development workshop in year three for HBCU-UP multi-year
grantee institutions that will focus on research opportunities for faculty,
including opportunities at major NSF-funded Research Centers; curricula and
pedagogy with an emphasis on the integration of research and teaching; and
effective student mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
&lt;br/&gt;QEM has a successful track record in the conduct and outcome of
proposal development workshops. It also has successfully implemented a series of
scholarly productivity workshops for faculty at HBCUs and minority-serving
institutions that will inform the content of the Student Professional
Development Workshop for Faculty and the Faculty Development Workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The project will not only reach the total
pool of HBCU-UP grantees, it will increase understanding of the HBCU-UP
guidelines and NSF application and reporting procedures among HBCUs; improve the
quality of STEM curricula, instruction, research opportunities, and student
advising/mentoring at HBCUs; strengthen the implementation of HBCU-UP funded
projects; and facilitate linkages between HBCUs and NSF-funded Centers.
Materials developed through the Project will be widely disseminated to faculty
on all HBCU campuses and will be made available at QEM's website. &lt;br/&gt;