* 0437903
* Boulder School for Condensed Matter and Materials Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2011
* Cristina Marchetti, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2011
* USD 1,360,000.00

This grant supports the Boulder School for Condensed Matter and Materials
Physics. This is an annual summer school held in Boulder, Colorado, at the
University of Colorado, whose goal is to bridge the gap between graduate
training and research by providing advanced graduate students and beginning
postdoctoral researchers access to specialized training not readily available
through graduate programs that may have limited resources. The School is also
intended to foster a sense of community among junior researchers and, over time,
to develop via on-line lecture notes, an educational resource for the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Schools typically run for four weeks in July
each year and utilize facilities provided by the University of Colorado. Each
school has about sixty students and twenty lecturers. Lectures expose the
students to a wide range of subjects in forefront condensed matter and materials
physics; topics that are often not available at students' home institutions.
Underrepresented students are always in attendance, as well as a number of
international students.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt; This grant supports the Boulder
School for Condensed Matter and Materials Physics. This is an annual summer
school held in Boulder, Colorado, at the University of Colorado, whose goal is
to bridge the gap between graduate training and research by providing advanced
graduate students and beginning postdoctoral researchers access to specialized
training not readily available through graduate programs that may have limited
resources. The School is also intended to foster a sense of community among
junior researchers and, over time, to develop via on-line lecture notes, an
educational resource for the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Schools typically
run for four weeks in July each year and utilize facilities provided by the
University of Colorado. Each school has about sixty students and twenty
lecturers. Lectures expose the students to a wide range of subjects in forefront
condensed matter and materials physics; topics that are often not available at
students' home institutions. Underrepresented students are always in attendance,
as well as a number of international students.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;