* 0437940
* GSE Planning for "TOYchallenge: The Movie"
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Sally Ride, Imaginary Lines Inc. (dba Sally Ride Science)
* Standard Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 01/31/2005
* USD 46,706.00

Imaginary Lines is planning the production of a full length documentary film
that will follow teams of middle school kids involved in an exciting,
entertaining engineering design competition -- to design a toy -- and in the
process change public perceptions of engineering and those who engage in it, and
encourage more students (especially girls) to get involved in science and
engineering. TOYchallenge, currently in its second year, was started by
Imaginary Lines and Smith College; Hasbro is the founding sponsor. The gender
neutral premise and format of TOYchallenge encourages both boys and girls to
experience the engineering design process -- from brainstorming to prototyping
-- in a competition that is fun and engaging. It is open to both boys and girls,
but a principle aim is to engage more girls, and to pay particular attention to
issues relevant to underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planning grant supports two things: an advisory committee of experts to inform
the film production team on science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)
pipeline issues and to develop the themes to explore in the documentary, and,
shooting and editing of a 3-5 minute TOYchallenge video to be reviewed and
critiqued by the advisory committee, then used as footage to describe the
competition and the motivation behind it to teachers, parents and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The merit of this activity is
that the relatively small investment in research input can result in the
dissemination of findings and research issues through an entertaining
documentary that could reach a very wide audience including children. Qualified
policy and research experts will team with film producers for a unique and
creative dissemination opportunity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
Research shows that 4th - 8th grade is a critical period when girls and boys
begin to drift away from science and math -- girls in greater numbers than boys.
One contributor is the low visibility of female engineers in the media and the
generally unflattering and often inaccurate media portrayal of engineers. Recent
reports call further attention to the shortage of US born scientists and
engineers, and to the relatively low numbers of American boys and girls who now
choose to go on in technical fields. Through its influence on the documentary,
the planning exercise has the potential to broaden the representation of
underrepresented groups by altering the perceptions of all students --
especially girls and minorities -- and the public at large (many, many thousands
of people).&lt;br/&gt;