* 0437660
* CoMPASS: Integrating digital text in design-based science classes
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Roland Hubscher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,879,386.00

This project investigates the use of multimodal representations of concepts in
student learning. The concepts are represented by text and by concept maps. The
project has two major goals. First is to further the understanding of
integrating the conceptual learning from informational text with the
experimental and hands-on activities in a design based classes. The enactment of
the intervention across different contexts will; be systematically studied by
examining the variations in teacher practices, student characteristics, project
challenges and aspects of classroom culture that enable students to take
advantage of the capabilities of both design activities and the use of the
multiple electronic texts. Second is to understand student's changing
representations as they use multiple texts in their science explorations. As
electronic texts become ubiquitous in educational settings, there is an
increasing need to understand how students in project-based and design-based
classrooms engage in learning from multiple texts in the context of an inquiry
classroom. This project aims to examine student's learning trajectories by
taking into consideration the strategies that students use, student
characteristics such as prior knowledge, metacognitive awareness, their group
interactions and the relationships of these to navigation and learning. The
methodology includes rigorous analytical tools systematically studying the
enactment of the intervention in a classroom context starting with a focus on
classroom dynamics and sequencing. The focus will then move to teacher practices
subsequently zooming in on student's knowledge representations. The results will
contribute to (i) the scientific knowledge base on integrating informational
resources into hands-on science activities (ii) increase an understanding of how
students process multiple texts thereby benefiting researchers using hypertext
and hypermedia systems and digital libraries (iii) generate a set of pedagogical
guidelines for integration of informational resources in scientific inquiry.
These will be important contributions to scaling up projects addressing K-12
science education. The intervention will take place in four middle school
settings, across different geographical, ethnic, and socioeconomic areas: (a) a
rural school in Connecticut; (b) an academically and economically challenged
school in Connecticut; (c) an urban school in Wisconsin; and (d) a suburban
school also in Wisconsin. Each of these sites will provide natural variability
in student preparation and motivation, teacher expertise in the topic, and
individual classroom dynamics. During each year of the 5-year project, a study
of the factors affecting learning will lead to a set of design principles that
can then be applied in other contexts.