* 0437198
* Education Research Meets the Gold Standard: Statistics and Mathematics Application in Science, Reading, and Research Methodology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Brian Hand, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2009
* USD 85,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education Research Meets the Gold Standard: Statistics and
Mathematics Applications in Science, Reading, and Research
Methodology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We intend to conduct a major international
conference addressing the articulation, or lack thereof, between the "gold
standard" for federally-supported education research and research in science
education and reading. Recent federal legislation places greater emphasis within
education research on quantification, as well as the use of randomized trials
and the selection of valid control groups. The fundamental issue for conference
participants to address is the extent to which the canons of federal research
connect with the current and likely future conduct of education research. We
intend that this conference will sustain and expand the dialogue between the
statistical community and those who implement the education research agenda,
through a discussion of whether and how to implement the new standards for
statistical work in the field of education research. The primary intellectual
contribution of the conference is to provide the opportunity for an exchange of
views among leading statisticians specializing in education issues, and
education research specialists in science education and literacy. The products
of the conference will be disseminated throughout the education research
community, and should result in improved research methodology, more effective
program evaluation and implementation, and more positive outcomes for students
and for instructional and administrative education personnel. Among the topics
and research methods we intend to cover are hierarchical linear models,
structural equation models, geographic information systems, data mining, meta-
analysis, neural networks, time series, decision trees/CART, and Bayesian data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is meant to help inform the
national debate over the role of scientific standards for research in education,
particularly as those research standards are influenced by statistical methods
and theory. We wish to ensure that this conference gives rise to sustained
dialogue regarding both established and innovative dimensions of the education
research agenda. The conference will bring together researchers in statistics,
education, and related disciplines to discuss the dramatically changing context
of contemporary education research. Standards for acceptable research in this
key area are affected greatly by the recent creation of the Institute of
Education Sciences in the U.S. Department of Education. The passage of the No
Child Left Behind Act of 2001 and the Education Sciences Reform Act (H.R. 3801)
reconstituted the standards for federal support for research and the
dissemination of education research findings. This major legislation has
established an approach to "scientifically valid education research," enshrined
in what is referred to as the "gold standard." The chief societal impact of the
conference is to provide stronger guidance for researchers and practitioners
addressing critical aspects of national education policy.&lt;br/&gt;