* 0437810
* SCI:  Keeping Condor Flight Worthy
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Todd Tannenbaum, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Manish Parashar
* 03/31/2010
* USD 4,370,211.00

This proposal outlines an effort to sustain the Condor High Throughput Computing
Software (Condor) by the Condor Project at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
(UW). The activities proposed are categorized into four areas of work: Support,
Release, Enhance, and Use. "Support" activities aid users with installation,
configuration, and usage through ticket-tracked email. Support also includes
outreach work in the scientific computing community. This outreach work includes
hosting an annual international Condor workshop, participating in online forums
dedicated to Condor and distributed computing, writing articles and book
chapters on using Condor, and delivering invited tutorials at workshops and
conferences. "Support" functions serve mainly to deliver new versions of the
Condor software. Support also includes maintenance - ongoing bug fixing, support
for new operating system releases and new versions of dependent software
packages, and updates to documentation. "Enhance" activities will generate basic
improvements to the Condor software, such as enhancements in scalability and
reliability, new capabilities on Win32, and the incorporation of recent advances
in distributed computing technology. "Use" activities leverages the Grid
Laboratory of Wisconsin (GLOW) project. GLOW is a multi disciplinary team of
researchers across the University of Wisconsin campus that develops, implements,
tests and deploys grid-enabled capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit and Broader Impact - The intellectual merit of the proposed effort lies
within the novelty of the distributed mechanisms implemented by Condor and the
software engineering challenges the Condor team faces in developing, maintaining
and supporting the over 400,000 lines of Condor code in an academic setting. As
a leading provider of open-source distributed computing capabilities, Condor
plays an important role as a primary "building block" in many research and
national and international grid initiatives, including the Grid Physics Network,
the International Virtual Data Grid&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory, the Particle Physics
Data Grid, and the NSF Middleware Initiative. Condor serves as the foundation
for numerous MS and PhD projects in networking, operating systems, and grid
computing. The size, complexity, diversity and quality assurance requirements of
the Condor software also lead to challenges in the area of software engineering.
The broader impacts of the proposed activity are interdisciplinary and span
across both academia and industry. Scientists who use Condor have been able to
greatly increase their computing throughput, and therefore increase the size and
complexity of the problems they study. Condor is widely used in many disciplines
requiring HTC, including Chemistry, Medical, High Energy and Nuclear Physics,
Biotechnology, and many others. Condor has been adopted by both universities and
government facilities, such as NASA, Sandia National Labs, and
NCSA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;