* 0437236
* Biomimetic Smart Materials and Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* Amy Shen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/2006
* USD 106,000.00

Biomimetic smart materials and sensors Amy Shen

With the discovery of the plant protein forisome (Knoblauch et al. 2003), a
novel nastic non-living, ATP-independent biological material became available to
the designer of smart materials for advanced actuating and sensing. The in vitro
studies of Knoblauch et al. show that forisomes (1-3 micron wide and 10-30
micron long) can be repeatedly stimulated to contract and expand anisotropically
by the application of a pH and calcium concentration shift. Due to their unique
features, forisomes have the potential to outperform current smart materials
such as ATP-dependent actuators and synthetic hydrogels/polymers as advanced
multi-functional smart sensors, valves, and actuators as biomimetic devices. The
central goal of this project is to engineer biomimetic smart materials based on
ATP-independent plant protein forisomes that will outperform conventional
actuators. With many unknowns and challenges, the proposed research is highly
exploratory and we will attack these issues using a combination of experiment,
modeling, and numerical simulation.

The high reward associated with this project comes from establishing the
possibility of synthesizing a biomimetic composite with all-in-one, multi-
functional (actuation, sensing) component within microdevices and morphing
structures. This work will be a major advancement over existing technologies
(using, for example, hydrogels, PZT, shape memory alloy) for actuation and
sensing in one-piece. Forisome based biomimetic smart materials are important in
civil and mechanical applications such as aircraft and small scale vehicle
morphing, mechanical adaptive systems, structural noise and vibration control,
and will lead to many potential applications in environmental monitoring, drug
delivery, biomedical and defense applications.

Broader Impact: Research and Education The proposed project promises to have a
wide-ranging impact not only on fundamental knowledge concerning the synthesis
of a new generation biomimetic smart materials for advanced actuating and
sensing, but also on the area of other emerging nano-, bio-, and micro-
technologies. Each year, PI Amy Shen has set aside two undergraduate research
positions in her laboratory to members of Society of Women Engineering at
Washington University. Mechanical Engineering junior Elizabeth Henderson has
been fabricating microfluidic devices and learning AFM procedure to perform
materials characterizations during Spring 2004 and will continue her research on
this project starting Fall, 2004. This experience will provide students with the
opportunity to learn how to work on a well-defined research project with
multidisciplinary interactions in novel materials, fluid mechanics, plant
biology, heat transfer, and process design.

