* 0437613
* Adaptations for Life at High Elevation.  January 3-8, 2005, San Diego, CA.
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2006
* Douglas Altshuler, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Paul Malchow
* 01/31/2006
* USD 3,000.00

Symposium: Adaptations for Life at High Altitudes. Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology, January 3-8, 2005, San Diego, CA&lt;br/&gt;Douglas L.
Altshuler,&lt;br/&gt;California Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium brings together
speakers from diverse backgrounds to address the challenges imposed by high
elevations on the physiological capacity of organisms. Elevational gradients
represent useful natural experiments that exhibit substantial changes over very
short distances in numerous environmental parameters, including the partial
pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide, air density, wind velocity, and solar
incidence. In addition to containing elevational belts that may constrain
physiological performance, mountains also include isolated habitats within which
populations can diverge and speciation can ultimately occur. This combination of
features makes elevational gradients ideal for studying the effects of climate
change on species diversity, and in many cases decline in abundance can be
linked to mechanistic responses to temperature change. Substantial reduction in
oxygen availability at high elevation is a feature which affects all organisms,
and numerous physiological studies have revealed an immense diversity of
anatomical and respiratory adaptations across taxa, and even among isolated
populations of the same species, including humans. Decreases in air density have
been demonstrated to influence the morphology, aerodynamics, and energetics of
flight in both insects and birds. In low-density air, higher lift must be
produced for both steady and unsteady flight modes when compared to low
elevations. Combined environmental changes across elevation influence
physiological performance synergistically, but have nonetheless been mostly
investigated in isolation. Accordingly, the intention of the organizers of this
symposium is to stimulate the comparative study of high-elevation biology
combining both taxonomic and mechanistic breadth. This symposium is very
appropriate for the membership of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology, which now emphasizes broader and evolutionary perspectives on diverse
biological phenomena. Annual meetings of this society are well attended by
graduate students and postdocs who will have the opportunity to hear and
interact with those working in this exciting field of comparative biology. This
award will support the participation of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers in this symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;