* 0437482
* Reductive Groups in Positive Characteristic
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* George McNinch, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 92,070.00

DMS-0437482&lt;br/&gt;George J. McNinch&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
study reductive linear algebraic groups over a, possibly imperfect, ground field
whose characteristic is a prime number p; this setting presents many important
and interesting challenges. The author recently exploited a result in geometric
invariant theory to give definitive existence and conjugacy results for a
suitable class of rank 1 simple subgroups, called optimal, containing any given
element of order p. If this element is rational over a ground field, the
techniques yield an optimal rank one subgroup defined over that ground field.
The project seeks to extend these results; an optimal rank 1 subgroup is
G-completely reducible in the sense of J-P. Serre, and one hopes to describe any
G-completely reducible rank 1 subgroup using the optimal ones. Moreover, the
project will consider counterparts of these results for simple subgroups of rank
greater than 1 -- e.g. one hopes to characterize the optimal ones. In a slightly
different direction, the project seeks to extend recent results of the author on
nilpotent orbits -- in the Lie algebra -- over ground fields. For an imperfect
ground field, the author has showed for a rather general class of reductive
groups that the orbits of the group of rational points on nilpotent elements --
i.e. the arithmetic nilpotent orbits -- have favorable properties; as
consequences, for instance, one finds over a local ground field that there are
finitely many arithmetic nilpotent orbits, and one finds that nilpotent orbital
integrals converge; the convergence of orbital integrals was obtained in
characteristic 0 by Deligne and Ranga Rao. The project will explore related
issues; for instance, it seeks to exploit recent results of the author and E.
Sommers to obtain information about nilpotent orbits for groups over the field
of rational functions on an algebraic curve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure
and representations of linear algebraic groups - and especially the reductive
ones -- are important to diverse parts of mathematics. The groups of their
rational points over finite fields account for most of the finite simple groups;
they are the natural transformation groups of many algebro-geometric questions;
representations of the groups of their rational points over local and global
fields carry deep number-theoretic information. The project will focus on
important aspects of these groups. The local and global fields just mentioned
are imperfect when their characteristic is positive; the author's existing
results -- and those sought by the project -- on reductive groups over imperfect
fields are essential to the study of linear groups in this "number theoretic"
setting. Reasons for tackling the proposed problems abound: results on
arithmetic nilpotent orbits for a group over a local field of positive
characteristic should provide tools needed for the study of the relevant
"harmonic analysis"; results on reductive subgroups defined over the ground
field contribute to one's understanding and provide useful inductive
tools.&lt;br/&gt;