* 0437544
* SGER:  Waste Biomaterials for Enzymatic Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Adrienne Cooper, Temple University
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 08/31/2006
* USD 75,544.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: SGER: Waste Biomaterials for
Enzymatic Synthesis &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0437544&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Adrienne T.
Cooper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Temple
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to
substantially expand the utility of enzyme catalysis for environmentally benign
alternatives to chemical catalysis syntheses. Present barriers to wider
applications of biocatalysis stem in part to the high cost of purified enzymes,
such as peroxidase, coupled with the requirements for large volumes of
materials. Use of organic solvents also is prevalent. However, if waste
biomaterials could be used as the source of the enzymes, dramatic cost
reductions would be achieved. This project would explore promising potential
replacements for lyophilized peroxidases, including plant peroxidases derived
from horseradish and soybeans. The key high-risk component of the research is
the utilization of in situ extraction with the evaluation of the effects of the
extraction solvents on enzymatic and catalytic activity. Both aqueous/organic
mixtures and room temperature ionic liquids will be utilized for extraction and
synthesis. Polymerization of 3-phenylphenol will be used to evaluate the
activity of the enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
research include new avenues to environmentally and economically sustainable
alternatives for biocatalysis synthesis. Publication will be through peer-
reviewed journals. A strong K-12 outreach activity will be utilized. The project
ensures strong participation of underrepresented groups. The combination of the
extraction and synthesis environments would be a major advance in this area, and
possible industrial applications would be very significant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;