* 0437997
* Collaborative Research: Direct In-plane Formation of Large Organic Crystals for Active Nanostructured Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Iskander Akhatov, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/2005
* USD 230,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to combine
expertise in materials science, fluid dynamics, and electrical engineering to
(1) implement a new method for growth of millimeter-scale organic crystals
directly on a large-area substrate and (2) utilize the crystals in active
nanostructured optoelectronics. The approach uses a single-step process in which
amorphous organic thin films crystallize during exposure to solvent vapor at
room temperature. Preliminary investigations led to the discovery of elongated
in-plane crystals that are more than 100 times larger than any previously
reported, spanning the length of an entire substrate (up to 1 cm long). The
large size of the single crystals will for the first time enable fabrication of
a variety of high-performance organic electronic and optical devices.
&lt;br/&gt;Achieving the targeted goals of this program would for the first time
allow integration of organic crystals with existing optoelectronic devices and
in such a way enable the development of entirely new technologies. The proposed
theoretical modeling will facilitate rational extension of the crystal growth
technique to a broad range of organic materials, enabling fundamental
investigations of their electronic, optical and structural properties. North
Dakota State University has targeted Materials Science and Nanotechnology as
priority research areas, with plans to establish a campus-wide interdisciplinary
BS/MS/PhD program. The proposed research will facilitate initiation and
stimulate growth of this educational program. In addition, the establishment of
a relationship between NDSU and MIT, which has top-ranking programs in Materials
Science, will benefit NDSU as it establishes itself in this research and
educational arena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;