* 0437523
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Effects of Early Experience on Parental Behavior in Voles
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Karen Bales, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2007
* USD 453,690.00

This project will examine the effects of early social experience on male
parental care in prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster). Prairie voles are a
monogamous, cooperatively breeding species in which males display high levels of
spontaneous parental and alloparental behavior (taking care of infants not their
own). However, the principal investigator has previously observed marked
differences in paternal behavior as a function of differential handling during
the postnatal period. Experiences during the postnatal period and the
availability of neuropeptide hormones, including oxytocin (OT) and arginine
vasopressin (AVP), may contribute to the expression of positive behaviors toward
pups as well. In this project the researcher will study the neurobiology
underlying the effects of varying levels of early experience on male
alloparental care. Pups will receive different levels of handling during the
first week of life. Later variables measured will include alloparental care and
anxiety, as well as long-term changes in peptide receptor systems (OT, AVP, and
CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone), mRNA expression for these receptors, and
short-term peptide changes in the brain and blood when exposed to a pup. This
project will help us to understand the biology of male parenting.

Prairie voles are a monogamous species of rodent in which males participate in
infant care. This project will investigate the effects of early experiences on
later male parental care and its underlying neurobiology.