* 0437794
* IERI: Learning-Oriented Dialogs in Cognitive Tutors: Toward a Scalable Solution to Performance Orientation
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Albert Corbett, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2010
* USD 1,270,000.00

The proposed work will evaluate the use of the four Cognitive Tutor middle-level
mathematics courses in a range of schools, including urban and suburban schools,
comparing the effectiveness of these courses to that of courses not involving
educational software. Methods will be developed with which the tutoring software
can detect ineffective behaviors associated with poor learning outcomes. A
series of studies will address the hypothesis that instructional software can be
a vehicle for creating a more learning-oriented classroom, with better learning
outcomes, if it engages students in "learning-oriented dialogues," designed to
help students focus and reflect on learning-oriented behaviors. The following
approaches will be evaluated:&lt;br/&gt;Providing interactive declarative
instruction prior to and during problem-solving activities, &lt;br/&gt;Having
students set learning goals at the beginning of tutoring sessions,
and&lt;br/&gt;Engaging students in discussions, with other students or with an
automated learning companion agent, in which they evaluate their own or each
others' learning behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;The pre- and post-assessments used in
these studies will be designed to detect shallow learning, probe the depth of
students' understanding, assess whether they can quickly absorb new material
(i.e., whether students have become better future learners), and evaluate
students' goal orientation and motivation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit The proposed research will generate new knowledge about the causes and
extent of students' shallow learning and ineffective learning behaviors with
technology. It will also produce new knowledge about how instructional software
can help students overcome those problems and be better learners. It will
provide insight into the differences between students' goal orientation and
learning results in urban and suburban schools. Steps will be taken to provide
better integration between educational psychology theory (particularly Cognitive
Load theory) and cognitive theory (ACT-R theory) and, correspondingly, between
the rigor of laboratory educational psychology experiments (cf., Clark &amp;
Mayer, 2003) and the realism of classroom experiments (cf., Bransford, Brown,
&amp; Cocking, 2000).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact The proposed research,
if successful, will improve American K-12 math education. Results from the
proposed work will have a direct impact on middle-school math instruction across
the country, since the four courses on which the research focuses will be
distributed through the network of the Pittsburgh-based company Carnegie
Learning, Inc. The creation of courses that work well in urban schools will be
especially helpful to minority and low-SES students, who make up a large
proportion of the student population of those schools. It should also benefit
disadvantaged students in rural and suburban schools.&lt;br/&gt;