* 0437920
* Organics:    Wavelength Selective NxN Optical Switches Based on Electro-Optic Polymer and Soft Lithography
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Antao Chen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 12/31/2008
* USD 440,000.00

0437920&lt;br/&gt;Chen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future optic networks for
information technology and defense require signal switching at each network node
not only at the fiber level, but also as a function of wavelength. A new class
of wavelength selective NxN switches based on micro-ring resonators and electro-
optic polymers is proposed to address these challenges. The objective of the
proposed research is to demonstrate a new class of fast and compact wavelength
selective switches that bring the performance and integration to the next level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The compact size enables large-scale
integration and a large switch array for a given chip size. More importantly,
their small size matches IC chip size and makes fast NxN optical switches
integratable on silicon CMOS chips for the first time. In addition, adding the
wavelength selectivity to NxN switch arrays opens up another dimension of
optical switching and may revolutionize optical component technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The new switches may enable high
bandwidth data routing, network management, system failure protection and
recovery. The technology may also enable robust, reliable and secured network
operation, which is vital to the nation's communication system, advancing the
security of the critical national infrastructures that support both general
public and defense. The outcome of the research can produce valuable
intellectual property that contributes to the technological leadership of the
nation. In addition, the project creates research opportunities and financial
support for graduate and undergraduate students, and cultivates the interest of
students of different levels and of diverse ethnic backgrounds in science and
engineering career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;