* 0437366
* Collaborative Research: Culturing Studies of Environmental Controls on Benthic Foraminiferal Shell Chemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 04/23/2004,10/31/2007
* Joan Bernhard, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Howard J. Spero
* 10/31/2007
* USD 379,191.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award the PIs will culture foraminifera
that reproduce and calcify and can be maintained under tightly constrained
carbonate chemistry and trace element concentrations to determine environmental
and physiological ("vital") influences on the shell chemistry of benthic
foraminifera. Two culturing studies, will take about one year each. These are
designed to address key aspects of the controls on benthic foraminiferal shell
chemistry. In each year both B. aculeata from a 220-m site and also epibenthic
species (e.g., Cibicidoides) from deeper-water sites will be cultured. Year 1
experiments will pursue results from work to date, and from previous culturing
studies of planktic foraminifera, by investigating the influence of carbonate
ion concentration on shell composition (d13C, d18O, Cd, Ba, Mg, Sr, U, V). Year
2 experiments will document the response of benthic foraminiferal trace element
composition to variations in dissolved trace metal concentrations, and the
response of benthic foraminiferal carbon isotopic composition to the d13C of
their algal food. Substantial culturing effort (~25% of the facility and time)
will be devoted in both years to exploratory studies on temperature influence on
foraminiferal shell chemistry (in particular, Mg/Ca), designed to help define
problems and approaches most suitable for future culture work. In addition to
these culturing studies, related field-based studies of in situ foraminiferal
life positions and shell composition will also be conducted. The project will
benefit society at large because results will enable better paleoceanographic
interpretations of past climate changes. Accurate assessments of past climate
variability are necessary for confident predictions about future climate change.
Such predictions, in turn, provide an essential foundation for sound policy
decisions regarding anthropogenic release of CO2 and other greenhouse gases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;