* 0437581
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Early East Polynesian Prehistory and the Archaeology of Rurutu, Austral Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2005
* Barry Rolett, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2005
* USD 10,640.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Barry Rolett, Robert Bollt will analyze the
archaeological assemblage recovered during his 2003 excavation on the East
Polynesian island of Rurutu in the Austral group of French Polynesia. The site
is typical of the Archaic period of East Polynesian prehistory, which represents
an early stage in colonization process during the period of A.D. 1000 - 1400.
Until this project, the Australs have remained a blank in the record of Archaic
East Polynesian culture. This research is geared toward filling this gap and
will significantly enhance our understanding of the colonization, settlement,
and development of East Polynesia. Robert Bollt's research focuses on the nature
of the Archaic period, and specifically on the high degree of long-distance
voyaging and interaction that took place in the region during that
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, empirical evidence for long-distance
interaction has drawn considerable attention to the East Polynesian Archaic
period. Compositional analysis of the basalt used in tool making has revealed
that the Polynesians had exchange networks that stretched over thousands of
kilometers throughout the eastern Pacific. Before such empirical evidence came
to light, it was believed that once settled, individual islands developed in
relative isolation from one another. Studies in interaction are now
revolutionizing how researchers understand the prehistory of Polynesia. The
Polynesians' navigational skills, shipbuilding technology, and spirit of
exploration have come to the forefront in ways not previously imagined. This
project will perform analyses on the basalt tools from Rurutu, which will prove
valuable because there is currently no such data from the Australs. This will
reveal to what extent the Australs were involved in interaction and long-
distance trade with their neighbors, such as Tahiti and the Southern Cooks. The
results will provide an invaluable reference point for the Australs that will be
useful to other researchers working in Polynesia. The radiocarbon dates obtained
from the site will also be the first series of its kind for the
Australs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As archaeological research makes further headway
into Polynesia, it continues to reveal new aspects of a culture whose
colonization of the entire Pacific Ocean over a thousand years ago ranks among
the most incredible feats of human exploration. As traditional Polynesian
society is quickly vanishing, understanding the region's prehistory is
increasingly critical to Polynesian life. Today, East Polynesia is far more
divided in terms of language and culture than it had been before European
contact in the 18th century. In learning about the achievements of their
ancestors, Polynesians are coming to realize that the modern international
boundaries that separate them from one another cannot mask a common heritage. By
working in harmony with government of French Polynesia and the people of Rurutu,
this project hopes to increase awareness of a rich and unique prehistory. The
results will be communicated through publications in scholarly journals and
presentations at scientific conferences. This award will also provide the author
and undergraduate laboratory assistants with valuable technical experience in
the analytical methods used.&lt;br/&gt;