* 0437589
* CEDAR Postdoc: Momentum Fluxes and Height Variability of Mesospheric Gravity Waves Obtained by Airglow Imagers
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2005,08/31/2007
* Michael Taylor, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra G. Fesen
* 08/31/2007
* USD 120,330.00

In the mesosphere/lower thermosphere region (~80-100 km), short-period gravity
waves have a very important role influencing the global-scale dynamics. However,
quantitative investigations on the effects of these gravity waves on the
mesospheric region still need to be done. To understand their effects it is
important to be able to quantify the momentum flux carried by these waves.
Airglow imager data have proven to be very useful instruments for measuring
small-scale horizontal structure of mesospheric gravity waves as well as their
induced intensity perturbations. However, it is the temperature perturbations
caused by the gravity waves that are needed to directly estimate the momentum
flux carried by the gravity waves. Previously, researchers have applied a
cancellation factor CF to relate the temperature to the intensity perturbations.
However, the CF used is a model prediction and has not been verified
sufficiently from the measurements because, until recently, it has been
difficult to measure both intensity and temperature perturbations. For this
program, investigators will use a special all-sky camera called the Mesospheric
Temperature Mapper (MTM) to simultaneously measure the intensity and temperature
waves to investigate CF and its dependence on vertical wavelength. The MTM data
will then be used to make a seasonal study of momentum flux and to extend the
capability to other types of all-sky cameras. This will allow a future, global
scale, study to be made using the many imagers that are now operated around the
world to measure gravity wave properties. In addition to this main study it is
planned to help develop a tomographic imaging capability by extending the Rocky
Mountain Imager Chain to permit new measurements of gravity wave structure
height variability and to study the effects of wave breaking. The development of
tomographic capabilities to study the gravity waves in the mesosphere, where
they deposit their momentum, will significantly enhance our ability to
investigate the dominant process involved. This study may open the door to
quantitative investigations of momentum flux on a much larger scale using
existing multi-station airglow and meteor radar measurements. Moreover, it will
help us understand the seasonal variations and latitudinal dependences of energy
transportation of gravity waves, leading to a clearer understanding of
mesospheric climate and potential climate change.