* 0437747
* Satellite Tracking of Sperm Whales in the Gulf of California, Mexico: A Method to Study the Ecology of a Mesopelagic Predator
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Randall Davis, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2005
* USD 44,186.00

The primary objectives of this exploratory study are to track the movements of
sperm whales and obtain information about their diving and feeding behavior in
the Gulf of California using satellite telemetry. This study will provide
fundamental data to allow the PIs to address questions about seasonal movements,
habitat-associations and vertical prey distribution. Despite their importance in
marine trophic ecology and their cosmopolitan distribution, little is known
about the daily and seasonal movements, behavior and habitat requirements of
sperm whales because their sheer size and deep, long dives make them difficult
to observe and track at sea. Much of what is known about their movements and
behavior is based on historical catch rates and the recovery of static tags by
the whaling industry. This study will be conducted in the Gulf of California in
collaboration with the Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias Marinas, Instituto
Politecnico Nacional, La Paz, Mexico which will provide an 8-meter research
vessel for tagging. Satellite-linked depth recorders will be used to track the
movements and monitor the diving behavior of up to five sperm whales. The Gulf
of California is an ideal location to study the behavior and ecology of sperm
whales for several reasons. The high density, year round occurrence and
accessibility of sperm whales in the Gulf of California makes it easy to locate
them for tagging. Earlier research by the PIs showed that sperm whales are
consistently found in high densities within 20 nautical miles of the island of
San Pedro Martir, which is near a port with marina and support facilities. The
Gulf of California is also one of the only known areas where sperm whales feed
on a commercially fished species of squid (the jumbo squid, Dosidicus gigas),
and thus the PIs will be able to relate abundance, diving behavior and movements
of sperm whales to estimated minimum jumbo squid biomass. Intellectual Merits of
the Proposed Study. Sperm whales are the largest marine predator and range
throughout all deep oceans. They are among the deepest diving marine mammals,
and they are thought to feed at depths (ca. 500 m or deeper) that are beyond the
diving ability of most other cetaceans with the exception of beaked whales.
Hence, they are members of a small group of large marine predators that feed on
large and medium size mesopelagic squid (thought to be the primary food source
of sperm whales), placing them at the top of the food chain in this deep-sea
ecosystem. Their importance in mesopelagic communities results from their large
size and food requirements. Worldwide, sperm whales consume an estimated 320 x
106 tonnes of squid annually, 4.7-times more than the biomass of marine fish
caught annually by commercial fisheries. Previous studies have relied primarily
on tracking sperm whales acoustically from a boat and observing their behavior
while at the surface. Satellite telemetry offers a more cost-effective means of
tracking the long-term movements of sperm whales and provides detailed
information on diving behavior. Analysis of the diving behavior and habitat
associations of this species will open a new window to understanding the ecology
of large marine predators. The results will produce a better understanding the
role of sperm whales as apex predators in the marine ecosystem of the Gulf of
California and in other parts of their range. In addition, this information will
be useful for creating meaningful management strategies for these endangered
animals. Broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity. This project will
provide an opportunity for Mexican graduate students to learn about satellite
telemetry, marine mammal tagging techniques, and sperm whale biology. This
research will develop and improve satellite telemetry techniques for sperm
whales and will create a foundation for similar research in other parts of their
range where they are more difficult to study. Outreach activities will include
interviews, public lectures and written material and photographs to popular
magazines in both English and Spanish. Previous research by the PIs has been the
focus of several documentary films on cetaceans in the Gulf of California that
excite the imagination and help instill an interest in science and wildlife
conservation in children and adults. &lt;br/&gt;