* 0437318
* SGER: Solid Support-Assisted Screen of Complex Protein Libraries With Small Molecules
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Erich Grotewold, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,016.00

Intellectual Merit: Few tools are currently available to identify links between
proteins and small molecules (&lt;1,000 Da, non-biopolymeric), despite the
importance of these interactions in many biological processes. To address this
problem, a solid support-assisted screen (METSCREEN) of protein libraries with
small molecules as a strategy to identify missing steps in biosynthetic
pathways, new enzymes that can modify existing metabolites or receptors for
small molecules will be developed. METSCREEN consists of linking small molecules
to beads and using them to bio-pan phage display or RNA display libraries to
identify the proteins that bind to the small molecule. Analysis of the genetic
material linked to the proteins allows rapid identification of corresponding
genes. As an exciting application of METSCREEN, RNA-protein fusions obtained
from RNA display will be used directly to probe DNA chips, permitting rapid
qualitative and quantitative identification of possible alternative fates of a
pathway intermediate. This will contribute to the rationale design of metabolic
engineering strategies. Initially, METSCREEN will be applied towards the
identification of Arabidopsis proteins that bind naringenin, a central
intermediate in multiple branches of flavonoid biosynthesis. The successful
development and implementation of METSCREEN will make a significant contribution
to systems biology by filling in difficult-to-establish connections in the
genome-proteome-metabolome continuum.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: METSCREEN
integrates chemistry and biology in a strategy that, if successful, will permit
establishment of direct links between small molecules and the proteins that they
bind, filling significant gap in systems biology. The interdisciplinary nature
of this project will significantly enrich the training of post-doc, graduate
students and undergrads in the PI's lab. This research will continue to enhance
the opportunities for the PI to link research and education through the
continuous participation of undergraduates in research in the lab, the
enrichment of the topic covered in courses taught by the PI (e.g., PB625 Plant
Metabolic Engineering) and the delivery of resources to the community for
general use (e.g., the Arabidopsis Gene Regulatory Information Server,
http://arabidopsis.med.ohio-state.edu).&lt;br/&gt;