* 0437505
* Collaborative Research:  Study of the Genesis, Evolution, Structure, and Dynamic Climatology of Tornadoes and Their Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* WENCHAU LEE, The Center for Severe Weather Research
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 02/28/2009
* USD 971,731.00

Current level of understanding in several areas of tornado science fails to
provide answers to some fundamental questions. Basic answers concerning the true
distribution of sizes, intensities, or structures of tornadoes are elusive. The
influence of the local environment on tornado intensity, the determining factors
for the occurrence and timing of genesis, growth, intensification, and
dissipation, as well as the modes of genesis are largely unknown, as are details
concerning vertical wind field structure, the evolution and structure of
damaging winds near the ground, and sub-tornado-scale vortices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of these questions are not new; however, due to the
current availability of high quality, high-resolution data sets, it is possible
to address these questions in a more rigorous manner. The Doppler On Wheels
(DOW) mobile radars have collected detailed data sets of several tornadoes in
recent years. These data sets represent a treasure trove of unique and valuable
information, the analysis of which can be applied to advance understanding of a
broad range of fundamental processes related to tornadoes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collected using the DOWs during 1995-2003 in the
Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX) and the
Radar Observations of Tornadoes and Thunderstorms Experiment (ROTATE) will be
analyzed, some in conjunction with other radar and in situ observations, to
study the genesis, evolution, structure, and climatology of tornadoes and their
environments. The VORTEX and ROTATE field campaigns yielded data with
unprecedented quality. Through careful radar deployments at ranges of 0.17-15 km
from tornado centers, data were obtained at very fine resolution, with cross and
along beam data spacing of from 3 - 250 m and 12-75 m, respectively. These
observations were obtained during various stages of tornado evolution for 60
tornadoes, providing a broad sample for statistical and climatological analysis.
Fast scanning capabilities and carefully selected volume coverage patterns over
the depth of interest allowed for temporal resolutions from 13 s in two
dimensions, 20 s in limited three dimensional, to 50 s in deep three dimensional
volumes. Using carefully designed scanning strategies, deployments capturing
tornadogenesis were achieved in several instances, including one with dual-
Doppler, in addition to several dual-Doppler deployments on pre-existing
tornadoes. Different data sets will be used to explore specific aspects of the
phenomena. Detailed dual-Doppler and single-Doppler analyses will be conducted
on particular cases in order to evaluate conceptual, numerical, and laboratory
models of tornado structure, evolution, and genesis. An analysis of the broad
range of tornado data sets will be undertaken in order to develop a climatology
of basic tornado structures and dynamics. Single-Doppler retrievals will be
conducted on high-resolution volumetric data sets in large tornadoes. DOW radar
and other data will be used to study the evolution and structure of tornadoes in
varying environments, and their effect on those environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A greater understanding of tornadogenesis, structure,
environmental dependencies, climatology, and other issues described above will
have a broad impact on the ability to detect, warn, and forecast these severe
events and reduce subsequent casualties.