* 0437481
* Quasi-Isometric Rigidity, Convexity Properties and Thompson's Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Jennifer Taback, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2006
* USD 78,413.00

DMS-0305441&lt;br/&gt;Jennifer Taback&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator proposes to study a variety of problems&lt;br/&gt;from both a
combinatorial and a geometric viewpoint. Many of&lt;br/&gt;these problems
concern Thompson's group, a fascinating group which&lt;br/&gt;appears in varied
branches of mathematics, from logic to algebra&lt;br/&gt;to homotopy theory and
group theory. The principal investigator&lt;br/&gt;plans to explore questions
ranging from amenability to&lt;br/&gt;quasi-isometries of this group.
Additionally, the investigator&lt;br/&gt;proposes to extend prior work on quasi-
isometries of lattices,&lt;br/&gt;working with colleagues to finish a quasi-
isometry classification&lt;br/&gt;of s-arithmetic lattices. This would complete
a project worked on&lt;br/&gt;by many geometric group theorists that has led to
the introduction&lt;br/&gt;of interesting new techniques. Finally, the principal
investigator&lt;br/&gt;plans several projects concerning convexity properties of
groups.&lt;br/&gt;While almost convexity is well understood, there are few
examples&lt;br/&gt;of groups which are not almost convex but satisfy weaker
convexity&lt;br/&gt;conditions. She also seeks to expand the list of classes
of&lt;br/&gt;groups which are known to be almost
convex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator proposes
several projects in the area&lt;br/&gt;of group theory. A group is a
mathematical structure, often&lt;br/&gt;introduced in the context of symmetries
of a particular object.&lt;br/&gt;Certain properties of a set of symmetries can
be extrapolated to&lt;br/&gt;describe abstract mathematical sets. In her
research, the&lt;br/&gt;investigator studies groups as geometric objects, using
the&lt;br/&gt;geometry to give greater insight into abstract properties.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator studies closely one particular group,
named&lt;br/&gt;Thompson's group after the researcher who first defined
it.&lt;br/&gt;Thompson's group can be understood geometrically using pairs
of&lt;br/&gt;binary trees, an approach which relates this group to questions
in&lt;br/&gt;theoretical computer science. Thus it provides an
interesting&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary application of abstract
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, Thompson's group is a favorite example
or&lt;br/&gt;counter-example to many questions in mathematics. There are
many&lt;br/&gt;open questions about this group which interest an
international&lt;br/&gt;group of mathematicians. In particular, the geometry of
this&lt;br/&gt;group is not well understood, a question which interests
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator greatly. Mathematicians have a standard way
of&lt;br/&gt;describing a "picture" of a group, which is sometimes difficult
to&lt;br/&gt;construct. For certain groups, it is possible to ask a computer
to&lt;br/&gt;construct this picture. The principal investigator is
interested&lt;br/&gt;in exploring an algorithmic property of some groups, called
almost&lt;br/&gt;convexity, which allows computer construction of the
group.&lt;br/&gt;