* 0437442
* Origins and Molecular Evolution of Meiosis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* John Logsdon, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2006
* USD 454,761.00

Much progress has been made toward understanding how meiosis works, but in only
a few organisms. It is, thus, unclear which aspects and functions in meiosis are
most fundamental. Nonetheless, the data from these organisms provide a solid
basis for initiating an evolutionary investigation of meiosis--more
specifically, meiotic genes and their encoded proteins--in a more diverse
sampling of eukaryotes. The central goal of this project is to better understand
the evolution and function of the meiotic process and its molecular machinery.
To accomplish this, the investigator will expand his ongoing evolutionary
studies of the eukaryotic recA gene family (RAD51 and DMC1) in protists by (a)
isolating these genes from additional protist species&lt;br/&gt;representing
major eukaryotic lineages, and (b) investigating possible cases of gene loss in
the recA family, some of which are associated with putatively asexual species.
To complement and support the proposed&lt;br/&gt;experimental studies, he will
employ and develop appropriate computational tools to carry out a systematic and
comprehensive bioinformatic analysis of additional meiotic genes and proteins.
This bioinformatic "data-mining" should result in the identification and initial
characterization of key genes encoding meiotic proteins from all available
eukaryotic (especially protist) species. In addition to providing information on
the function and evolution of meiotic proteins, a major priority of this work is
to establish when meiosis evolved, be it during extant eukaryotic evolution
(leaving some surviving asexual eukaryotes that lack meiosis because they never
evolved it), or alternatively, prior to the diversification of eukaryotes
(making contemporary asexual eukaryotes simply the descendants of sexual species
which have lost this ability). Phylogenetic analyses of the meiotic genes
identified from protists will be used to directly address this issue, especially
those genes that have duplicated and diverged from prior non-meiotic functions.
The results from this project will guide future experimental efforts to isolate
and study particular meiotic genes from other relevant eukaryotic
lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meiosis is the specialized cellular division
cycle in which diploid cells are "reduced" to haploid cells (such as eggs and
sperm), which then fuse to generate new (diploid) individuals. Meiosis is, thus,
central to sexual&lt;br/&gt;reproduction and has been crucial in the evolution
and success of eukaryotes. However, the origin and evolution of sex remains one
of the major enigmas in biology. Developing a clearer evolutionary understanding
of key meiotic mechanisms will not only broadly illuminate our understanding of
the sexual process, but also lend insight into the evolution of proteins and the
macromolecular assemblages in which they operate. Finally, these studies should
clearly demonstrate the importance of combining information from model
eukaryotic genetic systems with data from less well-studied organisms in a
comparative evolutionary framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;