* 0437614
* Organics:    Application of Organic Materials to 3D Optical Circuitry
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* George Stegeman, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2009
* USD 459,600.00

0437614&lt;br/&gt;Stegeman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel approach to
three-dimensional (3D) reconfigurable optical circuitry based on organic
materials will be developed. Two-dimensional arrays of coupled channel
waveguides will be photo-written into bulk polymer blocks doped with molecularly
engineered molecules. State-of-the-art organic materials, which exhibit both the
required flexibility and large nonlinear optical properties, will be used.
Signal and control beams will be localized in and switched between different
waveguides by changing the local refractive index either all-optically (using
newly discovered discrete solitons) or electro-
optically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general terms, this program will include
adapting laser writing techniques developed for glasses at CREOL to the
formation of arrays of closely spaced waveguides in doped polymer samples. The
preliminary soliton-based routing/switching network scheme proposed by
Christodoulides will be "fleshed out" and a version designed for electro-optic
control and localization. Research into laser-initiated formation of small
channels to be filled with liquid metals will be based on these designs. The
basic routing functions within the arrays will be tested, characterized and
implemented. The ultimate goal is to demonstrate controllable signal routing in
3D. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will address
fundamental questions and technological problems associated with novel 3D
solutions to current limitations imposed on optical networks by planar
fabrication technologies. There should be many intellectual and technological
fall-outs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This program addresses the
needs of the rapidly expanding information age for more sophisticated means for
manipulating progressively more information in the optical domain. In addition,
the technical workforce will be enriched by appropriately trained students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;