* 0437538
* The Role of Tropical Asian Landcover Disturbance in Altering Large-scale Circulations: Interaction with El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the Asian Summer Monsoon
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Thomas Chase, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2008
* USD 266,208.00

Several recent papers have documented atmospheric circulation changes resulting
from changing tropical land cover in climate model simulations. The proposed
research focuses on elucidating the role of land cover changes in changing
global circulation regimes and the interactions between the effects of land
cover change and other modes of variability including El Nino southern
oscillation (ENSO) and the Asian summer monsoon through a variety of general
circulation model simulations. &lt;br/&gt;The PIs address the following main
hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Historical land cover changes in the tropics
and in Southeast Asia, in particular, cause similar magnitude circulation
changes as seen in the alternating phases of ENSO. By affecting the tropical
divergent circulation, these changes have global reach. &lt;br/&gt;2) Tropical
land cover changes cause shifts in tropical circulations which would tend to
enhance the El Nino phase of ENSO at the expense of La Nina.&lt;br/&gt;3)
Circulation changes due to land cover change and those due to ENSO interact non-
linearly.&lt;br/&gt;4) Circulation changes due to tropical land cover changes
may have a role in explaining the observed decreased anticorrelation between El
Nino and the Indian summer monsoon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will examine
these hypotheses with ensemble general circulation model simulations and
observational analysis of circulation changes due to tropical land cover
changes; changes due to El Nino-like SST anomalies and circulation changes due
to a combination of both effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research adds significantly to previous studies of the effect of land cover
change and addresses two large, outstanding questions (intellectual merit) with
broader impacts in promoting interdisciplinary research, and societal
implications including the prediction of regional monsoon variability and the
expression of expected CO2 induced global warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported under the Climate Variability and Predictability Program
(CLIVAR).