* 0437555
* CAREER:  Methodology for Statistical Computing in Massive Datasets: Parallel Approaches to Cluster and MCMC Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,11/30/2010
* Ranjan Maitra, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 11/30/2010
* USD 400,017.00

CAREER: Methodology for Statistical Computing in Massive Datasets: Parallel
Approaches to Cluster and MCMC Estimation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS
0239734&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ranjan Maitra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is aimed at developing practical methodology for statistical analysis and
estimation in massively sized databases. Because of automated data collection
methods, there is now&lt;br/&gt;a surfeit of severely multi-dimensional records.
Grouping them into homogeneous clusters to better understand them is a desirable
goal in a variety of applications, yet classical statistical methods are
computationally infeasible in many cases. I propose to develop parallel
methodology for this context. Although the methodology and theory developed will
be quite general and for potential use in applications ranging from business,
medicine, the environment, software quality assessment, I will conduct the
research in the context of three scientific collaborations. The first pertains
to the&lt;br/&gt;US Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) self-reported Toxic
Releases Inventory (TRI) databases, where profiling the different facilities in
terms of their product, demographic and business information can improve the
accuracy of records, as well as better characterize them vis-a-vis their
emissions mix. The second project is to assess the reliability of functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scans, with a view to understanding the
cognitive processes of the brain, as a first step to patient care and therapy.
The third application is in bioinformatics where the goal is to cluster
microarray data and also to analyze two-dimensional proteomic gel images. This
will help in isolating genes and understanding their relationship with different
disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clustering is in general a very difficult
problem, with empirical solutions even for very moderately sized datasets. I
propose to develop multi-pass methodologies in several different scenarios. I
also propose multi-scale simulation approaches to estimation in a high-
dimensional context. One of the biggest challenges faced by simulation methods
due to high dimensionality is the low mobility around the space to be traversed
because of its vastness. I propose to address this issue by connecting these
high-dimensional spaces to lower-dimensional ones (which are significantly
smaller) and by using these lower scales to traverse from one corner of the
higher-dimensional space to another. A final goal of this five-year plan is to
investigate the development and estimation in more complex models for proteomic
gel data. Most of the plans proposed will be possible only with a parallel
computing interface. This is increasingly critical in a large number of
scientific applications, and I propose to simultaneously provide statistics
students with the necessary expertise by designing suitably tailored graduate
and undergraduate classes.&lt;br/&gt;