* 0437406
* Balloon-Borne In Situ Measurements of Aerosol Size and Concentration in the Mid Latitudes and Tropics
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Terry Deshler, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2009
* USD 799,159.00

This project will continue and extend vertical (surface to 33 km) profiles of
aerosol size and concentration measurements at Laramie, Wyoming, a mid-latitude
site. Extended measurements will add new size-resolved concentration
measurements for aerosol between 0.03 and 0.15 micrometers in diameter, and
tropical measurements from Natal, Brazil. The balloon-borne measurements will be
conducted at bi-monthly intervals from Laramie and annually from Natal over five
years. A collaboration with the University of Cambridge will permit exploratory
measurements of OCS (carbonyl sulfide) and SO2 (sulfur dioxide) in conjunction
with some aerosol profiles. An additional collaboration with the Danish
Meteorological Institute will add backscattering measurements and modeling
expertise to the tropical work. Continuing stratospheric aerosol measurements at
Laramie is essential to help establish, unequivocally, stratospheric aerosol
levels during volcanically-quiescent, "background," periods. The sulfur sources
necessary to maintain background aerosol levels, and the extent of perturbations
to stratospheric aerosol, are still uncertain. The Laramie record is the longest
sustained record of stratospheric aerosol existent, and thus favorably
positioned to address these questions. New measurements of smaller particles
will address a persistent discrepancy between satellite and in situ estimates of
aerosol surface area during background periods, when small particles control
surface area. In the event of a large tropical volcanic eruption, the
measurement focus will shift to the fresh volcanic plume. The annual tropical
measurements are exploratory to address several questions, such as, how well do
mid- and high latitude size distributions characterize aerosol in the tropics.
The tropical measurements will also test earlier tropical stratospheric
measurements of new particle formation and large particle layers, and whether
models properly account for the stratospheric aerosol source gases
OCS/SO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stratospheric aerosols have broad impacts on the
atmosphere and thus on society. Modeling of global stratospheric ozone requires
accurate estimates of aerosol surface area. Major volcanic eruptions produce
direct impacts on ozone through heterogeneous chemistry, involving chlorine, and
on radiation leading to stratospheric warming and tropospheric cooling.
Tropospheric aerosols have even more far reaching impacts on radiation both
directly and through their impact on clouds. This project will promote the
teaching and training of graduate and postgraduate students.