* 0437508
* Active Logistical State Management for Distributed and Grid Application Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* James Plank, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 587,083.00

ALSM represents a major new stage in a research program in Logistical Computing
and Internetworking, (LoCI), for distributed state management. The IP model is
too limited for distributed computing because it does not include the
possibility of managing application state between end systems (i.e. at
intermediate nodes). The unique contribution of the LoCI approach is that it not
only models this possibility, it does so without sacrificing the scalability
essential to networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While not viewing the IP model as
sufficient for distributed systems, the project's strategy is to reapply the
end-to-end design principles that underlie that model to storage and processor
resources. The first target was storage. Following the end-to-end paradigm, the
PIs created the Internet Backplane Protocol (IBP), which is a primitive
mechanism for managing distributed storage. With IBP-based intermediate nodes,
called depots, the network itself can be infused with storage resources that can
be shared, scaled up, and exposed for external scheduling, much like IP service
is. A testbed provisioned with more than 22TB of storage, spread among 250
depots in 20 countries has been deployed, and a variety of application groups
are currently using the testbed to explore the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following the LoCI design philosophy, ALSM.s
guiding hypothesis is this: If, by adhering to end-to-end principles, a generic,
best effort computing service can be integrated into ascalable logistical
network, then a programmable network resource fabric can be created that is
capable of providing the kind of active state management that grid applications
require.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will encompass the following main
activities:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Design Active Depots and ALSM middleware:
will optimize active depot architecture to efficiently support data
transformation; middleware will be created to map a high level network view onto
the weak semantics of IBP and the NFU, using sophisticated end-to-end techniques
to generate reliability, performance, etc.&lt;br/&gt;o Enable GridSolve-L
application environment: NetSolve will be adapted to use ALSM middleware so that
NetSolve applications can issue logistical directives to exploit data locality
patterns and offload state processing to active depots in the ALSM
infrastructure. The result of this integration is GridSolve-L.&lt;br/&gt;o
Validate ALSM in a grid visualization application: We will investigate the use
of ALSM to implement a remote visualization pipeline, using a real-world medical
imaging application under GridSolve-L; operations will separate as appropriate
onto active depots for state management and GridSolve-L for major
computation.&lt;br/&gt;