* 0437322
* Separations VI: New Perspectives on Very Large-Scale Operations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* George Keller, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Eric S. Peterson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: Separations VI: New Perspectives on Very Large-scale Operations
Proposal Number: CTS-0437322 Principal Investigator: C. Judson King Institution:
Engineering Conferences Internatinal of Polytechnic University

This grant will provide support for the conference, Separations VI: New
Perspectives on Very Large-Scale Operations, to be held in Australia in October
2004 under the aegis of Engineering Conferences International. It will focus on
the development of new separation technologies able to address the demands of
scale and reliability. Topics will include capture and sequestration of
greenhouse gases, processing of natural gas found in deep and remote off-shore
gas fields, conservation and recycle of urban water, low environmental footprint
minerals processing, and a move to a hydrogen energy economy. The conference
will provide a forum where academic, government, and corporate researchers from
the US, Europe, Japan, China, Korea and Australia will meet under strongly
interactive conditions to share experience and to plot future technological
developments. Most of the funding will provide an opportunity for early career
researchers and graduate students to interact with leaders in the field.
Notably, the US and Australia have joint research activities in climate change
research and Australia has demonstrated international leadership in urban water
treatment and mineral processing. This, plus its closeness to Asia means that
senior Asian separations researchers will be attracted to conference, thus
providing US delegates with the opportunity to interact with a new group of
active researchers. Japan, China and Korea each have strong research programs in
membrane technology and nanostructured adsorbents and in the application of this
science to processing situations. In terms of the broader impacts, the
conference will provide an opportunity to reexamine world research on
separations technology and to identify the fundamental work that needs to be
done to address the new generation of problems. Although there are emergent
technologies (novel high temperature membranes, nanostructured adsorbents, new
chemical absorbents) being reported in the literature, translating these into
large-scale technologies represents a major challenge, both in optimizing the
science and translating it into feasible engineering solutions that address
practical needs.