* 0437169
* Ensemble Methods for Data Analysis in the Behavioral, Social and Economic Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2004,11/30/2006
* Richard Berk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2006
* USD 483,000.00

PROPOSAL ID: 0437169 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Richard Berk and Robert D Mare
INSTITUTIONS: UCLA TITLE: Ensemble Methods for Data Analysis in the Behavioral,
Social and Economic Sciences

ABSTRACT

The analysis of observational data in the behavioral, social, and economic
sciences is commonly undertaken with statistical modeling. Over the past decade,
another approach to data analysis has been evolving in applied mathematics,
computer science, and statistics that some have called ``algorithmic.'' There is
usually no effort to construct a model of how the data were generated. The goal
is to link a set of inputs to one or more outputs so that some clear objective
function is optimized by a computer algorithm. This proposal focuses on
``ensemble methods,'' which are an especially promising special case of
algorithmic methods. The goal this is to help foster more effective interactions
between the developers of ensemble methods and empirical researchers in the
behavioral, social, and economic sciences. The approach is to apply, using real
data sets, ensemble methods to important social science data analysis problems.
These include 1) evaluation procedures for complex computer simulations, 2)
diagnostic procedures for conventional statistical models, 3) adjustments for
confounding in observational studies, and 4) classification and prediction
exercises when the response variable is highly skewed. In each case, the
performance of the ensemble methods will be compared to the performance of
conventional modeling using ten assessment criteria detailed in the proposal.

The proposed application of ensemble methods to real data sets should have
several broad benefits for the behavioral, social and economic sciences, as well
as for the mathematical and statistical sciences. Powerful and rapidly
developing data analysis tools, under the broad rubric of "data mining," will be
applied to difficult data analysis problems. These exercises will illustrate
strengths and weakness of ensemble methods for certain kinds of demanding
empirical research. This experience will help inform the behavioral, social, and
economic sciences about when ensemble methods can be useful and what their
limitations can be. Equally important, the applications will provide a ``test
bed'' for a variety of ensemble methods from which will likely emerge potential
refinements in existing ensemble procedures and new technical questions
insufficiently addressed in the current literature. Thus, the mathematical and
statistical sciences can benefit as well. Finally, each of the data sets to be
used is potentially rich in substantive implications. Although the emphasis in
this proposal is methodological, it is entirely possible that the data analyses
to be undertaken will also be instructive from subject- matter perspective.



