* 0437415
* SoD: A Normative Theory for the Design of Discrete Event Dynamic Systems for Supervisory Control
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Ramavarapu Sreenivas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 03/31/2010
* USD 365,091.00

This project addresses a problem domain related to the design of Discrete Event
Dynamic Systems (DEDS). The goal of the project is to identify tractable
synthesis of supervisory policies that control those systems. Examples of DEDS
include: air-traffic control systems; automated manufacturing systems; computer
networks; integrated command, control, communication and information (C3I )
systems; operations-management of multi-component organizations with event-
driven dynamics like shipyards, airports, hospitals, etc. Despite the myriad and
diverse applications for DEDS, advances in core aspects of supervisory control
of DEDS have not found application beyond academia, primarily due to the fact
that synthesis procedures require complete specification of the desired behavior
of the system, a difficult, if not impossible task. Even when complete
specifications are available, the synthesis of the appropriate supervisory
policy can be intractable. This project develops a normative theory of how DEDS
should be structured so that, starting from a supervisory policy that enforces
an incompletely specified behavior, progressive supervisory corrections can be
applied such that the (complete) desired specification is eventually
enforced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supervisory policy advocated by this project
is based on analysis of observed "desirable" and "undesirable" states of a
system. This project focuses on three areas of DEDS: (1) Learning phase: the
development of learning algorithms for supervisory systems where desired
behavior can be easily earned/identified using examples/counter-examples, (2)
Supervisory policy synthesis phase: the identification of DEDS structures where
learning is tractable, and (3) Progressive improvement phase: the development of
methods for improving learned behavior that can be progressively improved with
little computational effort as additional information is made
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The successful resolution of the open research
topics related to this project may mean that idiosyncratic problems in each of
the examples of DEDS described above (air-traffic bottlenecks, dead-lock/live-
lock in automated manufacturing, poor quality of service in networks, poor
triage services in the emergency room of a hospital, etc.) could be
eliminated.&lt;br/&gt;