* 0437376
* Infinite Possibilities Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2005,09/30/2006
* Nagambal Shah, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 09/30/2006
* USD 20,080.00

The Infinite Possibilities Conference will assemble women mathematicians from
underrepresented minority groups from all over the country for a 2-day
mathematics conference April 1-2, 2005 at Spelman College to promote,
educate,encourage and support minority women interested in mathematics. The
conference expects to host 150 participants, comprised of professionals,
undergraduate and graduate students, from the various fields of mathematics.
Highlights of conference activities include a professional development workshop
series, a panel discussion on graduate studies in mathematics, research talks
given by professionals, student poster sessions, roundtable discussions on
experiences with mathematics, and an award ceremony for special achievement in
mathematics in honor of the late Dr. Etta Z.Falconer.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the conference aims to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-
highlight innovative research in various branches of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- encourage undergraduate students to pursue
advanced degrees in Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-provide necessary
information and resources for graduate study of mathematics and professional
development&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-create a forum to discuss experiences unique
to minority women mathematicians&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-facilitate the partnering
of mentoring relationships between students and
professionals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-increase awareness of existing organizations
and programs that support women and underrepresented minority
groups&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-celebrate and honor the achievements of women from
underrepresented minority groups in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Infinite Possibilities Conference will be an exciting and enriching event that
will increase participation of underrepresented minority women in the
mathematical sciences by allowing participants to discuss, showcase and discover
the infinite possibilities mathematics can offer them in their academic and
professional journeys.&lt;br/&gt;