* 0437451
* Catalytic activity of nitrogen-containing functional groups supported on carbon structures for cathodic oxygen reduction reaction for PEM fuel cells
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Umit Ozkan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 12/31/2009
* USD 363,917.00

ABSTRACT

PI: Umit Ozkan Institution: Ohio State University Proposal Number: 0437451

Research

The high costs associated with the use of platinum (Pt) catalysts coupled with
the fact that the most significant potential loss in polymer electrolyte
membrane (PEM) fuel cells is due to the kinetics of the oxygen reduction
reaction (ORR) in the cathode have led several studies to focus on the
development of novel ORR catalysts. Some of these studies are based on the
nature-inspired concept of using hemoglobin-type molecules to perform the oxygen
reduction function. Large organic macrocycles containing iron (Fe) or cobalt
(Co) centers are reported to be active for ORR when supported on high-surface
area carbon. Although these complex compounds are not stable for long periods of
time in the fuel cell environment, when they are subjected to a heat treatment,
the remaining nitrogen-containing carbon structures with metal centers are shown
to be active and stable.

Although there is ample evidence in the literature about the possible oxygen
reduction activity of carbon-supported nitrogen functional groups (with and
without metal centers) as potential cathode electrocatalysts for PEM fuel cells,
there is no clear understanding about the nature of active sites and the
mechanism of oxygen reduction reaction. The focus of this proposal is
investigation of the nature of oxygen reduction active sites in nitrogen
containing carbon nano-structures as potential cathode catalysts for PEM fuel
cells. The main objectives are (a) acquiring a fundamental understanding of the
nature of active sites, the role of the metal centers and the carbon support
structure, (b) developing techniques for nano-scale synthesis of these catalysts
and (c) building a knowledge base that would lead to the nano-scale design of
novel, non-precious metal catalytic materials to be used as fuel cell
electrodes. While the ultimate goal of the proposed research is the development
of novel, platinum-free PEM fuel cell electrodes, the present study will focus
on the synthesis of nitrogen-containing carbon electrode materials to
specifically study and assess the factors contributing to oxygen reduction
activity, the inter-relation between metal/nitrogen functional groups/carbon
nano-structure/oxygen reduction activity, the active site(s) responsible for
activity, the forms of precursor material necessary for active site formation,
and the performance and stability of these materials under real conditions.

Broad Impact

The move to a hydrogen economy is a national target - consequently the
development of technologies that facilitate wide application of fuel cells are
becoming increasingly important. The results of this work could bring the
application of fuel cells closer to reality. Other impacts include curriculum
development (new course in "Catalysis and Fuel Cells", seminar series in OSU-
IGERT program), providing a training ground for graduate and undergraduate
researchers, and creating demonstration tools to be used in the "Orientation for
Women Engineering Freshmen" program that would capture the imagination and that
would get them excited about a career in engineering. The project will also
strengthen an existing international collaboration between the P.I. and the
French CNRS-Catalysis Research Institute.