* 0437890
* Collaborative Research:  Multifunctional Performance of Carbon Nanotube-Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Yuri Shkel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/2008
* USD 150,851.00

Collaborative Research: Multifunctional Performance of Carbon Nanotube-Polymer
Composites

Zoubeida Ounaies (VCU) and Yuri Shkel (Univ. Wisconsin)

The objective of this research is to develop and characterize carbon nanotubes-
based multifunctional composites that merge structural functions with self-
sensing and actuation. The proposed approach is aligning carbon nanotubes in a
polymeric matrix using an electric field to achieve a high concentration of
inclusions while keeping the composite below the percolation limit. Such
composite, having well-dispersed inclusions, is expected to exhibit self-
actuation and self-sensing capabilities matching those of the best electroactive
ceramics while preserving the strength, environmental resistance and
manufacturability of polymers. The long-range goal is to integrate all of these
functions into a single material during high volume manufacturing processes such
as injection molding.

The proposed research advances an innovative design paradigm that composites are
optimized for a particular application by control at the microscale-level during
manufacturing. The superb properties of carbon nanotubes combined with the
lightweight, flexibility, and manufacturability of polymers results in
multifunctional structural materials that have reduced cost, weight, power
consumption, and design complexity yet exhibit superior performance. The impact
of such development will spread significantly beyond structural health
monitoring and vibration control in aerospace applications to medical diagnosis,
self-sustainable medical devices, energy harvesting, high-tech consumer industry
and others. Educational benefits are expected by integrating this research
results to enhance existing and new courses. Educational efforts will have a
broad impact on teaching the next generation of the workforce to utilize modern
technology for solving complex engineering problems. Graduate and undergraduate
students trained on this project will acquire interdisciplinary research
experience and research mentorship skills.