* 0437165
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Dynamical Foundation of Protein Function:  Energy Transfer and Storage
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2009
* R. Stephen Berry, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 03/31/2009
* USD 35,000.00

0437165&lt;br/&gt;Leitner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a two-year
collaborative research project between Professor David Leitner of the University
of Nevada in Reno and Professor Tamiki Komatsuzaki at Kobe University in Japan.
They will be undertaking a study on the dynamical foundation of protein function
with reference to energy transfer and storage. The proposal details a number of
interconnected collaborative projects planned by three U.S. research groups and
four research groups in Japan with the goal of providing a molecular-level
description of energy transport and storage in proteins. Each group is presently
involved in theoretical and computational studies of energy transport in
proteins and protein dynamics during function and folding. The three goals of
the proposal will address, through computational modeling, the following: 1)
energy flow in proteins, with emphasis on elucidation of pathways and the role
of protein structure; 2) the influence of both aqueous and non-aqueous
environments on energy flow and storage in proteins; and 3) analysis of non-
Brownian dynamics of proteins over many time scales, with particular focus on
the properties of the potential energy landscape that give rise to complex
dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together the efforts of a
number of laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
capabilities. Both groups have expertise in theoretical and computational
chemistry and biology. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. The project includes the participation of
postdocs and graduate students. Results of the research will be disseminated at
scientific meetings and in scientific journals. &lt;br/&gt;