* 0437342
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Spectroscopy of Carbon Nanotubes in High Magnetic Fields
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Junichiro Kono, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2007
* USD 20,000.00

0437342&lt;br/&gt;Kono&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year U.S. France
cooperative research project involves Junichiro Kono and his group at Rice
University and the research team, led by G. L. Rikken, at the Laboratoire
National des Champs Magnetiques Pulses, at the University Paul Sabatier in
Toulouse, France. They propose to perform jointly magneto-absorption, magneto-
luminescence, and electron spin resonance experiments on single-walled carbon
nanotubes. The project adds an international dimension to the principal
investigator's research grants, including his CAREER award, supported through
NSF's Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit
Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) are a nearly one-dimensional (1-D) system
the possesses a wide range of novel and useful electronic, mechanical, magnetic,
and optical properties. The goal of this project is to explore novel 1-D physics
in the optical and spin resonance properties of SWNTs in high magnetic fields.
SWNTs may provide an alternative to semiconductor quantum wires.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts The proposed joint experiments will
advance knowledge on electronic states in nanostructures placed in intense
magnetic fields and could lead to new nano-based materials. It takes advantage
of unique facilities in France, in particular, a unique pulsed magnet of 75
Teslas that can be used for various optical experiments. The project also gives
graduates students and postdoctoral students an international experience via
research immersion with a leading group of French researchers from the French
National Center for Scientific Research.&lt;br/&gt;