* 0437344
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Salt and Society: Late Woodland and Mississippian Interaction in Southwest Alabama
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2006
* Ian Brown, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2006
* USD 11,913.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Ian W. Brown, Ashley Dumas will excavate a site of
prehistoric salt production in the lower Tombigbee River valley of southwest
Alabama. Natural saline springs in the region were the scenes of concentrated
cultural occupation from about A.D. 800 to the early 1500's. However, little is
known about the people who lived there, except that they often were occupied by
boiling brine into salt. Ms. Dumas will excavate at the Stimpson saline and
analyze recovered pottery in order to expose the importance and role of salt in
the lifeways of these people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for salt as a
dietary supplement has been shown to correspond to a reliance on cultivated
plants for food. Several scholars have speculated that the southwest Alabama
salines were infiltrated by members of the Moundville chiefdom to the north and,
later, by people from the Bottle Creek chiefdom to the south. Thus, an
assumption underlying this project is that people from the Moundville and Bottle
Creek chiefdoms needed salt to supplement their corn-based diets. Because it
dominated much of the trade in the region, the Bottle Creek chiefdom may have
been particularly interested in producing salt and controlling its distribution.
In addition to ordering the sequence of occupations, this study aims to
correlate the nature of salt production with the socioeconomic needs of the
Moundville and Bottle Creek chiefdoms. Recent research in the region of the
Alabama salines argues that there is no evidence for an in-place development of
Moundville or Bottle Creek-related culture in southwest Alabama. The implication
is that if it did not develop indigenously, then it had to come from elsewhere.
Salt may have been an important attraction to the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has great significance for the disciplines of
anthropology and archaeology. First, it examines how cultural change in a region
may have occurred through colonization rather than in-place, independent
development. Contact that occurs due to human desire for a certain resource is
difficult to investigate when that resource does not survive as part of the
archaeological record. Thus, the importance of this study for archaeological
research is that it adds to a small body of literature regarding methods for
measuring the importance of salt in prehistoric cultures. Second, excavations at
the Stimpson saline and analysis of the recovered artifacts will provide a model
for other archaeologists who wish to determine the nature of foreign interest in
a local resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research also will benefit a larger
audience in several ways. A program of public outreach, which is already
underway, includes presentations to local archaeological and historical
societies, a museum exhibit, and a volunteer program. Participants in the field
work portion of the project will gain experience in archaeological excavation
and laboratory analysis. Dissemination of research to a professional audience
will occur in at least two regional and one national conference and publication
in peer-reviewed journals. These efforts raise awareness of the unique
geological features that are the salines, their millennial importance in the
culture history of the area, and the role of science in bringing it all to
light.