* 0437345
* US-Italy Cooperative Research: Linking Deformation Length Scales in Transforming Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Huseyin Sehitoglu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Graham Harrison
* 08/31/2009
* USD 35,625.00

0437345&lt;br/&gt;Sehitoglu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award supports
US-Italy cooperative research on "Linking Deformation Length Scales in
Transforming Materials," involving Huseyin Sehitoglu of the University of
Illinois-Champaign and Piermaria Davoli of the Milan Polytechnic University
(MPU). The presence of slip is a major issue in transforming materials. It
limits transformation strains and transformation reversibility. The proposed
research will experiment and develop mechanics models to understand how the
transformation stress changes with temperature and cyclic loading. In addition,
the proposed collaboration will model the detwinning contribution to overall
recoverable strains. Finally, the PIs will focus on shear loading to understand
the role of stress states on fracture and transformation behavior.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Milan Polytechnic University has world-class facilities in
conducting experiments in multiaxial stress states. Such facilities are
expensive to operate, and require first-rate experimentalists. Consequently
their capabilities are matched in only a few institutions in the world. There is
strong synergy between these capabilities at MPU and that of the PI, who has
been involved in cyclic deformation and fatigue focusing on transforming
materials. The proposed research is expected to result in information regarding
the use of semi-brittle materials in actuators, in sensors, and other
engineering applications. It is likely that these materials could be used in
space or in bioapplications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;