* 0437787
* Computational Literacy:  A Study of the Efficacy of Computational Science in High School Biology, Earth and Space Science, and Physics Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Barbara Helland, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,995,293.00

The purpose of this IERI project is to investigate the building of computational
literacy both as a means of understanding domain knowledge and as a necessary
skill for pursuing careers in science and engineering. The project builds upon
previously funded NSF and Department of Energy projects that have worked at the
intersections of education and computational science for over a decade to bring
computational science and computational modeling strategies into the classroom
teaching of mathematics and science. The project will build upon curriculum
elements already developed in the areas of HS Biology, Earth Sciences, and
Physics. These curriculum elements include a substantial number of computational
science and computational models with the software supports that make the models
usable in HS curriculum. The models are aligned with pedagogy and state
standards. Master teachers will be involved in both the pedagogy support and the
design of the curriculum using the modules as a "virtual" laboratory. In the
experimental phase of the program, a randomized experiment comparing the new
curriculum to the standard curriculum will be conducted in a variety of
classrooms ranging from AP classes to general science classes and involving
diverse student populations in Maryland, Iowa, and Tennessee. Student outcomes
will be measured using instruments designed to show student problem
understanding and solving capabilities and with standard tests such as NAEP. The
broader impact of the project is reflected in its range of students and the
possibility of improving science education for all Americans.