* 0437349
* A General Circulation Model (GCM) Investigation of the Direct Radiative Forcing of Spherical and Nonspherical Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Kuo-Nan Liou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2008
* USD 270,688.00

The objective of this study is to improve our understanding of the interactions
among aerosols, clouds, radiation, and dynamical processes, and of the relative
importance of different types of aerosols on regional and global climate. The
work involves both climate modeling and analysis. Aerosol data retrieved from
satellites and collected by the scientists in China during the past forty years
are to be analyzed and employed in climate modeling simulation. The new endeavor
will include parameterization of the single-scattering properties of aerosols
for use in climate models based on the data obtained from the calculations of
the scattering and absorption properties of nonspherical aerosols employing the
finite-difference time domain method for light scattering. Two University of
California models with be used for this work - the atmospheric general
circulation model and the coupled ocean-atmosphere model, to investigate the
responses of the atmospheric system alone, and the coupled atmosphere-ocean
system, to the radiative forcings of various aerosol types, particularly mineral
dust and black carbon.

The results of this work are expected to further the incorporation of aerosol
effects into global climate models and will benefit the global climate modeling
community. The proposed modeling activity will train one research assistant in
climate modeling and aerosol-climate interaction. The impact of better
understanding aerosol-climate interactions will have significant benefits for
both China and the Earth as a whole.