* 0437655
* An experimental efficacy study of science achievement and attitude development amongst 8th grade students using an inquiry, integrated science-mathematics-engineering model of inst
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* William Cobern, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,005,902.00

The goal of this research is to test the efficacy of an inquiry model of science
instruction to show best practice or what the Institute for Education Sciences
refers to as "what works." The research will ask what works with regard to
science instruction for middle school students and under what circumstances. The
subjects will be 8th grade students from two collaborating districts: Chicago
Public Schools and Kalamazoo Public Schools. The research activities include: a)
Develop, adapt and revise science instructional practices according to the
components of the Model. b) Summer school program where Model practices will be
experimentally tested against expert direct instruction using the random
assignment of subjects to treatment/control groups. c) Regular school year
implementation of the Model practices accompanied by quantitative and
qualitative field research. The broader impact of the study will be the
validation or rejection of the inquiry science model of instruction. given the
near universal advocacy of inquiry pedagogy, the proposed research will have an
exceptionally broad impact regardless of its findings. It will either lend
credible experimental support to what is now widely advocated practice, or will
precipitate a serious reconsideration of what is considered to be appropriate
science pedagogy at the school level. Moreover, given the urban setting of the
research, the findings will support improved science education amongst the
neediest of American students.