* 0437346
* SGER:     Unleaded Drinking Water
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Jay Switzer, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 12/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00

This is SGER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program to Professors Jay Switzer and Eric W. Bohannan at the University of
Missouri at Rolla supports research on a current, urgent, public health problem
involving lead in drinking water supplies from the perspective of materials
science and electrochemistry. The passivation role of the formation and
dissolution of oxide films, such as PbO2, PbO, CuO and Cu2O, on the inside of
lead and copper pipes will be determined in the presence of commonly-used water
disinfectants, hypochlorite and chloramines. The oxides on the inside of actual
Pb service lines will be quantitatively analyzed and modeled with
electrochemical studies of film growth and dissolution. Dr. Michael Schock of
the Water Supply and Water Resources Division of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency in Cincinnati, Ohio will provide pipes from affected water
districts. The oxide films intact on the metal pipes will be analyzed by X-ray
diffraction (XRD) in order to determine phases, crystallographic orientation,
grain size and strain by Rietveld analysis. Cross-sectional transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) will be used to determine the cross-sectional
composition and grain size of the films. Due to the softness of Pb, focused ion
beam techniques will be employed to prepare the thin cross-sections. Model
systems will also be studied by standard electrochemical techniques, such as
cyclic voltammetry, and the electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM)
to follow the growth and dissolution of oxide films in various water
chemistries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both orthorhombic and tetragonal films of
PbO2 will be deposited onto EQCM electrodes followed by studies of the
dissolution of the films in the presence of hypochlorite, chloramines,
carbonate, orthophosphate, and other species known to be present in municipal
drinking water. Film growth by depositing Pb layers on Au or Pt EQCM electrodes
will be followed to determine whether hypochlorite and chloramines can oxidize
the surface to PbO2. These films will be analyzed by glancing angle XRD, and
possibly XPS, to verify the film formation. Although the emphasis is on
determining the cause of elevated lead levels in drinking water, the problem of
Cu pipe dissolution will also be studied. These problems may be correlated,
because Cu in contact with Pb may lead to a galvanic reaction whereby the Cu is
oxidized (and dissolved) and the PbO2 passivating layers are reduced. This
galvanic reaction might arise at the junctions of Pb and Cu pipes, at Pb solder
joints on Cu pipes, and in "lead-free" brass fixtures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work may provide guidance from a chemical and
materials science perspective to municipal water systems to assist in lowering
lead levels in drinking water. The research team of chemists, chemical
engineers, and materials scientists at the Materials Research Center at the
University of Missouri at Rolla will provide interdisciplinary training for
graduate students and postdoctoral associates.&lt;br/&gt;