* 0437612
* Investigating the Effectiveness of the NWREL Mathematics Problem Solving Model: A Quasi-Experimental Study
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2011
* Edith Gummer, Education NorthWest
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,831,115.00

The Center for Classroom Training and Learning at the Northwest Regional
Educational Laboratory is joining with the Departments Mathematics at Oregon
State University and Portland State University to investigate the effectiveness
of a mathematics assessment professional development model. The adjectives of
the project address the effect of the NWREL Mathematics Problem-Solving Model
(NWREL MPM) on instructional strategies, patterns of classroom discourse, and
student achievement in and attitudes toward mathematical problem solving. The
project will also investigate the technical quality of the NWREL MPM when used
by classroom teachers; the nature of teachers' implementation of the NWREL MPM
in classrooms'; the effect of the use of web-based technological support of
rubric-based discourse with middle school mathematics students to facilitate
implementation by teachers'; and the nature of post-intervention changes in
teachers' instructional and assessment practices. &lt;br/&gt; The mixed-
methodological research design will combine a quasi-experimental field test of
the professional development program with a qualitative analysis of the
implementation of the program. A quantitative quasi-experimental field test will
compare the performances of students of treatment and control teachers on
project-designed mathematical problem-solving tasks and on state or district
standardized tests. A detailed ethnographic qualitative analysis of the
implementation efforts in the classrooms of both treatment and control teachers
will provide information about how problem-solving instruction is carried out
and about the nature of classroom discourse patterns will be examined. A manual
for problem solving assignments will be developed, field tested by teacher
leaders in the project, and sisseminated in 4 regional invited
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Research
Project&lt;br/&gt; Much of the research in teacher assessment knowledge and
practice has been carried out with a strictly qualitative approach. This project
seeks to expand that research to include a field-based examination of the effect
of a particular assessment-focused professional development intervention on the
practices of teachers and the academic performance of students. Both the impact
of the professional development and the ways in which that impact is realized in
the complex environment of the classroom are the target understandings that will
be developed. Connecting the significant technical assistance resources of the
Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory with the content rich expertise of
university researchers strengthens the capacity for the development of new
understandings about how assessment influences instruction and student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact on the Proposed Research
Project&lt;br/&gt; The focus of this research is to develop casual explanations
of how assessment that is both formative and summative in nature contributes to
student learning. New knowledge about how helping students to develop an
understanding of the criteria by which they are evaluated enhances achievement
will be an out come of this project. With connections to institutions that
enhances achievement will be an outcome of this project. With connections to
institutions that have a strong history of participation in teacher preservice
education and the potential to include the results of this research in teacher
education courses on assessment, this proposal will provide direct impact on
teachers learn about assessment in the classroomevidence of the interactions
between teachers and students focused around conversations about performance and
criteria for evaluation will contribute to teacher networks that support work in
the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;