* 0437300
* SGER:  A Study of the Enhanced MRI Relaxivity in Gadolinium-Based Endohedral Metallofullerenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Harry Dorn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 06/30/2005
* USD 50,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Professor Harry Dorn at Virginia Tech to elucidate the
structure and magnetic properties of new Gd3 functionalized trimetaspheres,
which exhibit enhanced magnetic relaxation properties, by NMR and X-ray
crystallography. Because of their high paramagnetism, some lanthanide endohedral
metallofullerenes have potential applications as MRI agents; however, the
fundamental basis of the dipole-dipole dynamic interactions (i.e., unpaired
electron spin density inside/outside the carbon cage with water) responsible for
their enhanced relaxivity is not well understood. The goal of this research is
to provide a new model for this phenomenon that will catalyze and expedite
related research in this area and on fullerene cage functionalization,
biodistribution, and toxicology. The dependence of 1H MRI relaxivities in Gd3
functionalized trimetaspheres on the dynamic processes at the exohedral surface
of the trimetasphere cage (and corresponding influence on correlation times),
will be explored by variable temperature NMR studies and by varying the chain
length of the external functional group (e.g., polyethylene glycol, PEGS chain
length). The properties and dynamics of the internal trimetallic nitride cluster
(Gd3N) will also be determined. Changes in the water exchange rate as a function
of the cage surface functionality (hydroxyls) will be measured and the effects
on water relaxation rates determined by variable temperature and 17-O NMR water
exchange studies. Key physical properties, such as water solubility, light
scattering, and magnetic susceptibility will also be quantified. These
measurements will be used in developing an improved model for magnetic
relaxation rates for endohedral metallofullerenes in
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is coordinated with work at a local
company, Luna Innovations, and other researchers at Virginia Tech and the
Medical College of Virginia on biodistribution and toxicological studies that
will provide a better physical and biochemical basis for designing agents that
further enhance magnetic relaxation effects in water for use in biological
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;