* 0437912
* Ladder Polymer Semiconductors for Electronics
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Samson Jenekhe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Samson A. Jenekhe &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0437912&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance of
current polymer electronic devices, such as thin film transistors, photovoltaic
cells, and photodetectors, is limited primarily by the low charge carrier
mobilities of current materials. The overall goal of this research is to develop
next generation high carrier mobility polymer and hybrid organic-inorganic
semiconductors and explore their device applications in electronics. The
research is based in part on the principal investigator's (PI's) recent
discovery of high electron mobility in spin coated, nanocrystalline, thin films
of a conjugated ladder polymer. The planned research will: (i) develop new
ladder polymer semiconductors having field-effect mobility of electrons
exceeding 1 cm2/Vs; (ii) synthesize and develop new organic-inorganic hybrid
semiconductors with carrier mobility exceeding 10 cm2/Vs; (iii) establish the
relationships between charge carrier mobility and molecular structure and solid
state morphology of polymer and hybrid organic-inorganic semiconductors; and
(iv) explore the new high mobility ladder polymer and organic-inorganic hybrid
semiconductors in field-effect transistors and photovoltaic cells.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers having high electron
mobility will be useful for developing all-plastic complementary integrated
circuits for logic and memory functions and for improving the efficiency of
plastic solar cells. These advances could have major impact in accelerating the
emerging era of plastic electronics for applications in many areas of
information technologies and in portable power sources. The PI has developed
courses on organic electronics and electronic and optoelectronic polymers that
have been taken by graduate students in many fields including chemical
engineering, chemistry, materials science, electrical engineering,
bioengineering, physics, mechanical engineering, and forestry. The PI mentors
several female and African American junior faculty in science and engineering at
the University of Washington and other institutions. He is a consultant to a
small start-up company interested in commercializing plastic
electronics..&lt;br/&gt;