* 0437167
* Collaborative Project:    Development of Statistical Modeling Methods for Analysis of Social and Behavioral Science Data with Nonignorable Nonresponse
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Ke-Hai Yuan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2008
* USD 168,459.00

RUI - Collaborative Project: Development of Statistical Modeling Methods for
Analysis of Social and Behavioral Science Data with Nonignorable Nonresponse

PIs: Mortaza Jamshidian and Ke-Hai Yuan NSF proposals SES - 0407258 and
SES-0437167

Abstract

This project develops methods for modeling incomplete data that arise in social
and behavioral sciences (SBS). The main focus is analysis of data with
nonignorable nonresponse, using structural equation models and methods that take
into account the missing data mechanism. The investigators study and develop (1)
selection and pattern mixture model approaches to jointly model the missing data
mechanism and the variation in the observed data, (2) methods to segment the
data into groups having the same missing data mechanism via development of
statistical tests of homogeneity of mean and covariances, utilization of
clustering methods as well as latent variable regression models, (3) multiple
imputation methods that use predictive models for nonignorable nonresponse data
to impute missing data, and (4) application of various types of bootstrap
methods that take into account missing- ness. The investigators develop
theoretically sound statistical methods, theories are assessed by extensive
simulation studies, and methods are examined by application to real data,
specifically the data from the University of Notre-Dame Adolescent Parenting
Project, an on-going longitudinal study of teen parenting.

The investigators develop statistical methodology for analysis of data that are
not complete. In social and behavioral sciences, data are often collected in
longitudinal studies and through questionnaires. Lack of compliance of subjects
(e.g., dropping out of studies and/or incomplete responses) that leads to
incomplete data is commonplace. This project focuses on analysis of data that
are missing not at random (MNAR). MNAR occurs when a case of a variable is not
observed due to the value of that variable being atypical; for example, a
subject does not submit to a measure of the level of her depression because she
is unusually depressed. To-date, adequate statistical methodology to analyze
MNAR data has not been explored in SBS. The investigators formulate new models,
develop inferential and computational methods for MNAR data, and illustrate the
methods with social and behavioral science data sets. In the latter respect, the
investigators concentrate in applying the methodology to analyze a set of data
collected by University of Notre Dame which studies teen parenting. The analyses
are carried out in the context of structural equation modeling which has been
widely used in a variety of disciplines including education, medicine,
psychology, sociology, and other areas related to human behavior.