* 0437572
* Maury Workshop in the History of Polar Oceanography
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Helen Rozwadowski, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2007
* USD 35,000.00

The Maury Workshop in the History of Polar Oceanography brings together a
diverse group of historians from five countries who are scholars of ocean
sciences in the Arctic and Antarctic. The workshop will examine the history of
polar oceanography and place it in a global context. The workshop sets the stage
for discussions about the close relationship between ocean sciences and issues
surrounding environmental change in the polar regions, a major feature of
scientific research funded by the Office of Polar Programs (OPP) and relating to
the initiative SEARCH, the Study of Environmental Arctic Change. The workshop
will be held in the arctic coastal town of Barrow, Alaska, a community with a
majority of Inupiat Eskimos, whose culture is closely tied to the ocean and its
resources. The Barrow Arctic Science Consortium (BASC) will provide support for
the workshop and arrange outreach activities through its cooperative agreement
with OPP. Through the partnership with BASC, regional communities and schools
will be involved in the workshop. Paper topics include Barents Sea oceanography,
Soviet oceanography, Chinese oceanography, post WWII geophysics, atmospheric
science at the poles and arctic sea ice modeling. The workshop will produce an
edited volume on the history of polar oceanography covering the workshop topics:
Legacy of Exploration, A Science of Place, Geopolitics and Polar Oceanography,
and Nationalism, Internationalisms and Cooperation.