* 0437603
* SGER:  Planning Information Infrastructure Through a New Library-Research Partnership
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Janet McCue, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2006
* USD 124,095.00

The goal of this project is to address the problem of accessibility and
preservation of research data. Today, the responsibility for most scientific
data rests on individual researchers who typically do not have the means for
long-term preservation of or access to their data. As a consequence, scientific
data all too frequently are not available for comparative analysis and may
become lost altogether due to funding changes, personnel turnover, and physical
deterioration. Research universities, however, already rely on the library to
provide institutional support for archiving, access, metadata, and outreach
services for print and digital collections. This project will examine the
opportunities for partnership between the research community and the library to
ensure that research data are collected, preserved, and accessible to research
communities. The project will focus on language acquisition data that have been
collected by the Cornell Language Acquisition Laboratory (CLAL) over twenty
years and across more than twenty languages and countries. The project will
develop and document the principles of access, dissemination, and data
preservation; develop and document a prototype for testing and demonstration;
and examine possible protocols for inter-institutional library cooperation. The
project will also assess both start-up and ongoing costs required for this
planned infrastructure to facilitate extending the model to other research
institutions and libraries. The project will have broad impact by exploring a
new approach to long-term storage, preservation, access, and dissemination of
scientific data which may be applicable to many disciplines.