* 0437037
* US Austria-Denmark Cooperative Research:   Modeling and Control of the Cardiovascular-Respiratory System
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,03/31/2009
* Hien Tran, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2009
* USD 34,380.00

0437037 Olufsen This award supports the development of a mathematical model
predicting short-term cardiovascular regulation during orthostatic stress and
hypovolemia. The model to be derived will contain three sub-models: A
cardiovascular model predicting blood pressure and flow in the cardiovascular
system, a model predicting sympathetic and parasympathetic activity of the
autonomic nervous system, and a model predicting concentrations of carbon
dioxide and oxygen. These models will be combined through models for autonomic
regulation and autoregulation. In addition, formal statistical and computational
methods will be used to estimate parameters in the models with emphasis on
accounting for and exploring variability underlying mechanisms across different
individuals. In particular, the mathematical model will be validated against
already existing data from hypovolemia and orthostatic stress tests, obtained
during postural change from sitting to standing, head up tilt, and lower body
negative pressure.

This research project is a collaborative effort between the PIs, J. Ottesen of
Denmark, and J. Batzel and F. Kappel of Austria. In the past, each group has
conducted successful research projects in related areas. With the attention and
expertise of the US and foreign groups focused on this project, the
collaboration will make significant progress in this area of research.

In order to enhance antihypertensive therapy, further knowledge of the effects
of aging and hypertension on the cerebral circulation is essential. Since recent
studies show a relationship between hypertension and development of cognitive
dysfunction, it is crucial to understand the effect of hypertension on cerebral
perfusion. Despite the importance of these clinical questions, progress towards
answering them has been impeded by inadequate non-invasive methods to measure
cerebral autoregulation, and inadequately tested assumptions about cerebral
vasomotion. This award will support research designed to aid in the detection
and remediation of these and other potentially life threatening injuries or
conditions.

