* 0437293
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  New Composite Magnetoelastic Materials with High Stress Sensitivity and Low Hysteresis
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* John Snyder, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2007
* USD 24,994.00

0437293&lt;br/&gt;Jiles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year U.S.-U.K.
cooperative research project between the research group led by David Jiles at
Iowa State University and A. J. Moses of the Wolfson Centre for Magnetics and
Technology at the University of Cardiff addresses investigations in the magnetic
and magneto elastic properties of a new class of magneto elastic composite
materials. The proposal adds an international dimension to an existing NSF grant
in materials research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The
investigators plan to conduct materials characterization measurements using
state-of-the-art facilities at the Wolfson Centre. The investigators are
focusing on hysteresis (loss of magnetism) - a problem common to composite
magnetic materials. They will study the magneto mechanical properties in order
to understand their function and to produce materials with the desired
properties of low hysteresis loss and high stress sensitivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts In addition to the scientific research
proposed here, the project also has a strong educational and training component.
Through the international dimension, U.S. graduate students and a postdoctoral
research will have an opportunity to learn about magnetic materials
characterization methods being developed at the University of Cardiff using
their state-of-the-art facilities. They will have developed research experience
with an international team. There are plans to integrate the research results
into an instructional course on magnetic materials and to involve undergraduate
researchers through Iowa State's NSF-sponsored Research for Undergraduates
Site.&lt;br/&gt;