* 0437886
* A Global Plankton Database: An Inventory and Data From the Former Soviet Union Expeditions
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2007
* Sergey Piontkovski, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 01/31/2007
* USD 324,689.00

&lt;br/&gt;A GLOBAL PLANKTON DATABASE: AN INVENTORY AND DATA FROM THE FORMER
SOVIET UNION EXPEDITIONS &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Sergey Piontkovski (Marine
Sciences Research Center, Stony Brook University) &lt;br/&gt;Total Proposed
Cost: $324,689. Project duration:
01/15/05-01/14/07.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core international
projects dealing with the ocean have emphasized an urgent need for information
on the impact of climate change on species diversity and on the development of
efforts to deal with this impact. In order to assess this impact, a global
database of historical plankton community composition is needed. The objective
of the proposed study is to develop a plankton database of over 22,000 stations
sampled during the Former Soviet Union (FSU) oceanographic expeditions. This
database will contain 22 expeditions to the Atlantic Ocean and over 30
expeditions to the enclosed seas of the Atlantic Ocean, including over 30 years
of sampling in the Mediterranean Sea, the Black Sea, the Caspian Sea, the Aral
Sea, and the Indian Ocean. At present, there is a lack of knowledge on the
interannual climate-related variability of zooplankton communities of these
regions due to the absence of appropriate databases. The North Atlantic
Oscillation (NAO) is the dominant mode of atmospheric fluctuations over eastern
North America, the northern Atlantic Ocean and Europe. Therefore, one of the
issues that need to be addressed through data synthesis is the evaluation of
interannual patterns in species abundance and species diversity over these
regions in regard to the NAO. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this proposed activity is that for the first time ever a universal plankton
database, based on FSU data previously unavailable to the scientific community,
will be made readily available on the web and on compact disks. From the
database created, the project team will also investigate the ecological role of
the NAO in interannual variations of the abundance of key zooplankton species
along the zonal array of the NAO influence (from the western side of the
Atlantic Ocean to its eastern side, and through the enclosed seas of the
Mediterranean basin to the Arabian Sea). In terms of the broader impacts, the
data compiled will be added to the World Ocean Database, which currently has no
coverage in these key regions. Future research on biodiversity on the global
scale may be expected to benefit greatly from the detailed taxonomic analyses of
phytoplankton and zooplankton that will comprise a major portion of the
database. This database will advance the teaching of marine sciences by making
available unique data collected over the 30 years. Scientific cooperation
between the Stony Brook University (SBU) and the Institute of Biology of the
Southern Seas would contribute to the implementation phase of the US-Ukraine
Economic Cooperation Agreement, which deals with scientific cooperation issues
as well. Through the involvement of graduate students and consultants from
various institutions, the project broadens the SBU infrastructure for research
and education. It provides salary support and/or research opportunities for
graduate students and research faculty.