* 0437227
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research: Reliable Communication Support for Resource Management in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Ravi Prakash, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Graham Harrison
* 08/31/2009
* USD 29,668.00

04327227&lt;br/&gt;Prakash&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year U.S.-Switzerland
cooperative research project between Ravi Prakash of the University of Texas at
Dallas and Andre Schiper of the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne focuses
on creating protocols for reliable broadcast and multicast in mobile ad hoc
networks or MANETs. In reliable multicast as proposed by the investigators, the
intended recipients are guaranteed to receive messages; whereas, present IP
multicast is a best effort service. The investigators propose to develop
theoretical solutions to problems inherent in moving to guaranteed delivery in
mobile networks. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to develop reliable broadcast and
multicast protocols for mobile ad hoc networks that are topology aware,
bandwidth conscious and storage efficient. The researchers propose to move from
a simplified model to successively more complicated and realistic models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal adds an
international dimension to the U.S. investigator's NSF Career award on Resource
Management in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks - the Spatial Dimension. This work is
complemented by the Swiss researcher's expertise in reliable multicast and
atomic broadcast in traditional systems. Together, their approach will advance
understanding of reliable broadcast and multicast in MANETs. The project gives a
U.S. graduate student an international experience via research immersion at a
leading Swiss institution. The project advances the student's international
research skills and assists with developing international connections for future
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;