* 0437210
* A Mathematical Foundation for Matching Economies
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Gabriele Camera, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2008
* USD 393,878.00

A large segment of the economic literature is concerned with the study of
allocations that arise when markets are not well functioning. The defining
characteristics of this literature are its focus on informational and spatial
frictions and the desire to make them explicit by assuming that economic
interactions occur in small coalitions. The traditional modeling tool is that of
a matching framework. A limitation of this literature is that the treatment of
matching--as a technology--is mostly descriptive and hazily formalized. These
shortcomings contribute to blur the precise connection between the constraints
imposed by the matching technology, the environmental frictions, and the
possible allocations. The proposed research will develop a fully integrated
mathematical approach to matching mechanisms by formalizing and studying the
following: (i) the mechanics of matching in bi- and multi-lateral settings
(deterministic and stochastic); (ii) the links between matching and trade
frictions, providing exact mappings between technologies and informational
constraints; (iii) the allocative implications of different matching mechanisms
in general monetary and non-monetary economies. A clear understanding of these
connections will advance the formulation of sophisticated economic models based
on markets with impaired functioning and promises to clarify the implications of
policy.



A major concern of economics is how scarce resources are allocated when markets
are not well functioning. Market frictions often involve scarcity of information
or geographical separation or inadequate institutions. In general, the economic
literature makes these frictions explicit by modeling trade as occurring in
small groups--often pairwise matches. The resulting matching frameworks are used
to answer basic questions in a variety of settings; from economic governance to
unemployment and from business cycles to monetary policy. A shortcoming of these
frameworks is that the modeling of matching technologies is mostly descriptive
and superficially formalized. This blurs the exact link between the obstacles
faced by participants in the market place and the trades they can execute. The
proposed research will develop a theoretical foundation for this class of
models. It will formalize the mechanics of how different trading frameworks can
facilitate (or obstacle) the exchange of information and other economic
resources. It will precisely chart the link between the frictions impinging on
the trading process and the possible allocations. This will advance our
understanding of how to construct sophisticated economic models whose central
trait is markets with impaired functioning. The results will have applications
to other disciplines, such as biology (spread of diseases), sociology (formation
of social groups), and engineering (network communication).