* 0437251
* Hierarchical Bayesian Methods in Psychology of Consumer Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Steven MacEachern, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2009
* USD 609,100.00

Psychologists and marketing experts have different theories about why people
make the choices they do. While psychological theories more accurately describe
individual human choice behavior in simple circumstances, they do not typically
consider the range of variables, such as product features, consumer factors,
vendor strategies, that marketing theories must be able to handle. Nor do they
consider the fact that individuals' behaviors interact to form and influence
marketplace demand. In this project, psychologists, marketing experts, and
statisticians will collaborate to merge these theories. This collaboration will
result in a deeper understanding of consumer behavior through better marketing
theories and more complete psychological theories of human choice. Statistics is
at the heart of the research, providing the unifying conceptual instrument for
combining the varied theories and data sets through models such as the
hierarchical Bayesian model. The hierarchical Bayesian structure allows one to
describe simultaneously and coherently individual and aggregate behavior and to
combine the disparate psychological and marketing theories and data. The
Bayesian nature of these models allow one to adjust for known effects, even in
experiments of modest size. The models also allow one to move from experimental
settings to forecasting behavior in the marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human
behavior reflects a complex, multi-stage process that begins with the allocation
of an individual's resources to affect his or her environment and to improve his
or her state of being. This research will improve understanding of human
behavior both in the marketplace and in general. The research will take place at
the nexus of the three disciplines, statistics, marketing and psychology, with
benefits to all three fields. The project has a strong educational emphasis and
will provide the many students involved with a unique opportunity for cross-
disciplinary training. This will aid them in their careers in academics,
industry, or government. This award was supported as part of the Fiscal Year
2004 Mathematical Sciences priority area special competition on Mathematical
Social and Behavioral Sciences (MSBS).&lt;br/&gt;