* 0437579
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Transportation, Integration, Facilitation:  Prehistoric Footpath Networks in the Sonoran Desert
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Catherine Cameron, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2008
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Catherine M. Cameron, Devin Alan White will conduct
research on prehistoric footpath networks in the Sonoran Desert region
(specifically the Papagueri&lt;br/&gt;a) during the time periods that correlate
with the Hohokam Preclassic (AD 775-1150) and Classic (AD 1150-1300), the
societies that created them, and their complex relationships with the physical
environment that contained them. He will investigate how footpaths acted as
mechanisms for multiscalar community and regional integration over time and
space through the use of multispectral and hyperspectral data obtained from
airborne and spaceborne sensor systems, Geographic Information System spatial
analyses, quantitative predictive modeling, ethnographic data, and pedestrian
survey. Additionally, there will be a focus on the development of efficient
methods for detection, identification, and recording of footpath networks and
associated archaeological features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Footpaths are a rarely
studied part of the global archaeological record-especially in regions of the
New World such as the North American Southwest. While formal roads and causeways
can facilitate daily activities and ritual processions, footpaths are traveled
more regularly by people carrying out daily tasks that range from the mundane to
the spiritual, from nearby food procurement to long distance trade of exotic
materials. Most often, footpaths are routes that link communities to valuable
resources, to sacred places, and to each other. Where these paths begin and end,
what directions they take, and what they connect can reveal much about how
ancient peoples lived their lives and how their cultures operated because many
of these activities are carried out on an informal, routine level. More
specifically, footpath networks can speak to the degree of interconnectedness
between communities, especially when connections are difficult to see through
traditional material culture such as trade items, grave goods, architecture, and
refuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the research program for
archaeologists include proving the utility and efficiency of several new remote
sensing techniques for archaeological fieldwork; demonstrating that studying the
structure, waypoints, and endpoints of footpath networks can reveal the
motivations of travelers as well as the foci and complexity of societies within
a particular region; and filling in a significant gap in the archaeological
understanding of the Papagueria. Beyond the concerns of social scientists,
however, there are several impacts of importance to the public at large. First,
this award will assist in the formal training of a graduate student. Second, the
research will further promote the idea that archaeology does not necessarily
need to involve excavation to both ask and answer important questions about the
past. Third, Mr. White will be working closely with two government entities
(United States Air Force and the National Park Service) in a mutually beneficial
arrangement. Each entity will provide access to data, facilities, and land to
support his research in exchange for his assistance with their efforts to
preserve ancient footpaths in areas affected by the activities of the Air Force
and the movements of illegal immigrants across the U.S.-Mexico border. Last,
this project will provide native peoples in the region with an opportunity to
rediscover a part of their history and mythology. Footpaths are very important
to many groups in the Southwest and, due to many factors outside of their
control, those that live in the Sonoran Desert have lost track of where most of
their ancient paths are located. Mr. White will be working with these groups to
strengthen their connection to the landscape and their past.&lt;br/&gt;