* 0437312
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Middle Holocene Climate and Culture on the South Coast of Peru: Archaeological Investigation of the Pampa Colorada
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Madonna Moss, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2006
* USD 11,710.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Madonna L. Moss, Heather E. McInnis will analyze
data gathered during her survey and excavations of archaeological sites in the
Pampa Colorada region of the southern coastal Andes. The Pampa Colorada is one
of the few areas south of Nazca, Peru with archaeological remains dating to the
Middle Holocene, a poorly understood time period extending from 7,000 to 4,000
14C years ago. Although paleoclimatic and archaeological research shows that
people in this area have coped with climatic fluctuations for thousands of
years, we know little about the impact of long-term drought and climatic
variations on subsistence, technology, and settlement patterns of coastal Andean
societies during this time. McInnis's archaeological fieldwork focused on the
recovery of data that will shed light on changes in land and resource use of
Archaic coastal Andean foragers, and the impact of climate change on local and
regional economies. Her interviews with Peruvian fishermen working in the region
provide a baseline for analyses of the impact of short-term climatic events
(e.g. El Nino, tsunami, etc.) on resource abundance and availability.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research focusing on how and when people used coastal and
terrestrial resources and how these choices affected their settlement is
important because it evaluates adaptive strategies that demonstrate the balance
between population and resource base. One cannot understand how modern societies
living in marginal environments sustain viable economies, technologies, and
social institutions in the face of significant climatic changes without
identifying local constraints of such processes. This project examines the
distribution of 100 previously unrecorded shell midden sites at the Pampa
Colorada and assesses the variability of economic and technological practices
from 23 of these. Identifying variation over time and across space will help
explain the diversity of land and resource use of Archaic populations. Because
settlement and subsistence adjustments that took place in the Pampa Colorada
during the Archaic Period appear to have led to the development of sedentary
fishing communities by the Late Holocene, we can use these data to assess
general anthropological models of transitions to sedentism and economic
specialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of dynamic relationships between
settlement and subsistence activities and changing environmental conditions
requires a detailed chronological sequence, identification of economic and
technological behavioral correlates, and information about local
paleoenvironmental conditions. This project focuses on the recovery and analysis
of spatial data, material remains from cultural contexts (artifacts, faunal and
floral remains), and marine shell and charcoal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to contributing to knowledge of Andean prehistory, investigation of
archaeological remains at the Pampa Colorada will have a broader impact by
focusing the attention of local, regional, and national programs of conservation
and preservation on the Preceramic record of the coast. Furthermore, this study
will increase awareness of the relevance of anthropological studies to real-
world problems. The project has sponsored several outreach initiatives in local
communities including the development of a new museum display highlighting the
Preceramic occupation of the region, and the development of a cultural
preservation program in the regional school system. The project also provides
laboratory internship opportunities for local university undergraduates through
affiliation with a Peruvian research facility. Publication of the study results
in referred journals (in English and Spanish) will disseminate the results to
the scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;