* 0437925
* ORGANICS:    Exploring Charge Transport in Conjugated Organic Materials: A 2D Oligomer Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* David Collard, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 12/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this research is to characterize the effect of intermolecular
(i.e., chain-chain) interactions on the nature of delocalized charge carriers in
organic materials by development of cofacially-held conjugated oligomers. The
stacked geometry of the oligomers persists in solution and in the gas phase, and
a combination of synthetic chemistry, electrochemistry, and spectroscopies (UV-
vis-NIR, fluorescence, ESR, UPS) will allow us to explore the evolution of the
electronic structure of molecules and polymer chains into that of 3-D
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of the proposed activity
include: (i) an enhanced understanding of the influence of interchain
interactions on the electronic properties of conjugated organic materials, (ii)
new conjugated oligomers with enhanced mobility in field effect transistors by
virtue of control over interchain geometry, and (iii) new spectroscopic data
which will aid in the development of new quantum-based computational methods.
The broader impacts resulting from the proposed study include opportunities for
training of graduate students in a variety of techniques in a highly
interdisciplinary research environment, as well as through proposed
collaborations with Dr. Nadine Gruhn (University of Arizona), and Professors
Bredas and Kippelen (Georgia Tech). Georgia Tech and the PI have a strong record
of training graduates from underrepresented minority groups. Researchers will be
recruited to this project from the diverse student population present in the
School of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Georgia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;