* 0437461
* Expanding Links to Careers in Aquatic Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2011
* Benjamin Cuker, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2011
* USD 649,431.00

Hampton University and the American Society of Limnology and Oceanography (ASLO)
propose renewed funding for a program to increase the numbers of under-
represented minorities electing careers in aquatic sciences. The program targets
minority students, faculty and professionals interested in aquatic sciences, as
well as faculty working at Historically Minority Colleges and Universities
(HMCU). Participants received a free membership in ASLO and support to attend
the annual meetings and special pre-meeting workshops. The present proposal will
cultivate the development of past participants and incorporate new cohorts of
students into the process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the initiation of the
program in 1990, over 456 students and 25 mentors have participated in the
program. The funding requested in this proposal would continue the project for
an additional five years (2005-2009). About 42% of the students who attend one
ASLO meeting return for subsequent meeting. Perhaps most significantly, the
number of graduate students participating in the program has increased to 25% in
2003. Many of these graduate students participated in the program as
undergraduates. Many (70%) of the participants are female in recent years,
reflecting a national trend of declining enrollment of male minority students in
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students from more than 127 different
institutions have participated, with 25 different colleges and universities in
the 2003 program alone. Dr. Cuker received a 1999 PEW Fellowship based on this
work, and he has received funding via the Geoscience Diversity program to
support a graduate student fellowship program at Hampton, VIMS and Old Dominion
Universities from 2003-2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;