* 0437200
* Detectors for Calorimetric Determination of Neutrino Mass
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Dan McCammon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2009
* USD 114,079.00

Absolute neutrino mass measurements are of central importance to both particle
physics and astrophysics. The search has taken on a new urgency since the
discovery through neutrino oscillation measurements that these particles indeed
have non-zero masses, providing the first solid evidence of physics beyond the
standard model. The best and most direct upper limits to date for the electron
antineutrino mass come from electrostatic beta spectrometers measuring Tritium
decay endpoints, with limits around 2.5 eV. A much larger successor experiment
could reduce this limit by another factor of five if it is built and successful.
However, it is inherent in this type of measurement that confidence in the
results can be obtained only through confirmation by independent experiments
that have different systematics.

A quite different approach to beta decay endpoint measurements is to embed the
source in the detector and make a calorimetric measurement of the decay energy.
Only the neutrino escapes from the detector, so this gives a direct measurement
of the desired quantity, which is the total decay energy minus that carried away
by the neutrino. The advent of very sensitive cryogenic thermal calorimeters has
made this a practical method. These devices currently have energy resolutions of
a few eV, and with some additional development it should be possible to
implement an experiment that reaches mass limits below 0.5 eV.

With a modest amount of funding to cover travel and some undergraduate lab
assistants, Wisconsin will participate in planning and optimizing how the
detectors are installed and used, and will do appropriate parts of the small-
scale assembly in their lab where they are already equipped for such work. Later
on, with increased funding to add a graduate student, they will participate
significantly in the operation and data analysis. This will create a real
intellectual involvement for the U.S. in an important experiment and its
possible successors. It will also allow some Wisconsin undergraduates to be
involved in an exciting scientific endeavor, and will create a partnership that
will help share some fruits of the considerable investment that the astrophysics
community has made in large microcalorimeter arrays with another part of
physics. In return, it is expected that efforts to improve these detectors for
neutrino investigations will benefit both astrophysical and industrial
applications.

