* 0437178
* CEDAR: Polar Mesospheric Cloud Research Using the Sondrestrom, Greenland Lidar
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Weilin Pan, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra G. Fesen
* 06/30/2008
* USD 269,844.00

The investigators will study the aspherical nature of polar mesospheric cloud
(PMC) particles and the interaction of PMC particles with the mesospheric sodium
layer. The shape of PMC particles affects the growth-sedimentation-sublimation
cycle associated with visible cloud formation. For example, the fall rate of a
PMC particle depends on its shape as well as its size; an aspherical particle
experiences different aerodynamic forces that could cause it to reside longer in
the supersaturation region and thus could enhance its growth. The aspherical
nature of PMCs can affect the characterization of PMC particle size
distributions and the interpretation of PMC microphysics. Lastly, the presence
of PMCs may affect sodium concentrations and the greater surface area-to-volume
ratio of an aspherical particle may enhance the interaction of PMC particles
with the mesospheric sodium species. Owing to the submicron size of PMC
particles and the visible wavelengths used to probe them, Mie-Rayleigh
scattering theory has predominantly been applied to study PMCs. However, these
studies have assumed that the PMC particles are spherical -- a fundamental
assumption with little experimental support. An aspherical particle causes
incident linearly polarized light to depolarize when scattered. Lidar
observations have shown nonzero PMC depolarization ratios in lidar measurements
from Norway. Recently the Sondrestrom, Greenland, lidar system has also measured
nonzero depolarization ratios at visible wavelengths. The results indicated that
PMC particles can at times be aspherical. The goal of this research is to
evaluate the aspherical nature of PMCs at Sondrestrom. Another new and emerging
research area is the study of the interaction of PMCs with the mesospheric metal
species. Sondrestrom sodium and Rayleigh lidar measurements have indicated a
reduction in sodium density at the lower boundary of the sodium layer when PMCs
are present. These new observations suggest a connection between PMCs and sodium
that involves either heterogeneous chemistry in the presence of ice or the
physical uptake of sodium onto existing ice particles. The investigators will
study seasonal changes of sodium at high latitudes, including the effect of ice
on the sodium distribution, by using a seven-year database of Sondrestrom lidar
measurements and by using a sodium chemistry model. The research plan includes
an analysis of PMC depolarization measurements made by the Sondrestrom lidar in
the summers of 2003, 2004, and 2005 to address the question about the aspherical
nature of the PMCs. The investigators will develop a model based on aspherical
particle scattering to address the question of PMC shape and size. In addition,
six years of coincident PMC and sodium density measurements will be compiled and
the relationship of PMC occurrence to sodium density depletion will be detailed.
In addition, new observations from 1064 nm PMC backscatter measurements in the
summers of 2005 and 2006 will be used. The combination of 532 nm and 1064 nm
backscatter measurements, with depolarization measurements at 532 nm, will be
used to better constrain the PMC model and improve the shape and size parameter
estimates. The seasonal variability in the sodium layer observed with the lidar
will be used to test sodium chemistry models. The PMC depolarization
measurements since 2003 and the modeling effort will provide a reasonable
database that will be used to characterize basic PMC properties. PMCs are
believed to be an indicator of global change. Thus, it is important to
understand the physical and chemical mechanisms by which they are formed.