* 0437281
* US-Europe Cooperative Workshop:  Compatability and Integration of Software Engineering Tools
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Zohar Manna, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2007
* USD 28,000.00

Manna&lt;br/&gt;0437281&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year award supports the
participation of 15 US researchers, including two postdoctoral fellows in a US-
European cooperative workshop, "Software Engineering Tools: Compatibility and
Integration." The workshop is organized by Zohar Manna of Stanford University,
Thomas Henzinger of the Ecole Polytechinque Federale of Lausanne, Switzerland,
and Hermann Kopetz of the Technical University of Vienna, Austria. A lack of
tool integration has been recognized as a major impediment to the construction
of complex computer systems, especially in the development of embedded systems.
Tool operability is an important prerequisite for increasing software
productivity and reliability. The workshop will address these issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together American and European
scientists that share a common interest in seeing that software development
research serves as a catalyst for practical advances in next-generation software
intensive systems. It is expected to give rise to new collaborations that
advance the field. To advance this purpose, the workshop will include a meeting
of the working group of the China, US, and Europe initiative (CUE), a global
initiative to integrate theoretical computer science with software engineering
practice.&lt;br/&gt;