* 0437887
* Collaborative Research:  Differential Expression of Oxygen-binding Proteins in Antarctic Fishes Affects Nitric Oxide-mediated Pathways of Angiogenesis and Mitochondrial Biogenesis.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2009
* Bruce Sidell, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 08/31/2009
* USD 464,699.00

The polar ocean presently surrounding Antarctica is the coldest, most thermally
stable marine environment on earth. Because oxygen solubility in seawater is
inversely proportional to temperature, the cold Antarctic seas are an
exceptionally oxygen-rich aquatic habitat. Eight families of a single perciform
suborder, the Notothenioidei, dominate the present fish fauna surrounding
Antarctica. Notothenioids account for approximately 35% of fish species and 90%
of fish biomass south of the Antarctic Polar Front. Radiation of closely related
notothenioid species thus has occurred rapidly and under a very unusual set of
conditions: relative oceanographic isolation from other faunas due to
circumpolar currents and deep ocean trenches surrounding the continent,
chronically, severely cold water temperatures, very high oxygen availability,
very low levels of niche competition in a Southern Ocean depauperate of species
subsequent to a dramatic crash in species diversity of fishes that occurred
sometime between the mid-Tertiary and present. These features make Antarctic
notothenioid fishes an uniquely attractive group for the study of physiological
and biochemical adaptations to cold body temperature. &lt;br/&gt;Few distinctive
features of Antarctic fishes are as unique as the pattern of expression of
oxygen-binding proteins in one notothenioid family, the Channichthyidae
(Antarctic icefishes). All channichthyid icefishes lack the circulating oxygen-
binding protein, hemoglobin (Hb); the intracellular oxygen-binding protein,
myoglobin (Mb) is not uniformly expressed in species of this family. Both
proteins are normally considered essential for adequate delivery of oxygen to
aerobically poised tissues of animals. To compensate for the absence of Hb,
icefishes have developed large hearts, rapidly circulate a large blood volume
and possess elaborate vasculature of larger lumenal diameter than is seen in
red-blooded fishes. Loss of Mb expression in oxidative muscles correlates with
dramatic elevation in density of mitochondria within the cell, although each
individual organelle is less densely packed with respiratory proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;Within the framework of oxygen movement, the adaptive significance of
greater vascular density and mitochondrial populations is understandable but
mechanisms underlying development of these characteristics remain unknown. The
answer may lie in another major function of both Hb and Mb, degradation of the
ubiquitous bioactive compound, nitric oxide (NO). The research will test the
hypothesis that loss of hemoprotein expression in icefishes has resulted in an
increase in levels of NO that mediate modification of vascular systems and
expansion of mitochondrial populations in oxidative tissues. The objectives of
the proposal are to quantify the vascular density of retinas in +Hb and -Hb
notothenioid species, to characterize NOS isoforms and catalytic activity in
retina and cardiac muscle of Antarctic notothenioid fishes, to evaluate level of
expression of downstream factors implicated in angiogenesis (in retinal tissue)
and mitochondrial biogenesis (in cardiac muscle), and to determine whether
inhibition of NOS in vivo results in regression of angiogenic and mitochondrial
biogenic responses in icefishes. Broader impacts range from basic biology,
through training of young scientists, to enhanced understanding of clinically
relevant biomedical processes. &lt;br/&gt;