* 0438720
* The Indigenous Framing for STEM Evaluation Project, Phase II:    American Indian STEM Evaluation Resource Center
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2010
* Carrie Billy, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,000,000.00

In FY'03 this proposer was funded for one year in the amount of $237.9K for a
developmental effort with the objective of creating an indigenous evaluation
framework, focused on STEM education. The goal is to synthesize indigenous "ways
of knowing" and western evaluation practices. Ways of Knowing is the NA
perspective on life and their thought process as reflected in their learning
styles and how they conceptualize ideas. This was the portion of proposed
activities identified as the most important element and the primary focus of
first year activities.

According to the proposal, activities to date include A national advisory
committee meeting that produced a set of framing elements, which were discussed,
tested and refined at 4 regional focus groups with Native elders and educators
throughout Indian country. The questions asked for participants' knowledge of
and views on the evaluation process, methods and its 0verall value.

A literature review is underway and

REU students will interview elders from their tribes this summer

The PIs propose to apply the framing elements, which reflect the indigenous
perspective on education and evaluation in the development and/or testing of:

A STEM Evaluation Resource Center Portal to provide support, resources and
training to tribal college staff, administrators and faculty, K-12 teachers of
NA students thru on site workshops and on-line assistance. The portal will
become a forum for discussion of theory, practice, ethics and standards.

The Center will expand capacity to perform evaluations through training of
practicing evaluators. The workshops and courses developed will be based on a
core curriculum that weaves NA perspective into a graduate-level course workshop
and practicum. (p.9)

An Internet-based collaborative virtual library of evaluation tools and
materials linked to the Digital Library and to Western MI Evaluation Center (A
portal developed w/ UMI school of Information (p. 8)

A community of practice: advisory committee to be expanded (add science teacher
and assessment person) to review and update strategies to determine whether they
are consistent w/ cultural values and develop and maintain a list of indigenous
evaluators, etc.

A complete package of support and teaching materials and activities.

