* 0438571
* Investigating Unsequenced Enzymatic Activities: A Preliminary to Enzyme Genomics
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Yannick Pouliot, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 06/30/2005
* USD 78,486.00

An analysis of the contents of the ENZYME database has revealed that prima
facia, no gene or protein sequence is known for more than 1400 enzyme
activities, corresponding to 38% of enzyme classification (EC) numbers. This
lack of sequence data for such a large fraction of enzyme activities hinders
research and biotechnology in a number of areas ranging from genome annotation
to metabolic engineering and pathway prediction. Fortunately, the recent
availability of large numbers of completely sequenced genomes enables the
eventual identification of the genes encoding these enzymes using data available
in the literature, combined with computational and experimental analyses.

The overall goals of the project are to perform a survey of the literature
associated with orphan activities to further substantiate that their existence
is not artifactual, and to capture data from this literature, which would
facilitate the identification of the genes encoding these activities. Thus, the
project will 1) authenticate orphan activities; 2) capture and disseminate data
that could enable the identification of the genes coding for enzymes associated
with orphan activities; and 3) submit any sequence data found in the literature
to the UniProt database. The survey will be applied to a randomly selected
subset of orphan activities large enough to provide reasonably solid conclusions
relative to the universe of orphan activities.

Intellectual Merits Assessment of the authenticity of orphan activities:
Determining an upper bound on the rate of artifactual causes for orphan
activities will inform the decision as to whether to proceed with an Enzyme
Genomics Initiative. Similarly, extracting molecular properties and other data
from the literature associated with orphan activities will help determine the
extent to which such an Initiative is warranted. Enhanced genome annotation: The
availability of gene and protein sequences encoding previously orphan activities
will enhance our ability to annotate genomes in terms of both coverage (fraction
of genes that can be recognized), and accuracy (fraction of predicted gene
functions that are correct). Enhanced pathway prediction: The availability of
sequence data from previously orphaned activities will also increase our ability
to predict computationally the metabolic pathway component of organisms, since
such predictions typically rely upon sequence data from known enzymatic
activities. Enhanced metabolic engineering: These sequence data will also
enhance the practice of metabolic engineering, again because of its dependency
upon sequences from known enzymatic activities.

Broader Impacts Increased database accuracy: The outcome of this work will
result in the expansion of enzyme sequences in the UniProt Database, a major
protein information database. Increased value of existing data: The results of
this work will add value to a large body of enzymology whose full value is not
realized currently because of the absence of sequence data, and will further
leverage systematic genome sequencing.