* 0438121
* Filming "Breath of Life - Silent No More" California Indian Language Restoration Workshop at the University of California at Berkeley
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Seth Kramer, Ironbound Films, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,500.00

Filming "Breath of Life-Silent No More"&lt;br/&gt;California Indian Language
Restoration Workshop &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the National
Science Foundation, Ironbound Films, Inc., will film "Breath of Life-Silent No
More" California Indian Language Restoration Workshop at the University of
California at Berkeley from June 5 through 10, 2004. The Workshop brings
together about fifty American Indians interested in reviving or maintaining
their native tongues. It shows participants how to locate and understand
scientific research on their languages and then use what they find to teach the
language to others. Ironbound will follow participants as they sift through
linguists and anthropologists' field notebooks and audio recordings, from
digital tapes to one-hundred-year-old wax cylinders. Participants will be filmed
as they attempt to understand the words of their ancestors and decipher the
phonetic writing and grammatical annotations used by the scientists who
documented them. Linguists will be filmed as they instruct participants in the
most innovative methods of teaching these languages to their communities. The
footage will be a critical component of Vanishing Voices (working title), a one-
hour documentary on language endangerment. Vanishing Voices takes viewers from
Native Siberia to Native America, from ancient texts to cutting-edge technology,
to demonstrate how scientists record-even help revive-the world's
tongues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linguists estimate that, of more than 6,800
languages in the world, as many as ninety percent will not survive the century;
an average of one dies every two weeks. The rapid rate of language loss hinders
the development of theories about language variation and therefore human
cognition; debilitates the reconstruction of linguistic prehistory and therefore
human prehistory; and prevents the tapping of indigenous knowledge of the
environment. It is essential that the public understand how language loss
affects science and how scientists are preparing. Vanishing Voices will be
America's first look at how languages become endangered, and the awesome task of
documenting and preserving them. Footage from the "Breath of Life-Silent No
More" Workshop will demonstrate how people with languages no longer spoken are
learning and applying scientific methods to help bring their languages back into
use. &lt;br/&gt;