* 0438617
* ACTiVATE Program
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Claudia Morrell, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2009
* USD 712,002.00

0438617&lt;br/&gt;Behm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University of
Maryland Baltimore County to support the activity described below for 36 months.
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation
Program Solicitation (NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The
partners include University of Maryland Baltimore County (Lead Institution),
Johns Hopkins University, Towson University, University of Maryland, Baltimore,
Technology Commercialization Group, Office of Research and Development.
University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute, University of Maryland, College
Park, University of Maryland, School of Law, American Express Tax &amp;
Business, Anthem Capital, BioPlan Associates, Constellation Energy Group, Darrah
Tax Advisory Services, Eager Street Group, Grant Thornton, Legg Mason Wood
Walker, MGH, New Markets Growth Fund, Venable, Baejter &amp; Howard, and
Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO),&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objectives are: to create a systematic model for increasing the
commercialization of technology innovations from universities by training women
entrepreneurs to create technology-based, start-up companies. To achieve this
goal, the ACTiVATE Program will have the following specific
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. select 60 candidate technologies from Maryland's
research universities and conduct an opportunity analysis on 45 of these
candidates;&lt;br/&gt;2. develop a customized training plan for women
entrepreneurs that is transferable and adoptable to other under-represented
groups;&lt;br/&gt;3. validate the training program by introducing ninety mid-
career women to the basics of entrepreneurship;&lt;br/&gt;4. develop 15-24
business plans for candidate technology commercialization as part of the
training program;&lt;br/&gt;5. create 6 to 9 new women-run companies during the
Program's first three years;&lt;br/&gt;6. create sufficient wealth in the start-
ups to sustain the program after the initial NSF-funded
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The
ACTiVATE Program will create wealth for entrepreneurs, universities, the
inventors of technology, and ultimately the State of Maryland. Entrepreneurs
have the potential to increase their net worth through an equity interest in a
growing company. Universities will receive consideration for a license to their
technologies. The consideration, which may be in the form of equity, fees, and
royalties, will be shared with the technologies inventors through each
universities royalty distribution policy. Finally, the State of Maryland will
benefit from the creation of new companies in the state through new jobs that
will be created and increases in corporate tax
revenues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project will result
from the development of a technology commercialization model driven by an
efficient entrepreneurial training program will be a customized experience for
women, a traditionally under-represented group. The Program will extend to
significant numbers of women an awareness of, and information about,
entrepreneurship opportunities in technology fields. This unique and innovative
program is grounded in both research and experience in technology
entrepreneurship and the unique needs of women as entrepreneurs. The training
will take a learn-by-doing approach that can be disseminated to, and replicated
at, other institutions and for other under-represented groups. The ACTiVATE
Program will be the only applied entrepreneurial training program in the region
focused on meeting the special needs of women
entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity
concentrate on providing a model for commercializing innovations at universities
and federal labs that can be used at other institutions across the country. The
formation of new ventures will create wealth, build the regional economy, and
provide new products that will improve the national well-being. At the same
time, the Program will broaden the awareness and knowledge of women to encourage
their development as entrepreneurs, and the number of women-run technology
start-ups in Maryland will be significantly increased, thereby creating
opportunities for women entrepreneurs that are not currently available. The
experience gained by the entrepreneurial trainees will enable them to pursue
other start-ups in the future, which will increase the Programs economic impact.
The ACTiVATE Program will increase the number of university start-ups in
Maryland by 30% annually and innovations from universities will be
commercialized so the public can benefit from new products and services. The
ACTiVATE Program is designed to capture a portion of the wealth generated by the
start-up companies formed so that it can be sustained beyond the initial NSF
funding period.&lt;br/&gt;