* 0438400
* Gallium Nitride Quantum-Dot Light-Emitting Diodes
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2006,03/31/2009
* Ignatius Tsong, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 03/31/2009
* USD 600,000.00

0438400&lt;br/&gt;Tsong&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Arizona State
University to support the activity described below for 24 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include Arizona State University (Lead Institution), Sandia National
Laboratories, and Nitronex Corporation (a small
business).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the proposal is
research, technology transfer, and commercialization of light-emitting diodes
based on group III nitride wide band-gap semiconductors based on quantum dots.
Arizona State University will produce the zirconium-boron on silicon substrates,
which are lattice-matched to the gallium nitride light-emitting diodes. The
substrates are highly reflective in the ultraviolet spectrum, which overcomes
the absorption and makes the laser efficient. Nitronex will grow the stress-
relieving aluminum gallium nitride transition layers on the substrate to prevent
thermal cracking in operation. Arizona State University will then grow the
quantum dots of gallium arsenide, which are the optically active medium for the
light-emitting diode. Sandia will grow the capping layer and the packaging
elements. Sandia will also measure the efficiency of the light output of the
devices. Nitronex will commercialize the
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
innovations will create highly energy-efficient, longer-lasting, and cost-
effective lighting systems that will contribute significantly to the reduction
of energy consumption. Further sustainable innovations include white light-
emitting diodes through phosphor conversion, and laser systems for improved
optical communications and data storage. This will open business opportunities
in the multi-billion dollar range for the US lighting
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is the
growth and characterization of this new class of light-emitting diodes using the
unique capabilities of each of the three partners. The new materials will have
higher brightness and luminous efficiency than the conventional group III
nitride wide band-gap light-emitting diodes, and the color specificity will be
far superior because of the narrower emission line-
width.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity concentrate on
expanding the techniques to develop a new generation of light-emitting diodes
will fulfill the criteria of both low cost and high luminous efficiency for
applications in general illumination, as well as improved optical and data
storage. The students will also be exposed to course and practical experience in
entrepreneurship, i.e., first-hand experience in transforming knowledge into
products that create new wealth and enhance the quality of life by reducing
energy consumption.&lt;br/&gt;