* 0438704
* Building a Pathway Connecting Innovation to Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2008
* Carol Reeves, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2008
* USD 600,000.00

0438704&lt;br/&gt;Saxena&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University of
Arkansas to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal was
submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include
University of Arkansas (Lead Institution), Arkansas Science and Technology
Center, Virtual Incubation Corporation, and Alpha Fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objectives are to integrate into the university educational system a
complete pathway that creates knowledge, stimulates innovative ideas, and forges
commercialization. With the infrastructure and culture to reach SBIR Phase I
awards in place, this proposal sets it sights on building the very different
businesses infrastructure and cultural change needed to reach commercialization.
The activities include: creating a business infrastructure that facilitates the
transition of SBIR Phase I winners to not only SBIR Phase II but also to Phase
III and ultimately to commercialization, advertising the successes that will
provide the examples that we have learned are needed to establish a campus a
mindset that goes beyond SBIR awards by making clear what could sell, harnessing
a cadre of untapped business professionals to provide mentoring to SBIR Phase I
small businesses, conducting a formal evaluation of the impact of the overall
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Arkansas has a long tradition of an economy based on
agriculture. Despite the existence of a few very large businesses in the state,
very few high tech companies exist. Arkansas would benefit economically from the
fact that 66% of all new jobs are created by the 11% of new companies that are
high tech. The vision is to create a thriving high-tech small business economy
in Arkansas via a pathway for new ideas to grow in exciting interdisciplinary
areas and for providing the resources needed to take successive steps leading
from initial concept to actual in-hand marketable
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project will result
from integration of incubators, angel funding networks, and educational programs
under what seems to be a well thought out management plan. The proposed project
represents an important experiment in the creation of new high-tech commercial
ventures in an economically underdeveloped state. The funding network is
partially, although not fully, in place. A plan for assessment of outcomes of
the project has been established in cooperation with assessment professionals
from the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity
concentrate on advancing discovery and understanding while improving teaching,
training and learning at University of Arkansas. Participation of
underrepresented groups is one of the innovation outcomes and partially
reflective of the education component of this proposal. This proposal will also
enhance the infrastructure of research education Project activities proposed
would advance discovery and understanding while improving teaching, training and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;