* 0438948
* SoD: Enabling Design Strategies for Single Chip Heterogeneous Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Donald Thomas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0438948&lt;br/&gt;Paul, JoAnn M.
&lt;br/&gt;CMU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SoD: Enabling Design Strategies for Single
Chip Heterogeneous Multiprocessors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the next ten
years, it will be possible to provide enough transistors on a single chip for on
the order of a hundred 32-bit RISC processors. The design of these emergent,
software-intensive single chip heterogeneous multiprocessor (SCHM) computer
systems precludes the possibility of seat-of-the-pants analysis or specify-and-
synthesize methodologies. No science of design has been developed for mixed
hardware/software single chip multiprocessing systems. Strategic computer system
organization - requires a creative proces that can not be automateds,and thus
this designer creativity must be facilitated at the system level. The full
vision of this research is to develop the science needed to enable future design
systems to break away from the specify-and-synthesize mind set of current CAD
tools to become a characterize-and-invent paradigm that still has ties into the
current lower level integrated circuit design methodology flows. Another major
theme behind our research is that computer system designers start from trend
analyses, looking for future cross-over points between anticipated changes in
the major features of applications sets and the physical capabilities of the
major architectural features of the systems that carry them out. From these,
design strategies are invented which can become basic organizing themes for
entire classes of programmable systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;