* 0438482
* Relevance of Culture in Evaluation Institute: Implementing and Empirically Investigating Culturally Responsive Evaluation in Underperforming Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Stafford Hood, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 11/30/2007
* USD 567,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: 0438482&lt;br/&gt;PI: Stafford
Hood&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Arizona State University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Relevance
of Culture in Evaluation Institute: Implementing and Empirically Investigating
Culturally Responsive Evaluation in Underperforming Schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is intended to build upon ongoing activities
in the Relevance of Culture in Evaluation Institute (Project 0335699) to advance
the development of culturally relevant evaluation strategies such as those
proposed in the Principal Investigator's co-authored section of the NSF 2002
User-Friendly Handbook for Project Evaluation. By utilizing these strategies in
school settings and empirically investigating them the project is intended to
develop a model for sustainable change in improving evaluations of programs
where cultural context is a salient feature and at the same time broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups. The project objectives are: 1) to
develop a framework that will operationalize and provide guidance to evaluators
seeking to be responsive to cultural context, 2) build capacity within the
educational community by increasing the number of evaluators prepared to work in
settings where cultural context is an important feature, and 3) build and refine
a model of sustainable change and improvement of evaluation for schools that are
underperforming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;