* 0438712
* SCI: Cyberinfrastructure in Support of Research:  A New Imperative
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* John Towns, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Barry I. Schneider
* 06/30/2009
* USD 58,647,271.00

Increasingly complex scientific and engineering problems demand
cyberinfrastructure (CI) that fully integrates the tools, services, systems and
support to reach the next level of scientific discoveries in areas ranging from
computing a biologically faithful and multiscale virtual lung to managing the
full range of environmental, social and economic issues from environmental
hazards, such as severe storms and earthquakes. NCSA's unique expertise with
science applications and high end data and computational resources forms the
foundation for responding to the new imperative for CI: the secure, integrated
provision of high-end resources coupled by high-end services for large-scale
computational and data oriented research that can extend to other national
facilities such as SDSC, and ETF. This integrated environment will enable a
broad range of new scientific and engineering discoveries by transforming the
processes and tools researchers and communities use to achieve meaningful
scientific insight. To meet this goal, integration within this powerful new
environment must be driven by scientific and engineering requirements. NCSA will
accomplish this with a structured community engagement process and community
partnerships that will lead to a stable and robust CI that includes prototyping,
deployment, support, and documentation. This approach will provide significant
economies of scale in building a national CI because it will enable clear
definition and effective sharing of common services allowing extension of these
capabilities to new communities. The high-end computing and data resources at
NCSA, tightly coupled through an integrated CI, will address resource demands
that range from hundreds to thousands of simulations of moderate size to single
hero simulations requiring weeks of dedicated computational resources. It will
seamlessly provide the extensive data assimilation, storage and management,
analysis, mining, and visualization services required to discover new scientific
results. The NCSA environment and support for applications will be augmented
with the systems and expertise that will be available through the NCSA/SDSC
CyberInfrastructure Partnership. Expertise at each center will be directed at
providing needed middleware, data and visualization services to the national
community in a secure fashion. This will include traditional support for porting
and optimization of codes. To provide additional strategic input into the
partnership, a joint international Cyberinfrastucture Technology Watch Group and
a Joint User Advisory Committee will be created. Extensive collaborations with
ETF will further strengthen the national cyberinfrastructure. NCSA is providing
a deep and broad CI for the national community that will enable new discoveries
and insights across a wide spectrum of science and engineering disciplines. The
community engagement process will ensure that this balanced, services-based high
end environment will meet individual user and community needs. Collaboration
with SDSC, the ETF, and other partners will augment and enhance the
cyberinfrastructure. Scientists and engineers will have extensive training and
educational opportunities to learn about the latest CI developments through
advanced e-learning technologies.

NCSA will extend its engagement from existing to new communities that will drive
the development of the CI in support of scientific discovery. Relevant CI
services will then be made available to other communities, and in the process,
an expanded national CI base formed. Pro-active efforts to engage women,
minorities and people with disabilities will be accelerated through partnerships
with numerous professional organizations including the Minority Serving
Institutions Consortium. NCSA staff and partners will actively disseminate
information through the web, national conferences and workshops, museum and
planetarium exhibits, and PBS shows highlighting the direct benefits of
scientific discovery to the health, safety, and economic competitiveness of
society.

