* 0438967
* SoD Collaborative Research: Constraint-based Architecture Evaluation
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2012
* James Browne, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2012
* USD 762,000.00

This is a collaborative research project including Dewayne Perry, James Brown
and Sarfraz Khurshid at the University of Texas at Austin (award # 0438967), and
Daniel Jackson at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (award # 0438897).
The aim of this project is to develop new languages, methods, analyses and tools
for 'prescriptive' software architecture descriptions, to help the designers of
complex software systems express and explore their architectural commitments
prior to implementation, and to support families of systems that share
architectural features. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two underpinning technologies are
used: Jackson's Alloy constraint language and analyzer, and Browne's
compositional compiler. Alloy's underlying logic is expanded, new analysis
capabilities are added, and the Alloy system is packaged as a software
component. The compositional compiler is extended to utilize constraints and
property specifications in order to support both constraint and performance
analyses. On the basis of these technologies, an abstract model of software
architecture is created, an architecture constraint specification language is
defined, the rules of composition and evaluation are defined, and an integrated
tool suite for constraint-based architectural evaluation is constructed. The
research is evaluated first by simple specific examples and then with realistic
case studies, revising and extending the research as needed to satisfy the
overall evaluation goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will
have a significant and broad impact in terms architectural research,
architecture education and architecture support technology. Further, it is
expected that the technology will enable deeper understandings of design trade-
offs, will improve design quality, and will significantly improve the component
composition process. The project Web site
(http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~perry/work/projects/nsf-cbae/) will provide access
to the resulting techniques and tools.&lt;br/&gt;