* 0438691
* Partnership to Accelerate Commercialization of Kansas Bioscience Products and Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2008
* Terry King, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2008
* USD 592,039.00

0438691&lt;br/&gt;Kramer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Kansas State
University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include Kansas State University (Lead Institution), Advanced Manufacturing
Institute (AMI), Agricultural Innovation Center (AIC), Bioprocessing &amp;
Industrial Value-Added Program (BIVAP), Kansas Department of Commerce (KDOC),
Kansas Entrepreneurs &amp; Small to Medium-Sized Manufacturers, Kansas
Technology Enterprise Corporation (KTEC), Lawrence Regional Technology Center
(LRTC), Mid-America Commercialization Corporation (MACC), and Value-Added
Business Development Program (VABDP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives are: 1) create a structured process to identify
university&lt;br/&gt;intellectual property that is ripe for development; 2)
create the infrastructure needed to transform&lt;br/&gt;knowledge, inventions,
and discoveries in bioscience-related research and applications into
viable&lt;br/&gt;products; 3) market this Early Stage Technology Development
(ESTD) service throughout the university&lt;br/&gt;and state; and 4) prepare a
future workforce to develop new bioscience products and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;This
activity will provide general economic well being in Kansas. It will increase
the transfer of technologies to Kansas companies; stimulate the formation of and
assist the development of technology-based businesses in Kansas; increase new
products brought to market; and provide access to an engineering resource that
significantly accelerates the development and hardening of new bioscience-based
products, processes, and technologies in Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project is to simultaneously develop and formalize a
process to accelerate the&lt;br/&gt;commercial development of bioscience
products and technologies and provide meaningful ESTD&lt;br/&gt;experience to
Kansas's future technology engineers and entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the activity concentrate on the creation of wealth and
high-&lt;br/&gt;paying jobs for the citizens of Kansas. In addition, creating a
model process that benefits both the&lt;br/&gt;technology creator/inventor and
the recipient will stimulate transformation of intellectual property
created&lt;br/&gt;in both company and university laboratories into commercial
products. Both undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;students will be involved
and educated about commercialization activities and thus, Kansas
future&lt;br/&gt;technology entrepreneurs will learn to define and conduct
successful bioscience ESTD projects.&lt;br/&gt;