* 0438694
* The University of New Orleans Center for Innovation for the Southeast Louisiana and Gulf South Region
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2008
* Kenneth Lacho, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2008
* USD 663,070.00

This award is to the University of New Orleans to support the activity described
below for 24 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships
for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-04556).

Partners The partners include University of New Orleans (Lead Institution),
Tulane University, Department of the Navy-SPAWAR, Department of the Navy-
Stennis, NASA-Stennis, Louisiana Department of Economic Development, City of New
Orleans, Jefferson Parrish, Jefferson Parrish Economic Development Commission,
Louisiana Technology Council, MetroVision, Idea Village, Lockheed Martin,
Northrup Grumman, NVE, Parallel Synthesis Technologies, g.c.r.&Associates,
Resurgent Technologies, Science & Engineering Associates, Solutient, Xavier
University, Louisiana State University, and Louisiana Tech.

The primary objectives are: The University of New Orleans proposes the creation
of a Center For Innovation (CFI) as an effective way to facilitate the
transformation of research knowledge and ideas into innovations that create new
business opportunities in Southern Louisiana and the Gulf Coast region. The CFI
will bring together scientists with representatives of private businesses,
government agencies, and financiers to explore and develop business
opportunities. CFI will meet the goals of the Partnership for Innovation by
facilitating the transformation of knowledge emerging from researchers into
innovations that create new wealth, build strong local, regional and national
economies and improve the national well being. The strength of this proposal
rests primarily on the novel program. The center will proactively search out
faculty with promising ideas for emerging technologies using a network of
college representatives and the staff in the Office of Research and Sponsored
Programs. Faculty with emerging technology ideas that are judged to have a high
potential for commercialization will be partnered with an Entrepreneurial
advisor who will take an active role in educating the faculty member on the
importance of protecting intellectual property and working with the faculty
member on assessing the potential marketability of their product. Faculty will
then be connected with the appropriate partners in the business community. Thus,
the Center For Innovation will serve as the conduit for connecting the academic
community with these public/private partners to help turn innovations into
economically beneficial projects. Novel ideas in the proposal include combining
reporting of IP disclosures across multiple universities, which will increase
the likelihood of visibility of innovations.

Potential Economic Impact Growing the businesses in the area through
collaborative research will provide an economic benefit to the area.

The intellectual merit of the project is the recognition of a need for wealth
creation and economic development. This solution, creating a center, is a long-
term far-reaching plan to answer the need for new and different jobs. University
of New Orleans seeks to create an atmosphere of learning, collaboration, and
commercialization. The plan has a variety of partners with similar goals. This
proposal provides a vehicle for not only moving university innovations to the
market but also partnering with businesses to link appropriate faculty research
personnel to business interests.

The broader impacts of the activity concentrate on a Gulf Coast Region
initiative. There is a concern for fellow institutions in the area facing
similar problems. This is important because in the future when other
institutions want to start similar centers there will be a helpful voice from a
cooperative university. University of New Orleans does seek to create a template
to help other universities create similar organizations for their regions. Also
the program goes out of its way to address the inclusion of minority students in
the project, which will be easy because of their location.