* 0438670
* The TechLink Partnership Network
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2008
* Rose Glee, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2008
* USD 599,967.00

0438670&lt;br/&gt;Glee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the Florida A&amp;M
University to support the activity described below for 24 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnership for Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include
Florida A&amp;M University (Lead Institution), Alabama Agricultural and
Mechanical University; Jackson State Universtiy; Morgan State University;
Norfolk State University; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University; North Carolina Central University Southern University at Baton
Rouge; Tennessee State University; United States Department of Commerce, U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office; Association of University Technology Managers
(AUTM); American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS); Oak Ridge
Associated Universities (ORAU); Greyhaed Associates; the Boeing
Company;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives are to stimulate new
innovation among under represented segments of our population. The proposal
creates several regional clusters that should benefit each region and
collectively a cross regional benefit as the PI gathers the clusters together.
The effort will create the framework and the methodologies to enable Minority
Support Institutions (MSI) to participate in the technology transfer arena.
Innovation will be developed in three phases including; infrastructure
development; education and training; and outreach. The development of an
electronic or, virtual technology tansfer office will provide infrastructure
support for acceleratin the adminstrative and management of all technology
transfer functions. A series of courses, modules, workshops and seminars will be
used to equip adminstrative staff at MSI's with basic, intermediate and advance
knowledge of the profession. Non-MSI's with demonstrated experience in taking
new developments to the market place will serve as mentors to MSI's. The
partnership will also involve collaboration with law schools whereby law school
students learn about the profession of Intellectual Property Law, gain
experience assisting with the preliminary processes for patenting and
copyrighting and become involved ininnovation and entrepreneurship
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;Clearly,
this proposal has the potential to markedly increase the paticipation of
Minority Sercin Institution (MSI's) in the technology transfer and
commercialization areas. A benchmarking study of non-MSI institutions doing
$35-45 million in annual research would be very valuable in defining what those
institutions are doing to successfully in technology transfer and how those
practices might be adapted to benefit MSI's.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project will result from the goal of stimulating new
innovation, among under represented segments of our
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The braoder impacts of the activity concentrate
on bringing together a large number of diverse organizations that involve under
represetned populations for the purpose of creating a self-sustaining innovation
enterprise. This will result in graduates that have the ability to create small
technology-based businesses or to create new products within existing companies.