* 0438153
* Designing Software to Reduce Operator Error
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Nancy Leveson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2009
* USD 480,000.00

A large number of accidents have always been attributed to operator error. While
automation has eliminated many types of operator error, it has also resulted in
new types of operator error. Many of these new errors are the result of what
human factors experts have labeled technology-centered automation, where
designers focus most of their attention on the mapping from software inputs to
outputs, on mathematical models of required functionality, and on the technical
details and problems internal to the computer. Little attention is usually given
to designing and evaluating software with respect to whether it provides
transparent and consistent behavior that supports operators in their monitoring
and control tasks. Human factors experts have tried to overcome what they call
clumsy automation by changing the human interface to the automation, by changing
operator training, or by designing new operational procedures to eliminate the
human errors resulting from poor software design. These efforts have had only
limited success. Some human factors researchers have concluded that training
cannot and should not be the fix for bad design, and have called for more human-
centered automation. If we can identify software design features that lead to
human error, then we should be able to design software in such a way that errors
are reduced without sacrificing the goals for which computers are being
introduced, such as increased productivity and efficiency. Building on previous
preliminary work by the PI, the goal of this research is to identify problematic
software behavior (design features) that can lead to human operator error, to
define algorithms for analyzing formal software specifications for these
features, and to create new human-centered software design practices that will
lead to reduced operator errors and safer systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Most researchers in human-computer interaction have focused on the
design of the interface between the human and the computer. Software design,
however, is starting to play an important role in accidents by confusing human
operators and contributing to new types of human error. Very little is currently
known about the relationship between software design and operator error. The
potential benefits of developing this relatively under-researched area in the
science of software design are obvious in terms of saving lives and property. In
addition, students will get the opportunity to work in and learn about an
interdisciplinary field that requires knowledge from both computer science and
from psychology and human factors. The results of this research will be
disseminated widely and incorporated into both undergraduate and graduate
classes.