* 0438736
* Oregon's Lab to Market Initiative
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2008
* Albert Benight, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2008
* USD 599,645.00

0438736&lt;br/&gt;Kaiser&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Potland Sate
University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnership for Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include
Portland State University (Lead Institution), Oregon Health &amp; Science
University, Oregon State University, University of Oregon, Oregon Association of
Minority Enterpreneurs, Oregon Enterpreneurs Forum. Oregon Bioscience
Association, American Electronics Association, Intellectual Assests, Northwest
Technology Ventures, OVP Ventures Partners, Davis Wright Tremaine, Stoel Rives,
WellchAllyn, Community Development Department, Oregon Council for Knowledge and
Economic Development, and Oregon Development
Commission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives are to form a public-
private partnership to create market plans and strategies for licensing
agreements and formation of new businesses, outreach to the public to recruit
and train the next generation of entrepreneurs, capitalize of the excellent
research leadership in the state, establishment of a multi-stage financing plan,
creation of a science and engineering research network in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
innovations will create a goal of 12 new technologies by the end of the third
year of the award. The unemployment rate in Oregon is among the highest in the
nation. These new companies will provide new high tech employment opportunities
in the region. Entrepreneurial education and training will be offered to existin
and future students to ensure the workflow needed to sustain innovation in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project includes
formation of partnerships among academic, government, and the private sector to
foster high tech, research based innovation in the region. The partnership
includes university faculty and students, state, regional and local government,
and the business community (including venture fund comapanies). The workforce to
empower the innovation will be trained and educated in academic and outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity concentrate
on education and training of current and future enterpreneurs. There is a strong
emphasis on involvement of underrepresented groups.