* 0438004
* Bio-inspired, Multifuctional Microlens Arrays: Novel Synthesis and Dynamic Tuning
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Shu Yang, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2008
* USD 293,955.00

0438004&lt;br/&gt;Yang&lt;br/&gt;Microlenses are widely used in various
technologies including telecommunication. The position and geometrical features
of these lenses are fixed and cannot be changed by external control. Thus, there
is a great need for the development of microlenses with adaptive capabilities.
This proposal offers a highly promising approach toward the development of a
multifunctional microlense array that is designed based on what is known about
the structure and function of the eyes of brittlestar. The proposed optical
devices with novel architectures, tunability and tailored functionalities will
mimic the structures and functions of the biological prototype compound eyes of
a brittlestar. This is an example of how novel nanofabrication techniques can be
used to develop new functional systems that are inspired by nature. The proposed
structure is developed by synthesizing biomimetic hydrogel microlens arrays with
integrated pores using 3D micropatterning techniques to fabricate small,
hierarchical material structures in a large scale as well as responsive
hydrogels and microfluidics techniques that allow for manufacturing of
microdevices that provide multifunctional adaptive optics features.
Collectively, utilization of these techniques offers highly unique potential for
manufacturing of micro-optical devices with unique features that can be made
light weight and produced inexpensively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
applicants will synthesize a variety of photosensitive hydrogel precursors that
can be directly patterned using three-beam interference lithography; 2) fine-
tune the shape, size and/or refractive index of the biomimetic hydrogel
microlens arrays in response to external stimuli; 3) reversibly tune the lens
optical properties by transportation of microfluid through pore channels using
an electrowetting pump.