* 0438120
* Significance of Underplated Oceanic Melange in the Tectonic Evolution and Crustal Structure of Central Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2005,05/31/2008
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2008
* USD 224,885.00

Within the middle of the Qiangtang terrane of central Tibet is an enormous
(greater than 500-km-long and up to 100-km-wide) east-west trending belt of
blueschist-bearing melange. This belt occurs structurally beneath continental
margin strata, in the footwall of early Mesozoic domal low-angle normal faults,
requiring the melange to have underplated continental margin strata prior to
exhumation. The tectonic significance of the melange is highly uncertain, with
two leading hypotheses proposed to date: (1) the melange marks the location of a
suture zone separating formerly unrelated crustal fragments to the north and
south. (2) the melange consists of Songpan-Ganzi sedimentary and subduction-
accretion rocks which have been underthrust approximately 200 km from the Jinsha
suture to the north. In an effort to test these hypotheses, this three-year
investigation is conducting (1) regional and detailed geologic mapping and
structural analysis along two N-S traverses across the Qiangtang terrane, (2)
detailed structural analyses and thermochronologic and thermobarometric studies
within the Qiangtang melange, (3) comparative studies of detrital zircon ages
from the melange, Songpan-Ganzi strata, and northern and southern Qiangtang
region strata, and (4) biostratigraphic studies, led by colleagues from the
collaborating Institute of Tibetan Plateau Research in Beijing. Project findings
will have a major impact on understanding the tectonic assembly and crustal
structure of central Tibet and the general tectonic processes by which melange
is incorporated into continental crust. If project results indicate that
Qiangtang melange has been underthrust from the Jinsha suture to the north, then
much of the deeper central Tibetan crust should include underplated melange.
This relationship would also provide an unparalleled opportunity to directly
examine processes of low-angle subduction which are rarely observed in the
geologic record. Conversely, the conclusion of a major oceanic suture in the
central Qiangtang region would require significant revisions to conventional
thought regarding the tectonic framework and development of central Tibet. The
project involves one Ph.D. student and is engaging a group of undergraduate
students to assist in the collection and interpretation of detrital zircon data.
In addition, a Tibetan Tectonics" seminar is being organized that will bring
together University of Arizona faculty, graduate and undergraduate students, and
researchers from Chinese and other U.S. institutions.