* 0438071
* Studies of Orographic Precipitation Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Sabine Goeke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 04/30/2009
* USD 326,201.00

The fundamental scientific problem to be addressed in this research is to use
polarization radar signatures to understand the microphysical evolution of
mountain cloud systems, and improve methodologies for interpreting polarization
radar signatures in a wide variety of cloud systems. The specific objectives are
to use polarization radar measurements from the Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP)
and the Improvement of Microphysical Parameterization through Observational
Verification Experiment (IMPROVE II) in conjunction with aircraft microphysical
data to address two key unresolved scientific questions: 1) How does topography
affect microphysical processes and precipitation development within cloud
systems as they approach and ascend major topographic barriers and finer scale
topographic features? 2) What is the role of warm rain microphysics on
precipitation processes in mountain cloud systems? Fundamental to achieving
these scientific objectives is the quantitative interpretation of particle types
from polarization measurements in orographic cloud systems.

The intellectual merit of the research has its basis in the new understanding it
will provide concerning the role of mountains in enhancing precipitation. The
research also will explore novel ways to interpret measurements from
polarization radars. While past studies of orographic cloud systems have been
restricted to targets of opportunity when aircraft data or vertically pointing
remote sensors were available, this study will take advantage of four
dimensional polarization radar coverage, allowing examination in much finer
detail of the relationship of microphysical processes to evolving cloud
structures both upstream and over the mountain ranges. The results will also
have application to non orographic systems where the transitions in
microphysical processes with distance are not as abrupt.

The broader impacts of the proposed research are significant. The proposed
research has direct relevance to the effective management of water resources in
mountainous regions, since polarization radars will be used in the future in the
United States and internationally, to measure precipitation. The research will
contribute directly toward understanding precipitation processes over the
European Alps and the Oregon Cascades. In both these regions, water resources
are closely tied to orographic precipitation. Forecast model developers will use
the results of this research to evaluate precipitation parameterizations and
improve the prediction of precipitation in mountainous regions. This is
important since accurate prediction of precipitation can reduce the economic
impacts of frequent heavy precipitation events that often produce catastrophic
floods. The research will also lead to a better interpretation of polarization
radar data, which will be important both in the United States and in other
countries as polarization radars become operational and products become
available to forecasters and the public.