* 0438338
* Symposium for Engineering Entrepreneurship Educators
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2007
* Stephen Schiffman, Babson College
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2007
* USD 599,128.00

0438338&lt;br/&gt;Fetters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Babson College
to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal was
submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include Babson
College (Lead Institution), Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering, Sloan
Consortium for Online learning, Roundtable on Entrepreneurship Education for
Scientists and Engineers at Stanford University, Geo-Centers, Inc., Jackson
State University, Hampton University, Salish Kootenai
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective is to educate engineering
faculty about how to teach and apply entrepreneurship as a core feature of
engineering education. The program will result in the production of engineering
graduates who not only develop innovative ideas, but who will transform their
innovations into the companies, products, systems and services that drive the
national economy through the creation of wealth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed program is patterned after the successful symposium for
entrepreneurship educators, which has been in existence at Babson College for
the past 20 years. Olin College of Engineering, the partner institution, was
founded to provide a learner-centered engineering education. Entrepreneurial
thinking is integrated throughout the curriculum, a unique feature in
engineering education. The two institutions are therefore ideally suited to
develop a program to teach engineering faculty how to teach and apply
entrepreneurship as part of engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Sloan Foundation will provide a quality on-line education component and also
disseminate information about the proposed program to the 680 institutions that
are part of the Sloan Consortium. An important feature of the program is to
enhance the participation of underrepresented groups in technology. Historically
Black colleges and Tribal colleges will also be partners in this program. The
faculty from these colleges will be the first invitees to the Symposium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People in SBIR-funded firms will team with engineering
faculty in the Symposium in order to enhance the start-up and progress of new
ventures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge creation through innovation must be
carried forward by the entrepreneurial process to secure a positive economic
impact on our society. The program will result in the production of engineering
graduates who not only develop innovative ideas, but who will transform their
innovations into the companies, products, systems and services that drive the
national economy through the creation of wealth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the transformation of engineering
education curricula to include the teaching of entrepreneurship and in the
introduction of the teaching partner-pair concept into engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity concentrate
on education and training of current and future entrepreneurs. There is a strong
emphasis on involvement of underrepresented groups. Two historically black
colleges and universities (HBCUs) and one Native American university are
partners.&lt;br/&gt;