* 0438266
* SGER/GOALI/Collaborative Research: Forecasting and Proactive Management of Obsolescence for Sustainment-Dominated Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Janis Terpenny, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 07/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)/Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI)/Collaborative Research project is to explore how
industry and academia can collaborate to determine how multiple sources of
resources can be combined to impact proactive obsolescence of electronic parts
through forecasting and management. One of the most significant problems facing
many "high-tech" sustainment-dominated systems is technology obsolescence, and
no technology typifies the problem more clearly than electronic part
obsolescence. It is expected that substantial savings in resources are possible
if methods of forecasting through obsolescence-driven life cycle planning of
products were developed and applied. &lt;br/&gt;This project will involve three
high risk, high impact activities:&lt;br/&gt;1) Forecasting electronic part
obsolescence by predicting the date of discontinuance under uncertainty of
social, political, economic, and environmental factors.&lt;br/&gt;2) Determine
the best mitigation approach upon obsolescence, and&lt;br/&gt;3) Manage the
redesign of systems based upon the forecast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact is the expectation that longer term cost avoidance can be a more
significant driver in economic decision-making if the forecasting lowers the
uncertainty and risk. This is a high risk activity because of the inherent
complexity is integrating across social and technological models for a sector
such as the electronics sector.