* 0438177
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Los Chinos:  Architecture, Power, and Meaning at an Initial Period Site in the Moche Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2007
* Vincas Steponaitis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 01/31/2007
* USD 12,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Under the supervision of Dr. Vincas P. Steponaitis, John Pleasants
will analyze data gathered during his archaeological study of the Initial Period
site of Los Chinos (1800 - 900 B.C.). This site is located in the Moche Valley
on the Peruvian north coast, and is notable for its well preserved monumental
architecture, which includes a multi-level stone mound approximately 12 meters
high. Of the four Initial Period sites containing monumental architecture in the
Moche Valley, Los Chinos and two others have received only cursory attention.
Pleasants research focuses on understanding the chronology, function, and nature
of socio-political complexity (social inequality and political centralization)
at Los Chinos. The methodology includes: (1) Surface collection of artifacts;
(2) topographic survey, analysis of spatial data, and mapping; (3) excavation of
selected architectural features; and (4) analysis of recovered artifacts. A
detailed chronology for Los Chinos will clarify whether it existed
contemporarily with the other Initial Period sites. This is important for
understanding the regional political organization. Chronology will be
established through analysis of ceramics and radiocarbon datable material
recovered from room excavations on the top three levels of the main mound and
the main plaza; examination of architectural stratigraphy; and comparison of
architectural characteristics to other sites with known chronologies. The main
mound is the key to understanding site function, and excavations will focus on
the top three levels which contain a multi-room summit structure and two small
plazas each flanked by multiple rooms and a stone platform. Evidence of function
will come from excavations of selected rooms, stairways, and the summit
structure facade. Understanding the function of this site will increase current
knowledge about its local and regional role in the Moche
Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the Initial Period in the Moche Valley
dramatic cultural changes occurred in subsistence strategies, demography,
population size, and socio-political complexity. Understanding the nature and
evolution of socio-political complexity at Los Chinos will contribute greatly to
the knowledge about the development of civilization in this region during this
Period. Pleasants will use excavation and topographic survey and mapping to
gather evidence of socio-political complexity such as manipulation of
visibility; physical access patterns; the form of rituals; access to ritual; the
control of labor, and the techniques of any rebuilding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond these intellectual merits, this research can be
used to promote teaching, training, and learning through incorporation into
courses such as Andean Archaeology and State Formation. Also, it will lay the
foundation for future research at this site, and can provide valuable training
in the above archaeological methods and technology for the author as well as
other graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt; Public visibility of
archaeological data, field notes, and results of this research will be shared in
the form of web sites, presentations at technical conferences, and published
works. Finally, the research at the Los Chinos site should promote a positive
working relationship between the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
the Instituto Nacional de Cultura in Lima and Trujillo, the Peruvian
archaeological community, and the local community near the Los Chinos site. The
resulting knowledge about the Initial Period in the Moche Valley could be
incorporated into the teaching curriculums of schools and universities in Peru
and the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;