* 0438582
* Florida's First Coast Manufacturing Innovation Partnership
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,06/30/2011
* Neal Coulter, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2011
* USD 696,001.00

0438582&lt;br/&gt;Cox&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the University of
North Florida to support the activity described below for 36 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include University of North Florida (Lead Institution), Armor Holdings, Dura
Automotive, Florida Machine Works, Predator Products, The Ronco Group, Lorenz
Surgical, Cornerstone Regional Development Partnership, Fresh Ministries, and
First Coast Manufacturers Association.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives are to establish a Manufacturing Innovation Partnership (MIP) Program
with two primary goals: (1) to develop a shared design and manufacturing center
providing resources for the local manufacturing and design companies to aid in
the economic and technical development of the Northeast Florida Region, also
referred to as Florida's First Coast, and (2) to improve the technical education
and preparation of the future workforce in the region. The focus of the MIP
Program with the shared design and manufacturing resource center is to create an
environment that fosters innovations in current and new products, processes,
and/or systems through project-centered manufacturing and design activities of
mutual benefit to regional industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The activity will create a more competitive,
prosperous company in the region in a stronger position to create high-
technology jobs. In turn, the experiences gained by the student participants in
the MIP Program create another broader impact of a more scientifically and
technologically literate workforce trained with relevance to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project will result
from creating an environment that fosters innovations in current and new
products, processes, and/or systems through project-centered manufacturing and
design activities of mutual benefit to regional industry and academia. The
outcomes of the project-centered activities are in the areas of design and
manufacturing that increase the competitiveness of the partner company through
innovation. Of primary significance is that the majority of the company sites
that participate in areas of common interest are likely to be small with less
than 50 employees. Small companies often lack the staff and resources to develop
advanced design and manufacturing solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the activity concentrate on catalyzing the growth and success of
manufacturing companies in the region. Workforce development, including
connections and mentorship programs at the high school level should help with
workforce and diversity issues. The partnership seeks to attract and retain
engineering students to serve the local economy, with particular focus on inner
city high schools. The extensive assessment metrics are important and necessary
for sustainability and for application of innovation transfer processes in other
areas.&lt;br/&gt;