* 0438741
* SCI: Delivering Cyberinfrastructure:  From Vision to Reality
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2009
* Richard Moore, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Barry I. Schneider
* 06/30/2009
* USD 65,316,070.00

Cyberinfrastructure refers to the ability to access and integrate today's
hardware, software, and human &lt;br/&gt;information technology resources in
order to facilitate science and engineering goals. This proposal
&lt;br/&gt;describes a plan of action for building and delivering
cyberinfrastructure. The efforts of the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC)
will focus on the provisioning of a deeply integrated environment,
&lt;br/&gt;which coordinates hardware, software, and human resources to engage
and support users, and the &lt;br/&gt;development of critical infrastructure to
drive research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SDSC activities will have
particular focus on building the data cyberinfrastructure so critical to
&lt;br/&gt;managing, understanding, and gaining knowledge from today's deluge of
data. The Center will also focus on building the community for
cyberinfrastructure: extending the reach of researchers and educators through
deep collaborations, professional-level services and software, large-scale data
management and &lt;br/&gt;computational facilities, and the engagement and
support of new communities of social scientists and &lt;br/&gt;computer
scientists who can play an important role in cyberinfrastructure as process-
builders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyberinfrastructure extends the reach of
researchers and educators past the capabilities, challenges, and
&lt;br/&gt;limitations of their home environment.. Cyberinfrastructure provides
a vehicle for accessing additional &lt;br/&gt;infrastructure that benefits users
significantly in their research and education efforts. SDSC will be a core
&lt;br/&gt;resource for cyberinfrastructure through highly valued, applied, and
multi-disciplinary expertise and &lt;br/&gt;community leadership; large-scale
data and computational resources; and robust, professional,
user-&lt;br/&gt;focused software. SDSC will provide: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o A
broad spectrum of cyberinfrastructure software and services that enable users to
coordinate &lt;br/&gt;available technological tools in their home environment
with the larger landscape of cyberinfrastructure resources and impact their
science efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o A Synthesis Center in partnership with
the California Institute for Telecommunications and &lt;br/&gt;Information
Technology (Cal-IT2) [1] for leveraging infrastructure across projects and
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;o Intensive strategic collaboration projects among
domain scientists and computer scientists that &lt;br/&gt;bridge science and
technology goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o An Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
Laboratory that will be a flexible environment to support research, development,
experimentation, and evaluation with cyberinfrastructure technology and tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o A comprehensive Integrated Data Cyberinfrastructure to
serve a broad class of existing and emerging data-oriented users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The customers and beneficiaries of cyberinfrastructure are
its users, and the ultimate metric of success &lt;br/&gt;for cyberinfrastructure
is the ability to focus on the challenges of the science rather than the
challenges of &lt;br/&gt;the tools in driving new discovery. SDSC will build and
deliver key services, infrastructure, and &lt;br/&gt;innovations that will
enhance the ultimate success of cyberinfrastructure. Together with a community
of &lt;br/&gt;collaborators including the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA), TeraGrid/ETF, &lt;br/&gt;project-focused community efforts,
and a broad group of domain scientists, engineers and computer
&lt;br/&gt;scientists, SDSC will provide a cohesive combination of expertise,
hardware, and software to facilitate the &lt;br/&gt;transformation of the
cyberinfrastructure vision into reality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;