* 0438463
* Self-Assembly of a Novel Organogel and Applications to Nanostructured Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Gary McPherson, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2008
* USD 349,529.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;CTS-0438463&lt;br/&gt;Vijay T. John/ Gary L.
McPherson&lt;br/&gt;Tulane University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-Assembly of a
Novel Organogel and Applications to Nanostructured Materials
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental and applied Nano-
Technology research to develop a new class of self-assembled organogels that
spontaneously form when an anionic surfactant (AOT) dissolved in a nonpolar
solvent is contacted with the suitable phenol. There has been significant recent
research interest in designing small molecule gelators that form polymer-like
networks in nonpolar solvents through non-covalent interactions. Such gels have
tremendous potential as templates for materials synthesis in applications such
as nanostructured membranes, as potential field responsive materials for sensor
development, and in environmental applications related to containing organic
spills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's earlier work has indicated that the
AOT+phenol organogel system appears to be made up of three levels of self-
assembly, from strands to fibers and thence to fiber assemblies. The proposed
work seeks to understand the transition from inverse micelles of the anionic
surfactant, to the gel state, upon doping with the phenolic component. This will
be done through a full range of experimental techniques involving FTIR and NMR
spectroscopy, neutron, x-ray and light scattering, differential scanning
calorimetry, atomic force and electron microscopy, and rheology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's then propose to develop these organogels as
templates for materials synthesis. By polymerizing the solvent phase, we will be
able to generate nanostructured materials. They will be able to incorporate
functional nanoparticles (luminescent and/or magnetic) into the gel strands to
prepare new field responsive materials with possible erasable signatures. In all
these applications, we will exploit the novel properties of the gel (1) its
ability to spontaneously form by direct contact of the anionic surfactant and
the phenol, and (2) the ability to very easily destroy the gel template by
washing with water, thus breaking the AOT-phenol hydrogen bonding responsible
for gelation, once the materials synthesis is done. The research may lead to new
and simple methods for thin film membranes containing functional and field
responsive materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts &lt;br/&gt;The
project will provide excellent interdisciplinary training for both
undergraduates and graduate students. The combination of spectroscopy,
microscopy and scattering techniques that the students will be exposed to will
be an invaluable research experience. Tulane operates a unique Coordinated
Instrumentation Facility where centralized instrumentation and expertise allow
excellent student training. The project investigators are fully committed to
providing educational opportunities, and have a strong record of working towards
such objectives with formalized programs such as the Louisiana Alliance for
Minority Participation in Research (LAMP). The research is the continuation of
collaboration at Tulane that has produced several Ph.D. graduates and has
provided undergraduate research experience to over 10 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, the proposed research
results may have applications to the development of novel nanostructured
membranes and sensors. Rather than focus on a specific short-term application,
the proposal is written to develop concepts that have implications in long-range
technology development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;