* 0438607
* Finger Lakes New Knowledge Fusion: Unique Collaboration for Economic Impact
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2006,02/28/2009
* Robert Seem, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2009
* USD 600,000.00

0438607 Seem

This award is to Cornell University to support the activity described below for
36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-04556).

Partners The partners include Cornell University (Lead Institution); New York
State Agricultural Experiment Station, Geneva, NY; Cornell Agriculture and Food
Technology Park Corporation, Geneva, NY; Infotonics Center for Technology,
Canandaigua, NY; Finger Lakes Workforce Investment Board, Geneva, NY; and
Ontario County Office of Economic Development, Canandaigua, NY. In addition, the
collaborating institutions include Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY;
Metropolitan Development Agency of Central New York, Syracuse, NY; Finger Lakes
Institute; Hobart & William Smith Colleges, Geneva, NY; Rochester Institute of
Technology, Rochester, NY; The Trillium Group, LLC, Penfield, NY; High Tech
Rochester, Rochester, NY; New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets,
Albany, NY; NY Agri Development Corp., Syracuse, NY; Cornell Cooperative
Extension, Canandaigua, NY; BirdsEye Foods; Constellation Wines US; CY Farms;
Red Jacket Orchards;and Wegmans.

The primary objective of the proposal follows. The Finger Lakes Region of New
York State, bounded by Syracuse to the east, Rochester to the west, and Ithaca
to the south, is ready to emerge from its lagging economic development by
exploiting the intellectual power resident in its many institutions of higher
education and the strong desire to keep innovations arising from these
institutions within the region. This is technology-based economic development.
This proposal addresses the need by making a unique blend of disparate
technologies that rarely meet, but have great potential to generate innovation
when they do. The first set of technologies are agriculture and food, and is
embodied in the translational research carried out by the New York State
Agricultural Experiment Station which supports a wide range of research for the
horticulture and food industries in New York State. The second technology set
consists of photonics, microsystems and imaging, embodied by the industry-
initiated Center of Infotonics Technology, a New York State Center for
Excellence. Such a fusion will create innovation.

Potential Economic Impact

The proposed effort will create the support systems that insure this innovation
will find a home within the region to anchor, be nurtured, and grow. This
support consists of business and legal services for start-up businesses, capital
funding sources for new ventures, commercialization support for new
technologies, a well-prepared workforce to support the innovations, and a well-
educated community that will welcome the businesses producing the innovations.
Because there is region-wide excitement about technology-based economic
development, with the creation of initial successes expected from this grant,
the region will embrace sustained activity in technology fusion. The
investigators will share our successful approach with other regions that want to
replicate the success.

The intellectual merit of the project follows. This is a novel proposal to
address the need for cross-institutional, cross-disciplinary research, fusing
disparate technology areas to create innovation. It is a very aggressive
partnership that is unified by the overall goal of community education and
economic diversification.

The broader impacts of the activity follow. The impacts of this project are
extensive -- covering rural populations, citizens (an oft neglected
constituency!), high school teachers and administrators, community colleges,
higher education, economic development organizations and all parts of the
private sector. This proposal has the potential to affect a large physical area,
large population and diverse population with an innovate approach to knowledge
and technology fusion -- interdisciplinary work harnessed to create economic
diversification opportunities.