* 0438111
* Growth and Characterization of Wide-Bandgap Self-Assembled Quantum Dots for Optoelectronic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Russell Dupuis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2005
* USD 73,482.00

This FRG project is a collaborative effort between researchers at U. TX, Austin,
Harvard U., and U. VA. The project addresses materials science based approaches
to achieving high-performance laser diodes in the high-energy visible region:
(1) growth and characterization of III-P-based wide-bandgap self-assembled
quantum dots(SAQD) composed of direct-bandgap ternary alloys, e.g., InxGa1-xP on
GaAs substrates, and (2) growth of InxAl1-xP ( x = 0.6 to ~1.0) quantum dots on
GaP substrates. These SAQD materials and lasers will be studied to generate the
basic knowledge required to optimize such structures for optoelectronic
applications such as light sources emitting in the green and yellow spectral
regions for full-color laser displays, sources for holographic memory storage,
and high-speed light sources for low-cost plastic-fiber-based optical
communications systems. The research strives for fundamental insight into the
physics of two-dimensionally confined systems in III-V materials. The growth and
properties of III-phosphide quantum dots will be explored and the control of
strain will be employed to develop an understanding of the growth of uniform QD
arrays. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in
a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance.
Experimental tools are now available to allow atomic level observation of
elementary surface processes which when better understood allow advances in
fundamental science and technology. The results of this work may allow a new
level of reliable control of materials growth, allowing semiconductor devices
with reproducible properties to be attained in a variety of academic and
commercial settings. An important feature of the program is the integration of
research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. The project involves the collaborative work of
students and faculty in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Physics, and
Materials.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;