* 0438866
* SoD: Data and Meta-Data Integration Maintenance
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Lise Getoor, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2009
* USD 610,200.00

This research project focuses on developing a data integration and
transformation process that supports maintainability, adaptability, and
evolution. Data integration systems are software systems that permit the
transformation, integration, and exchange of structured data that has been
designed and developed independently. The often subtle and complex
interdependencies within data can make the creation, maintenance, and use of
such systems quite challenging. The PI, with the collaborator Renee Miller
(University of Toronto) have available a robust arsenal of tools and mechanisms
for reconciling semantic differences in how data is represented including views,
mappings, and transformation languages. The major focus is on the maintenance of
the metadata necessary to achieve semantic integration and sharing of data. This
project develops an integration and transformation process that is designed for
evolution. The research will develop a new theory of metadata discovery and
adaptation based on modern statistical learning and a new theory of the data
integration process, that supports not only automation, but also
maintainability, adaptability and evolution. The major contribution of this
research will be the development of a design process that supports robust data
sharing, an crucial aspect in the Science of Design. As part of the broader
impacts of this work, the expected results will contribute to an enhanced
infrastructure for research by developing a benchmark for schema and mapping
discovery and management tasks. The research results and the benchmark that will
be accessible on the project Web site (http:/www.cs.umd.edu/~getoor/sod) to
facilitate dissemination of knowledge and tools to a variety of scientific
communities. The methods developed in this project will be of particular value
to scientists who routinely need to gather, manage, and integrate diverse data
sets. The researchers also plan to partner with industry collaborators in order
to learn from and address industry needs, receive feedback, and facilitate
technology transfer.