* 0438356
* Additive Mediated Nucleation and Growth during Electrodeposition:     High-throughput Experiments and Multiscale Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2005,02/29/2008
* Richard Alkire, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 02/29/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Abstract

Proposal Title: Additive Mediated Nucleation and Growth during
Electrodeposition: High-Throughput Experiments and Multiscale Simulation

Proposal Number: CTS-0438356

Principal Investigator: Richard C. Alkire and Richard D. Braatz

Institution: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Analysis (rationale for decision):

New applications in materials, medicine, and computers are being discovered
where precise control of events at multiple scales is critical to product
quality. The particular focus for research is on events that control behavior at
the solid-liquid interface during nucleation and growth of electrodeposited
metal clusters and films in the presence of solution additives. Although
additives play a central role at the atomic scale, the primary manipulation of
these events during manufacturing processes occurs at macroscopic length scales.
This proposal addresses the challenge of replacing trial-and-error
experimentation and design, with a multiscale approach that spans from the
atomistic scale to the macroscopic process scale.

The intellectual merit of the work is to understand of how nucleation and early
stages of deposit growth are influenced by trace quantities of solution
additives during electrodeposition of metals, and to incorporate that knowledge
in multiscale simulations "from molecules to processes." The proposal addresses
how small-scale surface interactions guide spontaneous self-organization, how to
design and control systems which include uncertainties in the physicochemical
mechanisms as well as in values of parameters, and how to insure quality control
at multiple scales in manufacturing. This proposal takes strategic advantage of
high end computing in order to provide a re-usable approach that has the
potential for contributing well beyond the specific applications considered here
in its development. The specific contributions include (a) a novel high-
throughput experimental method for characterizing nucleation and growth, (b)
linked stochastic/continuum multiscale simulations, (c) computational analysis
tools for comparing experiment and theory, and (d) integration of the foregoing
tools to accommodate the rapid advancement of physical knowledge and its
transfer into innovative technological applications.



