* 0438472
* Alliance For Innovative Nursing Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2006
* Alexia Green, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2006
* USD 599,952.00

This award is to Texas Tech University Health Science Center to support the
activity described below for 24 months. The proposal was submitted in response
to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-04556).

Partners The partners include Texas Tech University HSC (Lead Institution),
Austin Community College, City of Lubbock, Texas, University Medical Center
County Hospital, WorkSource of the South Plains, WorkSource One-Stop Centers,
Greater Austin@Work, Capital Area Workforce Development Board, Rural Capital
Area Workforce Development Board, American State Bank, Covenant Health System,
HealthStream, Lubbock Heart Hospital, Seton Healthcare Network, St. David's
Healthcare Partnership, Lubbock Chamber of Commerce, Lubbock Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce, Lubbock African American Chamber of Commerce, TTU College of Education

Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center and Austin Community College are
initiating an Alliance for Innovation in Nursing Education, a strategic
partnership effort to improve the response to the national shortage of nurses.
The Alliance is specifically designed to build collaborations among educational
institutions, employers and the public workforce system, focusing on Central and
West Texas. The purpose of the Alliance is to support models (prototypes) that
operationally demonstrate how innovation in nursing education can more
efficiently and effectively meet the needs of our health care system, while
effectively assisting individuals to enter the nursing profession and migrate up
a career ladder.

Potential Economic Impact The proposed innovations will expand the local nursing
workforce system's capacity to be market-driven, responsive to local economic
needs, and a contributor to the health and economic well being of the West and
Central Texas communities.

The intellectual merit of the project follows. The proposed activity is very
important and the methodology for enhancing numbers of nursing students using
web-based, accelerated didactic tools. This proposal has two interdependent
goals: increase the nursing workforce in rural Texas and, in so doing, increase
minority participation and diversity to reflect shifts in population
demographics. The proposed activity will enable individuals who already possess
a B.S. degree (in any field and with a GPA > 3.0 with specific emphasis on
science GPA > 3.0), who have completed a course in pathophysiology, and who are
certified as a nursing assistant to participate in a web-based, accelerated
(12-month) baccalaureate nursing program. This proposed project is grounded in
good educational principles and offers a reasonable alternative for busy working
adults in fields other than nursing.

The broader impacts of the activity follow. The proposal comes at a time when
there is a real shortage of nursing students and nursing educators. The Alliance
partnership will expand the local nursing workforce system's capacity to be
market-driven, responsive to local economic needs, and a contributor to the
health and economic well being of the West and Central Texas communities. The
proposed effort will increase minority participation and diversity to reflect
shifts in population demographics in the region. The opportunities for
dislocated workers and/or underrepresented groups, particularly Hispanics, will
be enormous. If successful, this activity can be emulated in other sparsely
populated regions of the country.