* 0438201
* Collaborative Research: Tropical Marine Climate Feedback to Mid- and High-Latitude Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Ping Chang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/2008
* USD 307,012.00

This project will further research into the potential extratropical controls of
the marine Intertropical Convergence Zone and consequences to the tropical
marine climate and global climate. The working hypothesis is that the marine
tropics are sensitive to extratropical influences, in particular through
mechanisms similar to those controlling interannual variability of the Atlantic
Intertropical Convergence Zone. Four specific questions are identified: What are
the mechanisms of the extratropical communication to the tropics from changes to
extratropical ice and topography? What are the tropical thermodynamic and
dynamic ocean-atmosphere feedbacks to this linkage (e.g., the tropical Pacific
annual cycle and El Nino-Southern Oscillation)? What are the resulting global
climate impacts to the tropical feedback? What are the potential applications of
this study to past and future climate change scenarios? These investigations
will primarily be pursued as model studies using the Community Climate Model,
version 3, coupled to various simplified surface ocean configurations, including
a reduced-gravity tropical ocean model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
collaborative effort between research groups at the University of California,
Berkeley and Texas A&amp;M. Two graduate students and a postdoctoral associate
will receive support, and the project will provide opportunities for
undergraduate research. Advances in the understanding of abrupt climate change
are anticipated from this work.