* 0438646
* Improving Mathematics Achievement in K-8 students with Systemic Use of Proximal Assessment Data
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Madhabi Chatterji, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 05/31/2008
* USD 501,945.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will implement and study a model for
building the capacity of a school district to make systemic use of data so that
teachers and school-based instructional leaders can develop the know-how, tools,
and support systems to assess, quantify, analyze, isolate, diagnose, and take
actions to shape the mathematics achievement in struggling students. Capacity-
building opportunities will be provided through district-level workshops; formal
university-based coursework in assessment, evaluation, and data-based decision-
making culminating in certificates and graduate degrees; internship; and on-site
coaching activities. Technology will be incorporated in the form of existing
distance learning courses and web-based instructional modules, as well as
school/classroom data management systems that support proximal instructional
decisions by tracking process-outcome relationships. The focus will be on
mathematics teaching and learning, particularly on addressing achievement gaps.
The partners are Teachers College Columbia University (home institution of the
PI and Co-PI) and East Ramapo School District, New York, along with qualified
consultants in mathematics education and technology and a distinguished advisory
panel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project deliberately focuses on one bounded
school system to authentically implement and evaluate a systemic model of
intervention delivery. The pilot intervention will aim to demonstrate proof of
concept using a 3-year timeline. The research program for the pilot intervention
will have two phases. The formative phase (Years 1-2) will aim to develop,
field-test and fine-tune new and existing instructional materials, prototypes,
and delivery models for the intervention, including necessary instrumentation to
monitor field processes and outcomes. The summative phase (Year 3), will
formally document process-outcome relationships, initial impact, replicability,
and costs of implementing the formatively-tested intervention, using treatment
and comparison cohorts of teachers and students at the partner
district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How well teachers align instruction and assessment
to mathematics content standards, adapt instruction to meet the developmental
needs of diverse students, and monitor student learning at the local level are
factors well-supported by research as impacting student performance.
Particularly, achievement gap-reducing schools and teachers have been found to
make better use of data for making specific changes in their day-to-
day&lt;br/&gt;practices. To foster change within organizations, many have
pointed towards a need for decision-oriented evaluation approaches and for
"mainstreaming" evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will pilot-test, refine, and
eventually, replicate a model involving university-school system collaborations
that could potentially serve the northeastern region of the U.S. The ultimate
aim will be to develop exportable materials, tools, support systems that can be
implemented widely in a subsequent scale-up phase at other schools and district
sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;