* 0438245
* US-Africa Planning Visit: Collaborations in Cultural Astronomy
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Charles Brown, National Society of Black Physicists
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 9,558.00

Holbrook 0438245&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports planning activities to
develop an international collaboration that investigates the linkages between
Islamic astronomy and West African indigenous astronomy. Because Islamic
astronomy preserved and improved ancient astronomy and has a clear history of
diffusion into Europe during the Middle Ages, it is recognized as having
contributed to advances in astronomy during the European Renaissance. Muslim
traders began working in West Africa by the tenth century, settled into
communities as the merchant class, and came into contact with indigenous culture
and beliefs. The U.S. researchers (Drs. Holbrook and Brown) will collaborate
with Dr. Urama Johnson of the University of Nigeria, Nsukka and Dr. Thebe Medupe
from the South African Astronomical Observatory and North West University, South
Africa, to study indigenous African astronomy in search of evidence of adoptions
from Islamic astronomy. The team will examine studies of West African cultures
and their cultural astronomy and will develop a lexicon of items from Islamic
astronomy to search for within West African cultural astronomy. They will
identify Arabic words among indigenous astronomy terms and identify uniquely
Islamic astronomy concepts that may have diffused to the local population. The
lexicon is expected to be different from that used for Europe because most West
African cultures did not use formal writing systems unless they adopted Arabic
script. The preliminary study will target the Hausa of Nigeria, who have adopted
part of the Islamic calendar, and scientific documents written in Arabic that
have been found in Mali. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning visit is intended
to strengthen international collaborations between U.S. and African researchers.
The project team is gender diverse, and includes both African and African
American researchers, as well as junior faculty. The team plans to include
university students from Africa and North America in their research efforts. The
collaborators will incorporate their research results into lessons for physics,
astronomy, and social science classes and for K-12 outreach groups. The findings
of the planned project will be published both in academic journals as well as in
popular magazines geared toward advancing the understanding of science. This
award is cofunded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
Science and Technology Studies Program in the Division of Social and Economic
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;