* 0438447
* BE MUSES:Decision Support for Urban Development: Air Quality, Social Justice, Material, and Energy and the Impact of Social Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Nancy Grimm, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2006
* USD 121,324.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BE/MUSES: Decision-support for Urban Development: Air
Quality, social Justice, Material and energy and the Impact of Social Decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this BE/MUSES planning grant will be
to create a prototype tool that integrates air pollution models, material and
energy flow analyses, and an urban development model. The ultimate outcome is
aimed at developing decision support tools for environmental management of urban
systems. Such tools are expected to encourage planners to choose more renewable
resources and reduce waste generation, with the ultimate goal of reducing the
environmental impacts of the built environment during rapid urbanization. The
research is to explore the urban funnel concept with urban metabolism metrics
and visualization tools, while calibrating and validating UrbanSim, a model that
predicts urban growth by simulating the interaction of social-decision-making,
land development and transportation activities. The goal is also to predict
spatial and temporal distribution of major air pollutants, as well as
sustainability metrics such as water usage and solid waste generation.
Collaboration with a regional planning agency that works with Greater Phoenix
municipalities will provide assessment of the models developed. Broader impacts
include education for graduate and undergraduate students as well as outreach to
K-12 students and teachers, the general public, and urban planners in the
Phoenix area. This planning award is co-managed by Robert O'Connor in SES / SBE
and Tom Waite in BES / ENG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;