* 0438765
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Modelling and Interrogation of Cancellous Bone
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2005,04/30/2009
* Shangyou Zhang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2009
* USD 22,500.00

This proposal requests funding for a US-France cooperative research project
modeling cancellous bone and then testing these models against ultrasound data.
The US team, led by Robert Gilbert of the University of Delaware, is comprised
of applied mathematicians with expertise in modeling, differential equations,
and inverse problems. The French team, with participants at Institute de la
Sante et de la Recherche Medicale (INSERM) and Ondes Elastiques: Problemes
Directs et Inverses (OEPDI) are experimentalists and will test the models that
are generated by the American team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical methodology utilized will be the theory of
homogenization, inverse problems, and inverse homogenization. The American
research team is planning to address the problems representing two major
mathematical challenges in biology, namely homogenization of evolution equations
of biological tissue involving nonlinear modeling rates of the trabeculae, and
the correlation of trabeculae microstructure with the analysis of the ultrasound
response of the composite bone matrix. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This award is a collaboration leveraging the expertise in
mathematical modeling of the US participants, the expertise in diagnostic and
therapeutic applications of ultrasound of the French INSERM participants, and
the expertise in asymptotic, numerical, and experimental methods of the French
OEPDI participants. Outcome of this work will be useful for understanding,
treating, and preventing osteoporosis, a growing problem in the US. The
collaboration will further the research and global training of a graduate
student.