* 0438545
* Beyond Evaluation Use:  Determining the Effect of Individual Project Participation on the Influence of STEM Overall Program Evaluations
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2009
* Jean King, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 11/30/2009
* USD 737,168.00

The project is designed to contrast the type and scope of influence of different
approaches to program evaluation in order to increase the field's understanding
of how evaluation results are used when evaluations are conducted for a large
agency with both national and local implications. The project is grounded in two
theoretical bases: 1) evaluation use, and 2) participation in evaluation. These
are based on the theoretical work of Kirkhart, Greene, Gary and Mark, Patton,
Burke, King and Lawrenz and Huffman. The primary theory of evaluation use is
Kirkhart's three-dimensional influence of evaluation model - source of influence
(process or&lt;br/&gt;results), intention (intended and unintended), and time
(immediate, end-of-cycle, or long-term). Participation in evaluation draws on a
continuum of Lawrenz and Huffman bounded by program evaluation conducted by an
entity separate from the projects within the program to one when where the
projects independently determine the evaluation procedures and what data to
collect. &lt;br/&gt;`&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will investigate the
continuum of participation and how it relates to use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research questions are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) What patterns of participation
exist in large, multi-site evaluation?&lt;br/&gt;2)) To what extent do different
levels of project participation in program evaluations result in different
patterns of evaluation use?&lt;br/&gt;3) What evaluation practices are most
directly related to enhancing the influence of
evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Case studies will be carried out of four NSF
Programs: ATE, LSC, CETP, and MSP RETAs. Within the case studies, methods will
include artifact analysis, interview, surveys and site visits.&lt;br/&gt;