* 0438100
* Collaborative Research: An Engineering Study for a Cabled Observatory on the Beaufort Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Dale Chayes, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2006
* USD 49,909.00

This SGER is one of three collaborative efforts to define the instrumentation,
sites and budget for a cabled observatory adjacent to the continental shelf of
the Beaufort Sea. FY04 federal legislation calls for building a Barrow Global
Climate Change Facility near Barrow, Alaska. As with cabled observatories
envisioned elsewhere, this is an unprecedented opportunity for continuous, real-
time access to the water column, the underside of sea ice and ocean bottom
sediments.

Planning for this facility has been proceeding for the past year, but the
emphasis has been nearly solely on the physical facility (i.e., the building).
Without dedicated planning to the science infrastructure being done soon, it is
possible that the best opportunity to undertake the best science in this venue
may be unrealized.

The methodology will be to first hold a workshop in Barrow, bringing together
oceanographers, seismologists, biologists, sea ice specialists, oil industry
representatives and educators. The focus will be a discussion of what
instrumentation would be necessary to study the Beaufort Shelf and adjacent
waters. The resulting report will form the basis for engineering studies that
would include preliminary plans for implementation. These plans would
concentrate on adaptation of technology being developed for other seafloor
observatories and how to exploit devices routinely deployed on moorings. A
second meeting would result in an engineering report, translating the original
science plan into a series of technical requirements for an Arctic seafloor
installation.

It should be noted in the area of "Broader Impacts" that this effort has been
extensively coordinated with key constituencies of the Barrow community, and is
endorsed by leaders of that community.

The three separate SGER proposals are: 0438100 Chayes, Dale Columbia University
0438102 Proshutinsky, Andrey Wood Hole Oceanographic Institution Chave, Alan
Detrick, Robert 0439107 Coakley, Bernard University of Alaska Fairbanks
Weingartner, Thomas

This combination of talents is both necessary and sufficient to complete the
tasks as proposed.

