* 0438715
* New Mexico-Chihuahua Partnership for Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2008
* Richard Hills, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2008
* USD 719,274.00

0438715&lt;br/&gt;Hills&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is New Mexico State
University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include New Mexico State University (Lead Institution), New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology (NMT), ,Universidad Autonoma de Ciudad Juarez (UACJ),
Tecnologico de Monterrey-Chihuahua (ITESM), the Chihuahua Trade Office (CTO),
the New Mexico Economic Development Department (NMEDD), Los Alamos and Sandia
National Laboratories (LANL and SNL), the Mesilla Valley Economic Development
Alliance (MVEDA), the Centro de Investigacion en Materiales Avanzados (CIMAV),
Centro de Investigacion en Alimentacion y Desarollo (CIAD), Asociacion de la
Industria Maquiladora de Chihuahua (Maquiladora Industry Association of
Chihuahua, Centro de Desarrollo de Proveedores, Chihuahua Trade Office, Colegio
de Ingenieros Mecanicos y Electricistas de Chihuahua, High Tech Consortium,
LaSys Inc., Mesilla Valley Economic Development Alliance, and Technology
Ventures Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective is to develop
an interdisciplinary, multi-faceted approach to educating emerging scientists
and technology managers in technology development, commercialization of
research, and marketing. This proposed project is unique and original that it
focuses on minority students, especially Hispanic, Latino and Native American,
to become involved in creating technology that is beneficial to the New Mexico-
Chihuahua border region, which has a very high poverty rate. These students will
make up design teams that will complete the testing phase of technology
development, using the laboratories and facilities of partner organizations as
feasible and they will enter in regional competitions to expose their concepts
to a broader audience. The students will also intern to gain firsthand knowledge
of the problems their host organizations are attempting to solve, and will also
serve as communication channels between the firms/organizations where they are
offered internships and the university/laboratory
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The effort
focuses on minority students, especially Hispanic, Latino and Native American,
to become involved in creating technology that is beneficial to the New Mexico-
Chihuahua border region, which has a very high poverty
rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is the
advancement of scientific knowledge and collaboration in technology transfer in
a region seeking greater economic development and struggling to mitigate the
artificial barriers to coordination of efforts created by a bi-national border.
The project will contribute to understanding of the special challenges to
international collaboration and possible solutions/best practices. The project
will also facilitate research on the technology commercialization process. More
needs to be known about the effectiveness of market strategies, incentive
structures, and strategic alliances that already exist. Such research will be
carried out in collaboration with the small businesses and student/faculty teams
that are partners in the proposed project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts of the activity concentrate on serving underrepresented groups and
making a huge impact in New Mexico and Chihuahua if successful. This project has
the potential for stimulating the depressed economies on both sides of the
border. The proposal has high possibility for success for underrepresented
groups and all institutions and organizations involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;