* 0438452
* A Distance Learning Master's Degree Program in Evaluation for the U.S. Affiliated Pacific
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2005,11/30/2006
* Ormond Hammond, Pacific Resources for Education and Learning
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 11/30/2006
* USD 299,679.00

Pacific Resources for Education and Learning (PREL), in collaboration with the
University of Hawaii, proposes to implement a master's degree program in
evaluation, delivered largely through distance learning technology, with an
initial cohort of culturally diverse students from the U.S. affiliated Pacific
region. In the fall of 2002, PREL received an exploratory research grant from
NSF to document the need and develop a plan for this program. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The program would incorporate a specialization in evaluation into an
existing master's degree program within the University of Hawaii College of
Education, Department of Educational Foundations. The program of study will
require completion of 30 credit hours over the course of 6 semesters. The two-
year program will consist of courses offered in a "hybrid
asynchronous/synchronous format" and is modeled after PREL's successful distance
learning Master of Science degree program in Instructional Technology and
Telecommunications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
increase the capacity of the Pacific region to conduct high quality, innovative,
and useful evaluations of educational programs, including science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. The project has the following objectives:
&lt;br/&gt;o to increase regional capacity to provide graduate training in
evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;o to increase the capacity of regional education agencies
to engage in high quality, &lt;br/&gt;innovative, and useful evaluations.
&lt;br/&gt;o to strengthen regional capacity to apply the results of program
evaluations in educational program and policy decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;