* 0438684
* National Partnership for Managing Upstream Innovation:     The Case of Nanoscience and Technology
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Alden Bean, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2009
* USD 719,010.00

0438684&lt;br/&gt;Bartley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to North Carolina
State University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include North Carolina State University (Lead Institution), Industrial Research
Institute (North Carolina State University-based group of 210 companies that
fund 75% of the industrial R&amp;D performed in the US), and Center for
Innovation and Management Studies (group of 60 researchers at North Carolina
State University). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives are to develop a
new conduit for flow of knowledge between national research enterprise and the
industrial corporations, to develop new methods to manage innovation to aid the
transition of the early stage science and technology into commercial value, to
disseminate the results of the partnership's outcomes and methods to a broad
range of user groups through regional education and outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
innovations include transfer of research and technology from the research
enterprise in the nano-science and engineering area to companies that are
capable of exploiting it to create products and businesses. The national
expenditure in nano-related science and engineering is estimated in the billions
of dollars, and the nation is not on track to meet expectations for trillions of
dollars in products and services owing to the difficulty in assessing the new
information and converting it into products. The proposed partnership will
investigate new methodologies to foster this
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project includes
formation of partnerships among academe, government, and the private sector to
foster high tech, research based innovation in the region. The partnership
includes university faculty and students, state, regional and local government,
and the business community (including venture fund companies). The workforce to
empower the innovation will be trained and educated in academic and outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity concentrate
on education and training of current and future entrepreneurs. There is a strong
emphasis on involvement of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;