* 0438803
* SGER:  CONNECTING THE PRIVATE TO THE PUBLIC:  NEW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES AND THE FUTURE OF PUBLIC LIFE
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Andrea Press, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2006
* USD 78,953.00

The project will investigate how the media, especially digital media, help
define the boundaries between private and public life. The main focus of the
project is a four month study, to be conducted Sept.-Dec. of 2004, of how 30
carefully selected subjects actually use various media to satisfy their private
consumption desires, engage public issues, and construct the boundaries between
the two. A second component of the project involves content analysis of a broad
range of popular internet sites to map the ways in which the connections between
public and private life are drawn. The study is timed to take advantage of the
increased societal concern with public issues associated with the 2004 U.S.
Presidential election, as well as the months immediately following when people
typically pay less attention to public life. The project will employ a
combination of qualitative ethnographic methods, as well as interpretive and
more formal content analyses of internet sites and subjects' media diaries.
Broader Impacts: There is a general perception within the research community
that the internet has yet to live up to its supposed potential for invigorating
democratic life. Voter turnout remains low; citizen engagement seems largely
unchanged. This project will provide information useful to policymakers as they
seek to develop ways of employing digital technologies for enhancing American
democratic life. It will shed light on how various technologies are likely to
actually be used by a wide range of citizens. The results will be of use to
those (including socially minded corporations conducting e-commerce) interested
in furthering civic engagement, by providing insights into how to better design
web sites and take advantage of the ways in which citizens use different types
of media to pursue public concerns. The project involves collaboration with
scholars from other disciplines in other countries that will cross-train student
researchers in political science, sociology, public policy, business, computer
science, and communication.