* 0438279
* Collaborative Proposal:    Large-Scale Optimization Strategies for Design under Uncertainty
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Lorenz Biegler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2009
* USD 250,833.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lorenz Biegler &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Carnegie Mellon University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0438279&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Collaborative Proposal: Large-Scale Optimization Strategies for
Design&lt;br/&gt;Under Uncertainty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimal design under unknown information is a key task in
process systems engineering. This project considers formulations that
incorporate two types of unknown information, uncertainty in the modeling
information and variability in the operation of the process. Uncertainty
requires an overdesign of the process so that it can operate over the entire
uncertainty range. On the other hand, variability can be mitigated through
effective control strategies. Nevertheless, both issues are present in most
engineering systems and must be confronted at the design stage. To address this
problem the PIs plan extend a two-stage formulation for design under uncertainty
and derive new optimization strategies for this formulation. A key component of
this proposal is the application of novel optimization algorithms, recently
developed by the investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach will be applied to a number of important
research problems in chemical processing, including modeling and optimization
for fuel cells, carbon nanotubes and CVD reactors for the manufacture of
semiconductors. In addition two important outreach activities
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Distribution of developed software to assess the
influence of uncertainty and variability in industrially-relevant
processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- An educational program for high school
students, undergraduates and high school teachers to recognize the impact of
uncertainty and process variability on process performance, economics, safety
and environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;