* 0438679
* Concrete Industry Management:  Accelerated Program Expansion (APEX)
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,10/31/2008
* Austin Cheney, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/2008
* USD 599,000.00

0438679 Cheatham

This award is to Middle Tennessee State University to support the activity
described below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the
Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-04556).

Partners The partners include Middle Tennessee State University (Lead
Institution), Tennessee Department of Transportation, American Concrete
Institute International, American Concrete Pavement Association, American
Society of Concrete Contractors, Concrete Foundations Association, Hanley Wood,
LLD, National Concrete Masonry Association, National Precast Concrete
Association, National Readymix Association, Portland Cement Association,
Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute, Primedia, Inc., and Tilt-up Concrete
Association.

The primary objective is to train technical concrete professionals who
understand both the chemistry of concrete mixtures and the concrete business.
The proposed activities will address the technical workforce needs in the
concrete industry. No other 4-year institution in the nation is addressing the
workforce needs for technically trained professionals within the concrete
industry. The goals include: (1) select two comprehensive universities with
strong engineering technology programs and potential for strong industry
partnerships; (2) create a Concrete Industry Management (CIM) program at each
institution, train faculty, administrators, and concrete professionals,
establish the CIM program complete with curriculum; and (3) assist the new
programs in developing a student-recruitment program and building strong
industry relationships. The four-year CIM curriculum will be based on science
and mathematics, with a heavy dose of business courses.

Potential Economic Impact

The concrete industry is a multi-faceted 130 billion dollar industry that is the
foundation of the 931 billion dollar construction industry. The concrete
industry includes ready-mix, masonry, pre-stressed, pre-cast, contracting
equipment manufacturing and materials suppliers to name a few. The concrete
industry employs approximately 2 million workers, ranging from low-skilled
laborers to PhD. Research scientists. The industry is making an effort to
modernize with technology insertion. The industry estimates that there are 1000
openings for managers with an engineering degree in concrete technology and a
knowledge of the business side of the industry. To date, approximately 50
graduates are produced per year from one institution. This effort will provide
two additional degree-granting institutions to provide the manpower needed to
support this industry and keep it competitive worldwide.

The intellectual merit of the project lies in the continued development of a
technical curriculum for the concrete industry with an appropriate mix of
business management courses, the involvement of industry representatives in
design of curriculum that continues to evolve with the increasingly technical
evolution of the industry.

The broader impacts of the activity concentrate on the education infrastructure
needed to sustain the concrete/construction industry, as well as providing a
diverse workforce.