* 0438909
* SoD: Incremental Design of Complex Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* H Jagadish, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2009
* USD 600,000.00

Often today, the tools used to design a small personal database are as complex
as the tools used to design enterprise-size information systems. This challenges
the human ability to deal effectively with the complex structures employed in
these tools. In addition, as the world gets increasingly networked, we find it
possible and desirable to access, and integrate information from multiple
autonomously created data stores. Even if each of these data stores individually
is simple, the entire collection may be very complex. Finally, information
stores persist over time, and our needs change over this period. In consequence,
the stores need to evolve with time, as do our queries of them. Information
systems must be designed to adapt to this change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops techniques for the incremental design of XML-based information
systems. Techniques are developed for the hierarchical decomposition of schemas
and through this, resolution of multiple incomplete schema specifications
considered as "views" of related information contexts. Automated techniques are
also developed for mapping these into XML schema that are both suited for
efficient query processing as well as being normalized to satisfy known
functional dependencies and avoid update anomalies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a formal conceptual basis for the design of complex
heterogeneous information systems. It also develops incremental techniques to
deal with evolutionary change over time, as well as with the merger (and loss)
of data stores. If successful, this project will greatly reduce the human effort
involved in the design and maintenance of information stores, particularly for
designers and users of information systems who may not be familiar with the
underlying technical details, such as domain experts who are interested in
bringing together information from many heterogeneous information sources and
whose information needs change rapidly. The likelihood of such impact will be
maximized by working closely with a group of biologists who will serve as local
users of the technology and provide feedback. The project Web site
http://www.eecs.umich.edu/~jag/design/ will be used to disseminate the results,
including software tools created in this project that we will make available
free of charge for academic use.&lt;br/&gt;