* 0438522
* SGER GOALI - Collaborative Research: Forecasting and Proactive Management of Obsolescence for Sustainment-Dominated Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Peter Sandborn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 09/30/2006
* USD 49,986.00

This GOALI SGER Collaborative project is to explore how industry and academia
can collaborate to determine how multiple sources of resources can be combined
to impact proactive obsolescence of electronic parts through forecasting and
management. One of the most significant problems facing many "high-tech"
sustainment-dominated systems is technology obsolescence, and no technology
typifies the problem more clearly than electronic part obsolescence. It is
expected that substantial savings in resources are possible if methods of
forecasting through obsolescence-driven life cycle planning of products were
developed and applied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve three
high risk, high impact activities:&lt;br/&gt;1) Forecasting electronic part
obsolescence by predicting the date of discontinuance under uncertainty of
social, political, economic, and environmental factors.&lt;br/&gt;2) Determine
the best mitigation approach upon obsolescence, and&lt;br/&gt;3) Manage the
redesign of systems based upon the forecast.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact is the
expectation that longer term cost avoidance can be a more significant driver in
economic decision-making if the forecasting lowers the uncertainty and risk.
This is a high risk activity because of the inherent complexity is integrating
across social and technological models for a sector such as the electronics
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;