* 0438749
* Upstream Hydrologic Effects of Dam Installation and Removal
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Keith Loague, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2008
* USD 297,099.00

0438749&lt;br/&gt;Loague&lt;br/&gt;The damming of a river causes profound
changes to the hydrologic and geomorphologic regime of the river. Dam removal, a
practice becoming increasingly common as our population of dams grows older, is
similarly expected to cause major changes to the manner in which water and
sediment move through the system. Dam construction causes a rise in base level
for the upstream catchment, resulting in altered streamflow depths and
velocities, higher water tables, and sediment deposition. In some cases the
presence of a dam brings about changes to the ecohydrology of the catchment,
including the creation of wetland ecosystems in the dam's immediate zone of
influence. Downstream of the dam channel morphology is affected by the reduction
in sediment load and the moderation of peak flows.&lt;br/&gt;This study proposes
to use a comprehensive hydrologic model to simulate the effects of dams and dam
removal on near surface hydrology and geomorphology. The model to be used, InHM,
is well suited to the task as it simulates 3D variably-saturated subsurface
fluid flow and 2D surface water flow using a fully-coupled approach. This makes
it ideal for studying groundwater- surface water interactions, such as those
caused by dams. As part of the research plan InHM is to be augmented with a
physically based multiple species sediment transport algorithm, allowing
simulation of upland erosion (both by rainsplash and overland flow), channel
transport, and reservoir deposition, as well as erosion of reservoir sediments
following dam removal. Driven by the fully-coupled hydraulics in the existing
InHM the sediment transport algorithm will provide more accurate sediment flux
estimates than models with simpler hydrologic underpinnings. The transport
algorithm will take into account the affects of armoring and cohesion caused by,
for example, vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;The expanded model will be tested at the R-5
catchment in Oklahoma, an experimental site chosen due to the wealth of long-
term / spatially-variable data, including rainfall and climate records, water
and sediment discharge data, and soil-water content data. The ability of InHM to
simulate long-term hydrologic response with sediment transport will be proven at
the R-5 site. InHM will then be used in an application mode to simulate the
small watershed impounded by Searsville Dam in the coastal range of California.
Searsville Dam, constructed in 1891, has suffered the fate of many old dams in
that its reservoir is now almost completely filled with sediment. Consequently
dam removal is being considered for this dam. This study aims to address
questions related to the impact of Searsville Dam and its potential removal on
the hydrologic regime, including the sustainability of a wetland ecosystem that
has formed near the lake and sediment erosion and transport downstream. Using
existing historical data on topography, land use, soils, geology, and climate,
augmented with additional field data on sediment transport flux rates, channel
hydrogeomorphologic parameters, and near-surface hydraulic properties, we will
undertake a modeling effort to quantitatively assess the impacts of alternate
dam management strategies, including an analysis of prediction uncertainty
caused by model assumptions and data error. Additional simulations of generic
hypothetical catchments with dams will broaden the scope of the study and
provide a sound footing for assessing further research needs. The results from
this study will be presented both in site- specific and broad- based terms so
that they can reach a wide variety of interested parties including the general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;