* 0438385
* SCI:  Collaborative Research: NMI DEVELOPMENT: Policy Controlled Attribute Framework
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2007
* Katarzyna Keahey, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 11/30/2007
* USD 595,514.00

This proposal integrates GSI and Shibboleth to form a robust attribute
infrastructure for campus environments to enable secure verification of user
attributes by inter-institutional Grid users. This project will deliver a
framework that allows participants in multi organizational collaborations to
control the attribute information that they want to publish, share, and reveal
to other parties. Those parties will be also be able to determine whether they
possess the capabilities to access a service by matching their capabilities with
the service's shared policy of required attributes. Pseudonymous interactions
will be supported through the use of anonymous public key credentials that are
mapped to the client's identity at the client's own discretion. The project
substantially leverages on and extends existing technologies, primarily
Internet2's Shibboleth, the Globus Alliance's Globus Toolkit, and NCSA's
GridLogon Service. The framework will use Shibboleth's Attribute Authority
service (SAAS) and its attribute release policies to restrict the attributes
communicated to other parties. We will enhance these Shibboleth services by
enabling Web services access through integration with the Globus Toolkit. To
enable pseudonymous deployment, a module will be developed for the GridLogon
service to allow authenticated users to obtain public key credentials that do
not reveal their identity, yet are fully compatible with the Grid Security
Infrastructure. Lastly, formats and protocols will be developed and implemented
to express, publish, share, and match attribute-related policies and
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;