* 0438735
* On-Ramp to Biotech
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2007
* Theresa Feeley, City College of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2007
* USD 599,996.00

0438735&lt;br/&gt;McGuire&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to City College of
San Francisco to support the activity described below for 24 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include City College of San Francisco (Lead Institution), San Francisco Works,
Bay Area Bioscience Center, Chiron Corporation, Grenentech Foundation for
Biomedical Sciences, San Francisco First Source Hiring Administration, San
Francisco Mayor's Office of Economic and Job Development, United States
Department of Agriculture, University of California San Frisco, and Walter and
Elise Haas Fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective is to scale up a
successful program that prepares low-income, underrepresented adults with sixth
to ninth grade skill levels for successful employment and ongoing education
within the burgeoning biotechnology industry. The participants gain skills in
math and science through classroom education, hands-on internships at
laboratories at the partners' facilities, coaching or mentorship by
professionals in the field. Over the two-year period of the grant, the partners
will expand to the City College of San Francisco Mission Campus located in a
Latino community. Future expansion will include communities and campuses where
the language is not primarily English. The program will be formalized and
institutionalized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will provide a technologically literate
bioscience workforce needed to sustain the competitive edge in the biotech
industry in the San Francisco Bay area. The activity will bolster the pipeline
of skilled bioscience workers and lead to sustainability that includes local
public and corporate investment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project lies in the promotion of innovation in the bioscience industry by
increasing the scientific and technical capabilities of the local
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity concentrate
on the education infrastructure needed to sustain the biotechnology industry, as
well as providing a diverse workforce. &lt;br/&gt;