* 0438826
* Collaborative Research:  Investigation of Syncollisional Extension and Basin Development in the High Himalaya
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Michael Murphy, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2009
* USD 193,453.00

A team of scientists from the University of Arizona and the University of
Houston are investigating the nature of the transition from contraction to
extension in the Zada basin area of the Himalayan uplift. The Zada basin is the
largest late Tertiary basin in the Himalaya and is broadly constrained to be
Late Miocene to Pleistocene in age. The basin fill and its underlying basement
are spectacularly exposed owing to incision by the Sutlej River, a major
southward-flowing trans-Himalayan drainage. The basin currently lies at
approximately 3500 m elevation in the hinterland of the Himalayan thrust belt
and developed on top of a regionally extensive Early to Middle Miocene thrust
system. The thrust system flanks a second major basin, the Kailas basin, which
is considered to have developed during mid-Tertiary time, but remains poorly
dated. Together, the Zada and Kailas basins archive the collapse of this region
from high to relatively low elevation and the transition from erosional
denudation to thick sediment accumulation in only a few million years. The
multidisciplinary study is using structural analysis, thermobarometry, argon-
argon thermochronology, basin analysis, and oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry to
place constraints on: (1) geometry, kinematics, and magnitude of slip of the
Qusum detachment, South Tibetan Detachment, and Great Counter thrusts; (2)
provenance and subsidence history of the Kailas thrust basin and Zada basin; (3)
paleoelevation history of the Zada basin; (4) pressure-temperature-time paths
recorded in the rocks exhumed by the major faults; and (5) the depth to which
the major structures operated. Results are being used to determine the: (1)
timing of onset of high-elevation extension in this part of the Himalaya; (2)
mode of kinematic accommodation of extension in and around the Zada basin; (3)
rates of arc-perpendicular and arc-parallel extension; (4) elevation at which
extension began, and the evolution of paleoelevation and paleoenviornments of
deposition in the Zada basin in response to ongoing extension; and (5) date at
which the paleodrainage pattern in Zada basin become integrated into the
headwaters of the modern Sutlej River. By answering these questions, three
theories to explain the transition from arc-normal contraction and to arc-
parallel extension in major orogenic belts are being tested: (1) extension
occurs in regions of overthickened crust; (2) extension is due to outward
expansion of the arc-shaped thrust front; or (3) extension is caused by
extrusion of the middle crust. The project involves undergraduate and graduate
students in the research, collaboration with Chinese scientists, and education
and outreach efforts in both the United States and China.