* 0438079
* SGER:  Clay Microfabric Signatures Driving Organic Matter Preservation in Marine Sediment: Micro- to Nano-scale Properties and Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Kenneth Curry, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2005
* USD 75,000.00

Abstract: Proposal # - 0438079 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The ability to observe,
identify, quantitatively measure, and perform chemical and physical experiments
with micro- and nanoscale barriers in fine-grained sediments has the potential
to revolutionize our understanding not only of organic matter (OM) preservation
in marine sediments, but also of fine-grained sediment structure and its effects
on sediment physical properties such as porosity, permeability, and hydraulic
conductivity. This project seeks to develop transmission electron microscope
(TEM) and histochemical staining techniques that will allow imaging and analysis
of both the undisturbed microfabric of fine-grained sediments and the
distribution of specific organic compounds within the mineral matrix. Technique
development will be initially carried out on artificially created model
sediments of known composition and then applied to natural marine sediment
aggregates. Natural aggregates for the pilot study will consist of polychaete
worm fecal pellets. These were chosen because they are easy to produce and are
easily reproducible in the laboratory by biomechanical means (i.e., passage of
sediment through the worm's gut). They also contain two important end member
clay microfabric signatures: (1) aligned face-to-face-oriented clay platelets
(domain and "shingle") along the border of the pellets and (2) open organo-clay
networks dominated by an edge-to-face fabric ("house of cards", or random
arrangement of domains) in the pellet interior. Once the techniques can be
reliably applied to natural samples, two pilot experiments designed to study the
impact of clay microfabric on the preservation of OM in marine sediments will be
performed to demonstrate the utility of the technique for addressing questions
of importance to the marine science community. &lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts
include providing a basis for other TEM-related technical approaches for
studying OM preservation and storage in fine-grained marine sediments upon which
other innovative TEM and sample preparations techniques can be built; providing
a real-world basis for the development of models describing the behavior of OM
trapped in organo-clay aggregates and the rates at which OM degrades with time
and under different chemical, physical, and environmental conditions; and
support of NSF goals in education, training, and gender and ethnic diversity. &l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;b
r/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;