* 0438154
* Dynamical Systems Methods and Geometric Integrators for Nonlinear Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/07/2004,06/30/2006
* Constance Schober, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 48,376.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0204714&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical
Systems Methods and Geometric Integrators for Nonlinear Wave
Equations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0204714
Schober&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three
interrelated topics in the theory and application of nonlinear dispersive waves:
chaotic dynamics in perturbed nonlinear Schrodinger (NLS) equations, the role of
homoclinic chaos in the generation of high amplitude (rogue) ocean waves, and
the development and analysis of structure-preserving integrators for nonlinear
wave equations. Combined experimental and theoretical studies of water waves
recently yielded a characterization of the chaotic evolution in perturbed NLS
equations that is generic, observable, and physically significant. Preliminary
analysis indicates that similar results hold in fiber optics. In this project,
further experimental, numerical, and theoretical analysis will be carried out.
The latter includes extending the geometric interpretation of the Floquet
discriminant and the associated Melnikov integrals for solutions in the full
phase space and obtaining criteria for the existence of homoclinic structures
for symmetry-breaking perturbations of the NLS equation. The implication of
these results in the context of homoclinic chaos and the likelihood of rogue
wave formation will be examined. The research also involves the development of
efficient, stable multi-symplectic integrators for equations of interest in the
water wave and optics problems. A comparison of the multi-symplectic, energy,
and momentum errors to the overall performance of the integrators (including
accurate capture of qualitative features of the system) will be carried out.
Error bounds on the approximate preservation of the local conservation laws will
be sought. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on mathematical
and computational issues central to water wave dynamics and nonlinear optics.
Rogue wave events can have a devastating effect on offshore structures and
ships. The results of this project will address fundamental properties of rogue
wave generation and potentially have impact on the design and analysis of
structures such as offshore oil rigs. Soliton solutions of the NLS equation are
used to model light pulses in high-speed optical telecommunication systems. The
research on multi-symplectic integrators will yield fast, efficient codes that
can be used in numerical simulation of high data rate communication systems and
rogue wave events.&lt;br/&gt;