* 0438240
* Efficient Computation in Multi-level Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* David van Dyk, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 152,100.00

EFFICIENT COMPUTATION IN MULTI-LEVEL MODELS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent
years, a new trend has been growing in applied statistics---it is becoming ever
more feasible to build application specific models which are designed to account
for the structure inherent in any particular data generation mechanism. Such
models have long been advocated on theoretical grounds, but recently the
development of new computational tools (e.g., hardware, software, and
algorithms) for statistical analysis has begun to bring such model fitting into
routine practice. Of course, much work remains to be done. The flexibility of
such methods comes at a cost---they require problem specific coding, long
computation times, and present difficulties in ascertaining convergence. This
proposal aims to tackle some of these difficulties using newly developed
efficient Monte Carlo techniques. The PIs plan to study a number of outstanding
theoretical questions concerning the behavior and extended application of these
efficient methods by developing new algorithms for a number of important models
which are prime candidates for these methods. The PIs are involved in several
on-going substantive data analytic projects (e.g., in computational biology and
high energy astrophysics) which both help to clarify the relevant theoretical
questions and stand to benefit from the new methodology. The computational goals
of this research are by no means an end unto themselves, but rather a means to
improved data analysis and statistical inference. As has been so clearly
illustrated in recent years improved computational tools can open up whole new
areas of statistical application, as well as increase reliability, thus
improving statistical inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will focus on
such newly developed Monte Carlo techniques as multi-point Metropolis and the
methods of conditional, joint, and marginal data augmentation. Multi-point
Metropolis generalizes the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm by allowing multiple
dependent proposals at each iteration. As a consequence the multi-point method
is more able to jump further, is less likely to be caught in a local mode, and
thus can substantially improve mixing. The methods of conditional, joint, and
marginal augmentation have already substantially improved performance of the EM
and Data Augmentation algorithms in a wide range of models (e.g., mixed-effects
models, finite mixture models, multivariate t-models, probit generalized linear
models and generalized linear mixed model, Poisson image models, etc.). In
particular, these new algorithms maintain the stable convergence properties of
EM and DA while sometimes reducing the required computation time by over 99%.
These methods, especially in tandem, have the potential to significantly improve
and extend Markov Chain Monte Carlo in statistical practice. This program is
being jointly funded by the&lt;br/&gt;Division of Mathematical Sciences and
Astronomical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;Activities
from the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;