* 0438480
* Development and Implementation of Digital Specimen and Digital Tester Technique for Infrastructure Materials
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,04/30/2006
* Mehmet Tumay, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/2006
* USD 430,835.00

0438480&lt;br/&gt;Tumay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Louisiana State
University to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal
was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include Louisiana State University (Lead Institution), Southern University
(historically black college and university-HBCU), Louisiana Transportation
Research Center, National Center of Asphalt Technology, National Asphalt
Pavement Association, Federal Highway Administration, Barriere Construction
Company, and Fugro Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives are
to develop multiple functional digital specimen and digital test techniques, to
implement these techniques at Federal Highway Administration Turner-Fairbank
Research Center as wells as at the other partners facilities, to commercialize
the newly-developed techniques, to develop a training course for undergraduate
and graduate engineers, to conduct seminars for Association of Asphalt Paving
Technologists to promote acquisition and utilization of the techniques to
practicing engineers, and to seek use of the technology in other materials in
the construction industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovations will create a computer-based testing
and evaluation system for design of construction materials with a longer
durability in-service and a reduced life-cycle cost. Once the methodology has
been fully developed, it can easily be modified for other materials
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project
includes enhancing current practice in mix design for asphalt materials be
reducing the number of specimens to be tested, enhancing the mix design for
asphalt materials to optimize the engineering properties of the material in use,
reducing the probability of having faulty materials being used in the
construction industry, and understanding the lifetime durability of construction
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity concentrate
on enhancing the design of construction materials at the least cost of testing
and certification, education and training future construction engineers,
increased involvement of underrepresented groups in research, education and
professional engineering practice, the economic and societal impacts on the
national infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;