* 0438174
* Computationally Intensive Strategies for Structural Modelling
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2008
* A. Ronald Gallant, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 247,062.00

This proposal requests continued support for a program of research in nonlinear
econometric methods. The motivation for this line of research is that
econometric inference regarding the ideas, theories, and models from economics
should be made without compromise to the discipline: Economic models should not
be simplified or crudely approximated to accommodate limits imposed by
econometric theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under the previous grant
focused on estimation of parametric and semiparametric structural models that
are so complex that they can only be estimated by simulation methods. The idea
was to require that moments determined by simulation from the structural model
match the scores of a certain truncation sieve. This estimator is as efficient
as maximum likelihood would be were it feasible and is termed efficient method
of moments or EMM for that reason. Diagnostics based on the scores that can
pinpoint the reasons for model failure were developed. These methods work well
when data is abundant such as financial econometrics. When applied in areas
where data is sparse, such as macroeconomics, the maximum permissible truncation
point becomes so small that the diagnostics cannot detect a model's inability to
track important features of the data such as conditional scale and a claim that
passing the diagnostic tests certifies a model's adequacy becomes
suspect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development of methods
similar to EMM that work well when data is sparse. The most promising is a
Bayesian approach for which the structural model is taken as the prior on a
truncation sieve. The advantage is that the prior amounts to a dimensionality
reduction that makes computations feasible when data is sparse. Relaxation of
the prior leads to informative diagnostics. The Markov chain Monte Carlo
computational strategy developed for this Bayesian estimator can also be applied
to frequentist estimators. Because it is more robust than traditional quasi
Newton hill climbing methods, estimation using nonstandard criterion functions
becomes practicable. The Cramer-Von Mises criterion is an instance that is
interesting because it is defensible when the economic model is admittedly
misspecified and it gives results that seem qualitatively similar to the
Bayesian approach in applications. A theoretical justification of Cramer-Von
Mises estimates is sought. This project also continues an ongoing program of
empirical work that exploits new methodologies developed under this program of
econometric research. Initial work will focus on determining whether structural
macro models that can pass tests of model adequacy based on macro time series
data will continue to do so when required to confront, in addition, data on cash
flows from a cross section of assets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact: The
availability of practicable methods to determine from data the parameters of
substantive models rich enough to accurately represent target phenomena and the
availability of methods to assess the adequacy of such models is of considerable
societal importance. The methods developed within the program have been applied
in science, business, and government. In thesciences diffusion has been broad; a
sample of citations in non-economic and non-statistical journals is the
following: American Journal of Epidemiology, American Naturalist, Annals of
Human Biology, Ecology, Journal of Pharmacokinetics and Biopharmaceutics,
Journal of Psychiatric Research, Nature, Physica D, and Physics and Chemistry of
the Earth C. Diffusion to business and government has been primarily through
inclusion of methods developed within the project in commercial statistical
packages such as SAS.