* 0438693
* Simulating the Visual Appearance and Physical Application of Automotive Surface Finishes
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2011
* Gary Meyer, Pine Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/2011
* USD 599,999.00

0438693&lt;br/&gt;Heckman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Pine Technical
College to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal was
submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include Pine
Technical College (Lead Institution), University of Minnesota, and Dupont
Performance Coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective is to produce
effective new simulation-based training tools for the automotive collision
repair industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort concentrates on
adaptation and application of new computer graphics and simulation research in
the improvement of existing virtual reality-based training tools, new research
into the convergence of paint development technology and realistic computer
rendering of colors, application of the new technology to real-world training
tools, development of new curriculum materials to enhance the training benefits
of new and existing simulation-based training tools, provision of research
opportunities for undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort will produce economic benefits
through new commercial products and intellectual property. The cost efficiency
and environmental improvements of the automotive collision repair industry will
significantly reduce collision insurance costs nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in the
adaptation and application of new computer graphics and simulation research in
the improvement of existing virtual reality-based training tools. New research
into the convergence of paint development technology and realistic computer
rendering of the resulting colors and attributes, and its application to new
real-world training tools to meet difficult training challenges are key features
of this effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity
concentrate on integration of research, education, training, and innovation for
a segment of the automotive industry that has lagged in technology insertion.
The new uses for computer-based virtual reality for training can be adapted to a
broad range of other subjects.&lt;br/&gt;