* 0438018
* ORGANICS:     A Spectroscopic Probe of Charge Injection Phenomena in Polymer Field Effect Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Massimiliano Di Ventra, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2008
* USD 339,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to systematically investigate charge injection
in polymer-based field-effect transistors (FET) using a novel spectroscopic
approach. The spectroscopic probe will allow the team to study and elucidate
charge-injection effects in the parameter space that is unattainable by other
techniques. The experimental work will be coordinated with the theoretical
analysis of the electronic structure, phonon spectrum and polaron formation in
polymers as well as by the examination of the electrostatic potential and
Schottky barriers developed in FET devices. FET devices with
Poly(3-hexylthiophene) as the active semiconductor will be the test bed of this
research program. Apart from fundamental aspects of the problem, the issue of
charge injection is of paramount practical interest in view of numerous
electronics and photonics device schemes based on FET architecture. The
experimental approaches developed within this project can be readily extended to
study injection in a variety of FET devices based on other classes of
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of the proposed work:
this team of investigators will address some of the long-standing problems in
the physics and materials science of polymer FET devices employing entirely
novel experimental approaches. Broader impact of proposed activities: the
integration of research and education within this challenging program will aid
the preparation of highly skilled personnel with expertise in an area of high
demand both in academia and in industry. &lt;br/&gt;