* 0438229
* Florida Partnership for Industrial Biotechnology Career Development and Training
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2006,01/31/2009
* Winfred Phillips, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/2009
* USD 599,997.00

0438229 Snyder

This award is to the University of Florida to support the activity described
below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships
for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-04556).

Partners The partners include the University of Florida (Lead Institution),
International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering, Marion County Public
Schools, Santa Fe Community College, School Board of Alachua County, Enterprise
Florida, Florida Department of Education, Central Florida Community College,
Florida Research Consortium, School Board of Bradford County, Scripps Research
Institute, and BioFlorida.

The primary objective of the proposal follows. This proposal provides the
opportunity to develop essential vocational/academic state-of-the-art workforce
training for stimulating high-wage high-skill jobs in a clean industry. The goal
is to create model curricula and pilot programs at both Community College and
High School levels that will then be reproduced throughout the state and the
nation. In addition, the effort will provide a unique capability for a realistic
training environment and, ultimately, employment. Together, with the partners,
Florida Partnership for Industrial Biology (FPIB) will: build infrastructure by
equipping the Center of Excellence for Regenerative Health Biotechnology (CERHB)
Education Center; develop curricula; train faculty; and deliver the curricula to
attract and educate students for entry and mid-level careers in the
biotechnology.

Potential Economic Impact

New statewide initiatives are being implemented to expand Floridas biotechnology
industry. Along with this expansion there is a need to fill technical positions
with trained and qualified workers. In addition, as biotechnology companies
transition discoveries made in the research laboratory into products, their
workforce skill requirements change. Currently, there is a shortage of trained
personnel who are capable of manufacturing biological and medical products.

The intellectual merit of the project follows. The proposal is designed to train
faculty and deliver curricula to high school/college students and provide
training for entry and mid level jobs in the biotechnology industry that will
stimulate and capitalize innovation in the area of workforce development. In
addition the project will build infrastructure through the creation of an
education center. The creation and access to new knowledge for workforce
development will offer High school tracks and certificates in a very
comprehensive approach to workforce preparation. The proposal offers an
integrated approach to workforce development beginning at the high school level.

The broader impacts of the activity follow. The potential impact on the economic
well being of the region is significant in view of the overall economic push for
this industry segment. The project is also designed for national dissemination
and replication. In addition, the program will serve as an "innovative, model"
project for the nation's Biotechnical field. The activity integrates community
colleges and local school systems in the education and training of the diverse
workforce.