* 0438887
* SoD: Design Exploration -- Supporting A Design Process for Engaging Users
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Frank Shipman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2009
* USD 475,000.00

This project builds tools supporting user expression and the collection and use
of this information by software designers. The design exploration process
provides users and other stakeholders a construction kit where they create
annotated partial designs. A design repository collects partial designs and
performs automatic analysis, including textual analysis of annotations and
spatial analysis of graphical designs, to help identify interesting examples and
patterns within the collection. Finally, an exploration interface is provided to
software designers that provides for searching and browsing within the
collection in order to better understand the task domain and user expectations
and work practices. The design repository includes algorithms combining the
analysis of text and the analysis of graphical layouts to index, cluster, and
associate the user responses. Based on these results the exploration interface
provides a variety of search and navigation features to the software designer.
This approach leaves the software designer in control of deciding what to see
and when to see it but supports these decisions. Additionally, combining search
and browse options allows for a variety of work practices based on the software
designers' understanding of the collection, their prior access to
associated/related items, the focus of their current activity, and their
preferences. This combination is prevalent today on the Web. The results of this
project will have an impact on the design process by enabling the inclusion of a
greater number of users and stakeholders in design and will facilitate
communication about different perspectives on issues surrounding the design of
software. The project Web site (http://www.csdl.tamu.edu/DesignExploration/)
will be used to disseminate the research results, including the tools developed
in this project that will be freely distributed for use in software development
efforts.