* 0438151
* North American Euro-Pacific Workshop for Sensing Issues in Civil Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Farhad Ansari, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 06/30/2005
* USD 28,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Implementation of successful structural health-monitoring
programs requires selection and placement of sensors suitable for measurement of
key parameters that influence the performance and health of the structural
system. In addition to the structural considerations, sensors need to be chosen
based on compatibility with the materials and the range and scope of
measurements. Despite the recent technological advances in the field of sensors,
their applications in civil infrastructure systems have met with many
challenges. Some of the primary issues of concern that impede rapid
implementation of sensor technologies include large size of structures and the
need for multiplexing a multitude of sensors, harsh construction environment,
adverse exposure conditions, long term reliability and durability, and
inexistence of sensors for measurement of relevant parameters of importance in
civil structures. There is a need for development of a coordinated research
program to address these issues. The proposed workshop will aid NSF in
prioritization and planning of a coordinated research program for research and
development of sensors and sensor packages for specific use of civil engineering
type of structures, such as bridges, dams and tunnels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will address the key link between the material performance and the
sensing capability. The final products of the workshop will be in the form of a
hardbound book detailing the state-of-the-practice, and a comprehensive report
outlining a detailed five-year national plan for research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;