* 0438777
* Correlative Antarctic and Inter-Hemispheric Dynamics Studies Using the MF Radar at Rothera
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2005,02/28/2009
* David Fritts, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 02/28/2009
* USD 240,000.00

This proposal is to continue operation and scientific studies with the middle-
frequency (MF, 1-30 MHz) mesospheric radar deployed at the British Antarctic
station Rothera in 1996. This system is now a key site in the Antarctic MF radar
chain near 68 deg. S, which includes also MF radars at Syowa (Japan) and Davis
(Australia) stations. This radar comprises the winds component of a developing
instrument suite for the mesosphere-thermosphere (MLT) studies at Rothera - a
focus of the new BAS 5-year plan, which also includes the Fe temperature lidar
(formerly at South Pole) and the mesopause airglow imager for gravity wave
studies (formerly at Halley). The Rothera MF radar has just had its antennas and
electronics upgraded to achieve better signal-to-noise ratio and more continuous
measurements in height and time. The main focus of the proposed research is to
extend the knowledge of the polar mesosphere dynamics. The instrument suite at
Rothera is ideally positioned for correlative interhemispheric studies with
northern hemisphere sites at Poker Flat, Alaska (65 deg. N) and ALOMAR, Norway
(69 deg. N) having comparable instrumentation. Further research efforts
performed with continued funding will focus on: (1) multi-instrument
collaborative studies at Rothera to quantify as fully as possible the dynamics,
structure, and variability of the MLT at that location, (2) multi-site (and
multi-instrument) studies of large-scale dynamics and variability in the
Antarctic (together with the radars and other instrumentation at Davis and
Syowa), and (3) interhemispheric studies employing instruments (e.g., the Na
resonance lidar and MF radar) at Poker Flat and ALOMAR. It is expected that
these studies will lead to a more detailed understanding of (1) mean, tidal, and
planetary wave structures at polar latitudes, (2) seasonal, inter-annual, and
short-term variability of these structures, (3) hemispheric differences in the
tidal and planetary wave structures arising from different source and wave
interaction conditions, and (4) the relative influences of gravity waves in the
two hemispheres. Such studies will also contribute more generally to an
increased awareness of the role of high-latitude processes in global atmospheric
dynamics and variability.