* 0438469
* Alliance for Collaborative Research in Alternative Fuel Technology  (ALL-CRAFT)
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Galen Suppes, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/2008
* USD 591,636.00

&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0438469 Coleman. This award is to the
University of Missouri-Columbia to support the activity described below for 24
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-04556). Partners: The partners include the
University of Missouri-Columbia (Lead Institution), Clean Vehicle Education
Foundation, DBHORNE LLC, Lincoln University, Midwest Research Institute,
Missouri Biotechnology Association, and Missouri Department of Natural
Resources. The primary objective is to develop safe, high-capacity storage
technologies for natural gas. These technologies build on new adsorbent
materials that radically reduce the pressure required for high-capacity gas
storage for next-generation clean automobiles. The project involves production
of nanoporous carbon and calixarene from domestic sources as adsorbents for
methane; construction and testing of a prototype natural gas automobile fuel
tank based on these materials; developing technologies to collect methane from
landfills; establishing a training program in alternative energy technologies
for undergraduates based on internships; and assessing and patenting the
technologies. Potential Economic Impact: The activity will provide practical
fuel tanks for clean and non-polluting automobiles and trucks, and for large-
scale tanks for shipping gas fuels. This will sustain long-term innovation by
demonstrating new clean energy and transportation technologies, and by training
students to become future leaders in alternative energy technologies. The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the development of natural gas fuel
storage tanks that avoid the need for high-pressure containment based on new
storage media. The broader impacts of the activity concentrate on the clean fuel
aspects for non-polluting automobiles for the future, to include potential
hydrogen storage for fuel cells for automobiles, and education of a diverse
workforce for the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&l
t;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;