* 0438389
* Coupled Thermal and Mechanical Behavior of Conducting Polymer Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2009
* Vikas Prakash, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore L. Bergman
* 04/30/2009
* USD 350,000.00

ABSTRACT

National Science Foundation

Proposal Number: CTS-0438389 Principal Investigator: Abramson, Alexis R
Affiliation: Case Western Reserve University Proposal Title: Coupled Thermal and
Mechanical Behavior of Conducting Polymer Nanostructures

Conducting polymer nanostructures have gained attention by the nanoelectronics
community because of their high electrical conductivity, mechanical flexibility
and potential for low-cost manufacturing. Moreover, the properties of these
nanosized polymer structures make them interesting candidates for additional
applications such as for membrane materials, tissue scaffolding, sensing, and in
composite materials. Improved characterization of coupled thermal and mechanical
response of these nanostructures is expected to lead to a better understanding
of the novel phenomena at the nanoscale that is essential to the nanoelectronics
industry as well as for current and future applications. In view of the lack of
understanding of the coupling between mechanical strain and thermal transport in
conducting polymer nanostructures and the scientific and technological
importance of the successful implementation of these materials to society, a
collaborative three year multidisciplinary research effort comprising
specialists in polymer processing/nanofabrication, transport properties at the
nanoscale, and experimental nanomechanics is being proposed. The research will
integrate three major ingredients, i.e. synthesis and nanofabrication,
experimentation and modeling. The proposed research will focus on the behavior
of thermal and mechanical properties (both coupled and uncoupled) of conducting
polymer nanostructures as a function of temperature. Polyaniline nanostructures
with different shape, size, morphology, and porosity will be investigated. The
polymer nanostructures will be nanofabricated using a wet electropolymerization
process. The design and development of a novel testing device will enable
coupled mechanical and thermal measurements of the polyaniline nanostructures.
This nano-tensilometer device is based on a novel modification to the
commercially available Hysitron triboindenter and will be combined with
specialized thermal probes. The device will be used inside a high resolution
scanning electron microscope (SEM) with in-situ nanomanipulators. An electron-
beam induced deposition (EBID) procedure will be employed to "nanoweld" the
nanostructures to the probe tips or micro-device. A theoretical analysis will be
utilized to complement experimental results and enable an improved
understanding. It is emphasized that the proposed research program is innovative
and novel and entails considerable nanofabrication, experimental and modeling
challenges. It represents a major departure from the conventional and current
techniques employed by the energy transport and experimental mechanics
communities to investigate coupled thermal/mechanical behavior in micro- and/or
nanoscale structures. A strong learning and teaching component, integral to the
research objectives, will provide for significant educational enhancement for
both undergraduate and graduate students and will provide for outreach
opportunities for K-12 students. These students will greatly benefit from the
inherently multidisciplinary nature of this project. Furthermore, they will have
the opportunity for laboratory experience on and/or exposure to state-of-the-art
modern instrumentation and cutting-edge research. In addition to the involvement
of graduate students through their own research projects, CWRU strongly
encourages the involvement of undergraduate students in faculty research
projects through senior projects and/or laboratory courses. All involved
students will be encouraged to participate in national conferences. Attention
will also be paid towards the recruitment of underrepresented minority students.
Furthermore, the PIs will contribute significant content from this research to
the "Nanopedia," an extensive multi-faceted web-based learning approach to
nanotechnology curriculum currently under development at CWRU. This resource
will be available to university level and K-12 students as well as the general
public.

