* 0438125
* SGER:The Futures of Our Past: Three-Dimensional Representations of Culturally Significant Objects & their Humanistic Implications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2006
* USD 74,070.00

Technological innovations have made it possible to complement our traditional
(physical) museums and libraries with digital archives. Emerging digital
technologies are quickly making possible new forms of access to artifacts,
including virtual museums built on immersive visual technology. In such
environments, it is likely viewers will be less passive; they will configure
artifacts as they wish, and not be limited by the experts' views of what is
good, useful, or significant. This raises concerns about historical and
interpretative accuracy, both concerning replication of materials and with
respect to setting them in relation to each other to produce meaningful
interpretations. As a first step to exploring such issues, the PI will in this
project investigate the technological difficulties in creating accurate 3D
representations of physical artifacts. She will focus in particular on three
fundamental unsolved problems: automatic 3D data acquisition of arbitrary
complex shapes; representation of these complex shapes allowing search
algorithms to easily access the right object or a part thereof; and the proper
display/visualization of such objects as they serve the user needs depending on
the user's questions.

To anchor this research, the PI will focus on works of Sikh art and cultural
artifacts, an area chosen because it supports a large collaborative project to
establish a Virtual Museum of 500 years of Sikh art and cultural artifacts,
involving the Center for Information Technology Research in the Interest of
Society (CITRIS) at UC Berkeley, the University of California Humanities
Research Institute (UCHRI) at UC Irvine, and the Sikh Foundation of Palo Alto,
which will provide financial and in-kind assistance in identifying and enabling
access to virtually all major Sikh art and cultural collections in the West.

Broader Impacts: This project constitutes in many ways the cutting edge of the
relation between IT and humanities research. If successful, the work will form
the basis for collecting, collating, displaying, and distributing materials for
the purposes of advancing art, historical, cultural, and social research, and
education on particular cultures. We will be able to assess comparative studies
of similar objects (their geometries, materials and functionalities), and their
evolution over time. In turn, this will enable better explanations of the
evolution of the societies that produced these artifacts.