* 0438359
* Improving Evaluation of Professional Development with Mathematics and Science Teachers through Developing Research-based Measures of Quality with States and School Districts
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2005,04/30/2008
* Cynthia Prince, Council of Chief State School Officers
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 04/30/2008
* USD 383,631.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: 0438359 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Rolf K.
Blank &lt;br/&gt;Institution: CCSSO &lt;br/&gt;Title: Improving Evaluation of
Professional Development with Mathematics and Science Teachers though Developing
Research-Based Measures of Quality with States and School
Districts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has four key goals: 1)
Conduct a survey of the 50 states to assess capacity within the 50 states for
collecting, reporting, and analyzing data on teacher professional development
including quality of programs. 2) Identify research-based criteria for high
quality teacher professional development and use the criteria as a framework for
analyzing and selecting local programs in partner states based on the data. 3)
Evaluate effectiveness of professional development in a sample of districts in
10 states using research-based criteria of program quality and a value-added
model for measuring achievement gains.4) Communicate findings to assist
education leaders in all states with improving models for broad-scale evaluation
of professional development, identifying key data items and measures of quality,
and applying value-added models for determining effects. Estimate the effects of
quality professional development programs on student. The project goals are
grounded on research-based findings of effective math and science teacher
professional development. These characteristics of effective professional
development are intended to guide improvement efforts and resource allocation at
state and district levels. The project would test the relationship of these
research-based criteria with student achievement using a value-added model
across programs in 10 states and districts in each state. &lt;br/&gt;