* 0438848
* Collaboration in Ecology: A Workshop Proposal
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Bonnie Nardi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2006
* USD 29,916.00

The science of ecology is crucial to our understanding of the evolution of life
on earth as well as environmental problems such as climate change and reduced
biodiversity. At present, ecology is a small, underfunded discipline. There is a
self-identified need among ecologists that their science must grow in order to
address timely large-scale ecological questions. To this end, software tools
must be developed to handle data, to enhance remote collaborations, and to
perform more sophisticated analyses of ecological data. Such tools are part of
the emerging field of ecoinformatics. To develop good tools, interdisciplinary
efforts are required, since many ecological problems involve other sciences such
as physics and chemistry. This workshop will bring together ecologists, social
scientists, computer scientists and librarians to discuss the work practices and
information needs of ecologists and to inform the design of the new
ecoinformatics tools. Topics of interest will include computational tools for
handling large datasets, and issues related to collaboration over distance and
working across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop
will enable scientists from varied disciplines to form relationships and
networks for future interaction, so that ecoinformatics can be truly
interdisciplinary. The outcomes will have implications for scaling up other
field sciences such as geology, oceanography, and paleontology.