* 0438280
* CAREER:  Team-Based Research as an Integrative Teaching Tool for Secondary, Post-Secondary and Graduate Education
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Marvin Schulte, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/2005
* USD 54,792.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the fundamental mechanisms by which human
central nervous system nicotinic and serotonin receptors interact with
endogenous compounds as well as therapeutic drugs and drugs of abuse. This
project is unique in that it utilizes general anesthetics to probe the
receptor's molecular structure. Anesthetics exert a wide range of effects on
these receptors, displaying different effects on different receptors. Using
cloned receptors and modern molecular techniques, this project will identify the
differences between these receptors at a molecular level that give rise to these
differential effects. By utilizing this information, an improved understanding
of the relationship between the site of drug interaction and the functional
effects on the receptor can be achieved. The focus on general anesthetics
increases the scope of the project by enabling the mapping of several different
functional regions of the receptor. These functional regions may provide
additional targets for drug development, thus permitting a "fine tuning" of the
receptors function via novel pharmaceutical agents.&lt;br/&gt; New drug types
developed as a result of this research would be potentially useful in the
treatment and prevention of a number of human diseases including Alzheimer's
disease, Parkinson's disease, age associated memory impairment, nausea
associated with chemotherapy and withdrawal from drugs of abuse. Since this
project investigates fundamental structural and functional relationships of
receptor proteins, this research will also increase our knowledge of other
similar proteins - thus facilitating a broader understanding of protein/drug
interactions. In addition to scientific benefits, the educational impact of this
project is also substantial. Students from widely different educational
backgrounds will conduct much of the proposed research. High school teachers,
high school students, undergraduate college students and graduate students will
work as a team to accomplish the research goals of the project. The composition
of the research team is designed to establish improved ties between secondary
and post-secondary education and encourage high school students to pursue
careers in biomedical research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;