* 0438073
* The Azoria Project:  Agricultural Production and the Formation of a Small-scale Polity in the Mediterranean, 1200-600 B.C.
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2005,05/31/2008
* Donald Haggis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2008
* USD 250,485.00

Dr. Donald Haggis and an international team of archaeologists, representing a
collaboration of fields of prehistory, palaeoethnobotany, zooarchaeology,
anthropology, and ancient history, will conduct three seasons of archaeological
field work on the island of Crete in the Aegean, exploring the emergence of
early cities and the economic and political conditions involved in the formation
of the first Greek city-states. The crux of the project is the excavation of the
Iron Age town of Azoria, examining the growth of the settlement from its
earliest foundations (ca. 1200-700 B.C.) until its establishment as a fully-
formed urban center (700-500 B.C.) with all the accoutrements of government. The
plan of work sets out to study how the civic center was formed and organized,
how agricultural and pastoral production was managed on household and public
levels, and what archaeological contexts of food storage, processing, and
distribution can reveal about the sociopolitical transformation leading to
urbanization in the Iron Age Mediterranean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ancient cities,
like their modern counterparts, were centers of complex socioeconomic
interactions and political configurations; they transformed their surrounding
landscapes, organized labor, and procured, processed, and redistributed
foodstuff for public and private consumption. The Azoria Project focuses on the
reorganization of the food-producing countryside during periods of city-state
formation, by recovering remains of ancient plants and animals in diverse urban
contexts. The aim is to identify corporate groups in the emergent city and
ultimately to define the political structure of the nascent city-state by
relating patterns of crop processing and animal husbandry to models of land use
and power relationships, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the project is
to recover archaeological evidence for household and civic organization that can
help to establish links between agricultural and pastoral production, economic
and political structure, and social identity. The main hypotheses of the study,
to be tested through excavation, are that evidence of production and consumption
of food in the urban center reflects land-use strategies out side of the city,
and that the latter are linked directly to specific social roles and the
political status of individuals in the community. While the presence and absence
of certain crops, types of wood remains, and animal species can tell us about
likely rural sources and conditions of agricultural production, the urban
center's relationships to the countryside is also evident in the volume and type
of available storage and stages and methods of food processing, permitting a
nuanced interpretation of social contexts and economic relationships in the city
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study augments significantly our knowledge of
the resource base of early Mediterranean societies-communities on the verge of
becoming cities with developed political institutions-as well as the process of
urbanization in the Mediterranean fringe and beyond. The project brings together
archaeologists with widely differing experiences, backgrounds, and regional as
well as methodological perspectives, to form a dialogue on the question of the
urbanization: asking why and how towns became cities in the first millennium
B.C. Integrating the results of a wide range of analyses into the study of
human-environment interaction, the study strives to visualize the ancient
occupants of Azoria as producers and consumers, and as agents of environmental
change in the landscape. The results of this work will affect our understanding
of the origins and ultimately the form of Mediterranean civilizations as
diachronically changing scales of human interaction across diverse and
overlapping natural environments and cultural spheres.&lt;br/&gt;