* 0438069
* Collaborative Research:    Collaborative Evaluation Communities in Urban Schools - CEC
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Kelli Thomas, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 01/31/2010
* USD 636,900.00

The Collaborative Evaluation Communities in Urban Schools (CEC) project will
create school-based collaborative evaluation communities to achieve the
following goals: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. Improve the evaluation capacity of
urban schools. &lt;br/&gt;2. Develop graduate level educational leaders with the
knowledge and skills to evaluate &lt;br/&gt;science and mathematics programs.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Provide teachers of science and mathematics professional growth by
improving their capacity to use evaluation data and engage in continuous
improvement and data based decision-making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborative evaluation communities created by the CEC project will serve as
professional growth activities for science and mathematics teachers, and as
training grounds to help graduate students develop evaluation skills. By
engaging schools in evaluation the team will assist teachers and graduate
students in the collection and analysis of data, the examination of student
assessment results, the evaluation of school programs, and the analysis of
science and mathematics instructional practices. The CEC project will assist
partner districts in the creation of an evaluation culture designed to support
the continual evaluation of programs with the ultimate intent of improving the
educational opportunities for all students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CEC project will create a total of eight
collaborative evaluation communities over the three-year grant period; four
collaborative evaluation communities in the Kansas City, Kansas School District
and four in the St. Paul School District. The collaborative evaluation
communities will be co-led by a faculty member and a lead science or mathematics
teacher in the schools. The faculty will also help supervise graduate students
in each community who will help lead and develop the collaborative evaluation
community. The lead teacher will serve as the liaison between the university and
other classroom teachers who are in the same school as the lead teacher. There
are various ways that the collaborative evaluation communities can interact, and
it is expected that this project will inspire new ways for the schools and
universities to collaborate on evaluation activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of collaborative evaluation communities to build evaluation capacity in
urban schools is a unique and important activity for the field of evaluation.
The schools are in need of teachers who can use evaluation and assessment data
to make decisions regarding science and mathematics education. The CEC project
will advance knowledge and understanding of how to help schools engage in
evaluation. The investigators are very well qualified to design and implement
the CEC project. They have extensive experience in the field of science and
mathematics program evaluation, and will be able to use this experience to
develop graduate students and help schools engage in evaluation. In addition,
the CEC project will be externally evaluated by an expert in the field of
science and mathematics program evaluation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of the CEC project will advance
discovery and understanding regarding the use of collaborative evaluation
communities for teachers in urban schools. In addition, the CEC project will
promote teaching, training, and learning for graduate students. The CEC project
will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups by enhancing the
evaluation capacity of teachers in urban schools who serve a diverse student
population. The investigators on the CEC project also have the ability to
recruit graduate students of diverse backgrounds. The results of the CEC project
will be widely disseminated to the education and evaluation community. The
project has great potential to benefit society by developing the evaluation
capacity of urban schools, and by developing the evaluation abilities of
graduate students who can go on to serve society. All in all, the CEC project
will create lasting collaborative evaluation communities in urban schools in
order to develop schools' capacity to engage in evaluation and to help all
students achieve in science and mathematics.