* 0438604
* A New Paradigm for Entrepreneurial Discovery and Business Development
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Robert Dowling, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/2009
* USD 600,000.00

0438604 Keyton

This award is University of Louisville to support the activity described below
for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-04556).

Partners The partners include University of Louisville (Lead Institution), the
Jewish Hospital, Kentucky Office for the New Economy, and MetaCyte Business Lab.

The primary objective is to establish a sustainable program for the discovery
and commercialization of cardiovascular (CV) devices to help improve quality of
life for patients and to stimulate regional economic development. The program
will be developed with the Cardiovascular Innovation Institute (CII) in
Louisville as a new paradigm for entrepreneurial discovery and development of
emerging technologies at the University of Louisville and other Kentucky
universities. In addition to the Innovation Training Program, CII researchers
and PhD students will be eligible for Innovation Discovery Grants to develop
proof of concept and prototypes for promising cardiovascular product ideas.
These grants will be administered by an Innovation Advisory Board on scientific
and entrepreneurial merit. To further commercialize good ideas, the Business
Development Network, coordinated by MetaCyte Business Lab, LLC, will provide the
infrastructure for market feasibility, business planning, capital formation,
start-ups, and incubator services. The Innovation Discovery and Business
Development will be funded with private funds.

Potential Economic Impact

The program will produce advances in health care, but they will also, through
introducing science oriented professionals to entrepreneurial techniques, create
jobs and wealth.

The intellectual merit of the project is the development of a new paradigm for
creating and establishing successful entrepreneurial ventures in emerging
technologies. The intellectual basis for the proposed program is a model for
entrepreneurial discovery and exploitation derived from a series of research
projects at the U of L School of Business and Public Administration, including a
study of repeat-entrepreneurs and a retrospective evaluation of business plans.
The proposed program is an experiment to see if the search model can improve the
odds of aspiring entrepreneurs to develop successful business ventures in the
growing cardiovascular device industry.

The broader impacts of the activity concentrate on regional economic
development, healthcare improvement, and entrepreneurial training targeted at
the talent of the future: PhD students in biomedical science and engineering
targeted specifically at cardiovascular devices. It will draw more students into
science and engineering fields who may also have business interests, and in
providing the tools to those who have enter the biotechnology field to fully
exploit the value of their research. The target population of this proposal is
the PhD candidates in biomedical engineering, of whom about half are women and
minorities.