* 0438445
* Models of Evaluation and Research for Educational Technologies
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2009
* Michael Coe, Education NorthWest
* Standard Grant
* James S. Dietz
* 11/30/2009
* USD 412,967.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this three-year project, the
Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory (NWREL) seeks to identify a core set
of models for evaluating the effects of technology integration in the teaching
and learning of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). The
purpose of the study is to determine if a new approach to evaluating educational
technology, based on a refined set of typical models for how educational
technology is actually used, can yield better measurement of the effectiveness
of technology applications. The study will identify scientifically testable
models by studying samples of technology integration project designs. The
identified evaluation models will be refined, in part through a structured
symposium with experts on technology integration and research methodologists.
Overall, the study will develop capacity in the research and evaluation
community, and in state and local education agencies, to plan and evaluate
educational technology implementations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology
integration is a widespread priority in the nation's school systems, yet little
is known systematically about the impact of technology integration on teaching
and learning. The study will identify the theories and assumed causal mechanisms
that underlie current technology integration efforts, and clarify existing
hypotheses about the effects of technology integration on student achievement.
These will be clustered and refined to derive a small set of common or
prototypical models that are scientifically testable and that account for a
large number of current technology integration efforts. The models derived in
this way will clarify the various purposes for which technology is applied in
math and science education, and will serve as a basis for more clearly conceived
project designs and rigorous evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology integration projects are increasingly
used to address the needs of underrepresented minority groups and difficult to
reach populations. This research will focus on identifying prototypes for
projects that serve rural, isolated populations, as well as indigenous Native
American, Native Alaskan, and language minority students, and the faculty and
administrators who work in these areas. The study aims to improve the state of
educational technology implementation and research, by improving project design
and evaluation for federal, state, and locally sponsored projects. Findings from
the study may generalize beyond projects that are aimed at underrepresented
groups, either directly through application of the specific evaluation models
generated here, or indirectly, by serving as an example of how to distill a
group of project designs into a refined set of prototypical, testable models.