* 0438641
* Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Product Development and Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2005,07/31/2012
* Joseph Wilck, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2012
* USD 600,000.00

This award is to the University of Tennessee Knoxville to support the activity
described below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the
Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-04556).

Partners The partners include University of Tennessee Knoxville (Lead
Institution), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, The State of Tennessee, Tennessee
Department of Education, Tennessee Department of Economic and Community
Development, Center for Industrial Services, Analysis and Measurement Services
Corporation, Atmospheric Glow Technologies, Clarity Resources, LLC, Control
Technology, Inc., Eastman Chemical Company, Exide Technologies, IBM Global
Services, Management Consultants, Robert Shaw Industrial Products, Rohm and
Haas, Co., Spinlab Utility Instrumentation, Inc., and Technology 2020.

The primary objectives are to produce individuals able to create tech-based
businesses or to create new marketable products within existing companies.
Recognizing the need to ease the barriers to recruitment yet maintain quality
standards, the project creates a summer entrepreneurship program for
undergraduates that includes part-time internships. The proposed activity
creates multidisciplinary student teams in engineering fields to boost the
ability to educate individuals with the ability to develop a product from
"concept to market." This activity builds on a recently created dual degree
program offered by the University of Tennessee. It expands its entrepreneurial
focus, extends the degree through the entire College of Engineering, and
establishes an "Idea Bank" of new product ideas drawing from university
discoveries and the nearby Oak Ridge National Lab. It engages input and
participation in multiple ways, and establishes an "Entrepreneurial Board" both
to advise and direct the effort and to provide specific assistance ranging from
lecturing, networks, evaluation of student plans, advocacy and internships.

Potential Economic Impact The goal is to help create a tech-based
entrepreneurial culture in East Tennessee by tapping into the region's base of
technical knowledge and, thereby, diversifying the area's largely service-based
economy. The effort includes targeted outreach to underrepresented students
through the Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, an
alliance of six universities, and it offers scholarships for its undergraduate
summer program as well as graduate fellowships.

The intellectual merit of the project will result from leveraging research being
conducted at the Oak Ridge National Lab serving as a platform to convert the
intellectual property into real products and attract leading technology
corporations to the region.

The broader impacts of the activity concentrate on advancing efforts both by
students and with companies, and it identifies sources from which to secure this
support. The effort includes targeted outreach to underrepresented students
through the Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, an
alliance of six universities, and it offers scholarships for its undergraduate
summer program as well as graduate fellowships. There is a stated intent to
publish the results of this work to further promote dissemination and to make
the educational modules developed available to any university. The components of
this proposal are such that it can be easily replicated.

