* 0438396
* U.S.-Mexico Dissertation Enhancement: Understanding Land-Sea Biogeochemistry at Multiple Scales - Interactions at the Interface of Mexico's Yaqui Valley and the Gulf of California
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2005
* Pamela Matson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/2005
* USD 7,140.00

0438396&lt;br/&gt;Matson, Pamela A. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
enhancement proposal, will support the dissertation research of &lt;br/&gt;Mr.
Michael Beman under the supervision of Dr. Pamela A. Matson of Stanford
University, and in collaboration with Dr.Esther Cruz at the Centro de
Conservacion para el Aprovechamiento de los Recursos Naturales (CECARENA) of the
Instituto Tecnologico de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey (ITESM). The proposed
research will study the effects of agricultural runoff from the Yaqui Valley of
Mexico on the coastal systems in the Gulf of California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agricultural runoff can have large-scale influences on
phytoplankton biomass in the open waters of the Gulf. Based primarily on data
from satellite remote sensing, it is argued that coastal upwelling of nutrients,
augmented by agriculturally-derived nutrients, results in large phytoplankton
blooms and plumes that can reach almost 50 km in scale. These results further
imply that the estuaries of the Yaqui Valley are sites of important and possibly
quite unique biogeochemical transformations. The proposed research is focused on
a smaller spatial scale, and aimed at understanding microbial community
structure and function in one of these estuaries, Bahia del Tobari. The work
will employ a combination of genetic techniques, sediment manipulations, and in
situ biogeochemical measurements to understand nitrogen transformations and
losses from Tobari, and how these processes are linked with processes at work in
the Gulf. As a highly connected land-sea system undergoing rapid change, the
Yaqui Valley-Gulf of California represents a model system for understanding the
acceleration of coastal change worldwide. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;