* 0438933
* SoD: Collaborative Research: Flexible High Quality Design for Software Intensive Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2010
* Victor Basili, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2010
* USD 850,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0438933&lt;br/&gt;PI: Victor R. Basili, Jeff
Carver&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SoD: Flexible High Quality Design for Software
Intensive Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responding to late software changes is
one of the key areas of risk in software development, but is often unavoidable.
The major way to deal with the problem is during software design, making the
architecture flexible, which is too often not achieved. This research addresses
this problem by studying the relationship between changes and software
architecture. The project involves the mining of existing change and defect
data&lt;br/&gt;from our collaborators to formulate representative taxonomies of
changes, and defects, and to understand how effective various QA strategies are
for dealing with them, running of classroom studies to test specific hypotheses
resulting from the data mining, and the analysis of the changes and defects
encountered on industrial projects; recommendation of a suite of QA strategies
for the expected defect profile; and controlled observation of the effectiveness
of recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to Science
of Design by producing a model that allows software developers to reason about
proposed changes and their impact on system quality; a method for evaluating
technique composability; increased understanding of the relations between
faults, changes and architecture; and increased understanding of the
relationship between design process and the quality of the resulting
product.&lt;br/&gt;