* 0438561
* An Educational Environment with Virtual Laboratories for Data Center Professionals
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2008
* Barbara McMullen, Marist College
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2008
* USD 590,913.00

0438561 Norton

This award is to Marist College to support the activity described below for 36
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF-04556).

Partners The partners include Marist College (Lead Institution), Monroe College,
Distributed Systems Laboratory of Argonne National Laboratories, Dutchess County
Workforce Investment Board, AFCOM, IBM Corporation, Open Source Development
Labs, Fiserv, and Cisco Systems.

The primary objectives are to - Promote Institute for Data Center Professionals
(IDCP), its courses and programs, and its potential to create new and secure
data center models by using the combined resources and ideas of IDCP and its
partners

- Create a permanent support, outreach, and networking infrastructure for the
data center workforce

- Build recognition for IDCP's vendor-neutral data center technology
certifications

- Diversify the data center workforce

- Transfer the benefits of ingenuity and invention gained through open source
systems and collaborative, on-demand, utility and autonomic computing to
industry. Commercializing a test-bed for open source applications that is
accessible to students in Marist's distinctive e-education environment will
enable the achievement of the above goals and fuel data center innovation.

Potential Economic Impact IDCP is the first and only institute of its kind. Its
mission is to provide individuals and companies with vendor-neutral skills-based
training and credentialing that will support and diversify the data center of
the future and thereby strengthen the national economy and national security in
the area of information technology.

The intellectual merit of the project follows: 1) A network of Marist programs
(Linux Research Lab, z/OS and Linux zSeries Lab and Learning Center, Center for
Applied Technology, Center for e-Business, Marist Institute for Public Opinion);
2) IDCP technology partners (IBM, Cisco Systems, Distributed Systems Laboratory
of the Argonne National Laboratories, Open Source Development Labs -- OSDL); 3)
Marist's nationally-recognized virtual laboratory resources; 4) Research with
on-demand virtual Linux servers to be used by IDCP students through Marist's
end-to-end e-education environment and IDCP portal with Rich Media Distribution
Utility; 5) The expertise of Marist College faculty in shaping the IDCP
curriculum. The IDCP curriculum to be developed by Marist faculty will focus on
Java, open source platforms and technologies, and large-scale enterprise and
grid computing, areas where there is a shortage of expertise in the national
workforce. The curriculum advances new knowledge within each of six IDCP data
center fields and Associate certifications (systems and software, security,
networking, facilities management, operations and process management, product
development and financial planning). Organizational, leadership, and other soft
skills are infused into IDCP certification requirements and courses. An
industrial advisory board will be created to help Marist College gain
recognition for IDCP certification.

The broader impacts of the activity follow. The partnerships with Cisco, IBM and
WIB are clearly designed to have a powerful impact on the regional workforce.
The link to IBM's Project View program shows a strong commitment to the
development of underrepresented minority students in this field. The choice of
partnering with Monroe College will clearly help in this regard. The educational
experiences seek to combine emerging technologies, access to current research
initiatives, sound management principles and a framework that enables the
professional to keep their knowledge and skills current once they complete the
IDCP certification.

