* 0438208
* Research Starter Grant: Engineered Substrate Specificity of Serine Proteases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Teaster Baird, Jr, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 45,000.00

Project Summary The principles that govern the mechanism(s) by which serine
proteases recognize their respective ubstrates are only partially understood.
The goal of this research project is to advance the understanding of this area
using a novel engineered derivative of the classic serine protease, trypsin. The
engineered derivative is identical to wild type rat trypsin except that the
eponymous serine, serine 195 (Ser-195) has been replaced with a threonine (Thr)
residue and the disulfide bridge formed by cysteines (Cys) 42 and 58 has been
removed by substitution of those amino acids with either alanine or valine
residues. The effect of the three simultaneous substitutions is to produce a
functional threonine protease whose activity toward typical trypsin substrates
varies as a function of (1) the size of the chemical group that occupies the
position immediately C-terminal to the scissile bond in synthetic substrates
(the P1. position) and (2) the van der Waals volume of the residues at positions
42 and 58 (the S1. binding site). This observation suggests that, in the
presence of Thr-195, the chemical and physical properties of the amino acid
residues in the S1. binding site may influence the selection and subsequent
hydrolysis of a given substrate with respect to its P1. residue. Additionally,
the S1. subsite may be engineered such that the selection of a substrate with a
given P1. residue may be selectively hydrolyzed. Therefore, the specific aims of
this study are to (1) modify the S. (S-prime) binding site of wild type trypsin
and the Ser-195 to Thr trypsin variant by substituting amino acids with various
physical and chemical properties at positions 42 and 58 and (2) characterize the
variants kinetically and with regards to their substrate specificities.
Specifically, peptide substrates will be designed and synthesized to evaluate
the effect of the substitutions made on P1. selectivity. By introducing such
changes into the S1. binding site of the engineered threonine protease, it is
expected that the variants will display preferential hydrolytic activity toward
substrates whose P1. amino acid is complementary in chemical and physical nature
to the amino acids used to modify the S1. binding site. The results from the
experiments described in this project will provide insight into the molecular
basis for extended substrate specificity in serine proteases and provide a basis
for the design of substrate specificity into trypsin-fold serine proteases.
Broader Impact The experiments outlined in the project will be carried out
primarily by undergraduate and Master.s level graduate students that will be
trained by the principal investigator. The students will gain experience in
protein structure analysis, protein expression and purification, enzymatic
analysis and various molecular biology techniques including PCR, mutagenesis and
gene subcloning. The work will be carried out at San Francisco State University,
an ethnically diverse University, providing a means for the P.I. to recruit and
train students from ethnic minorities that are underrepresented in the sciences
with the intention of exposing them to opportunities to pursue careers in
science and preparing them to succeed in such pursuits.