* 0438609
* Partnership for Innovation in Biomaterials
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Martine LaBerge, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2008
* USD 600,000.00

This award is to Clemson University to support the activity described below for
36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include
Clemson University (Lead Institution), Medical University of South Carolina,
Medical College of Georgia, Benedict College, Tri-County Technical College,
Greenville Technical College, South Carolina Governor's School for Science and
Mathematics, Anderson School Diistrict, Department of Commerce, Food and Drug
Administration, Cryovac/Sealed Air, Selee Corporation, Drake Dental Laboratory,
Polymed, Greenville Chamber of Commerce, South Carolina Science Coalition, South
Carolina Dental Association, Upstate Alliance, and Carolina Crescent
Coalition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective is to create, nurture, and
sustain a biomaterials cluster in the state of South Carolina, anchored by
Clemson University. The partnership will include: 1) education institutions
(public schools, 2-&lt;br/&gt;year technical colleges, 4-year degree colleges,
and doctoral-degree-granting institutions); 2) governmental&lt;br/&gt;agencies
(both at the state and federal level); 3) large, medium, and small industries of
the state and the&lt;br/&gt;region; and 4) non-profit organizations (including
business-related coalitions and local chapters of
national&lt;br/&gt;professional societies). The activities include: 1) catalyze
innovation; 2) build human capital; 3) synergize innovation and capitalization
of opportunities of intrinsic merit. At the core of this proposal are state-of-
the-art scientific and technological innovations. To capitalize on these
innovations, two pilot projects with high commercial value will be run in
conjunction with industrial partners and a federal regulating agency. The idea
is to leverage the strength of each constituent member and bring about
intellectual and project development. One of the projects will be to utilize
Surface Modificationla technology to coat artificial materials to make them bio-
compatible. The second project will use microwaves processing of metals and
ceramics for dental applications. This project will attempt to minimize the
processing time for prosthodontic devices so that visits to dental offices are
minimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will catalyze entrepreneurial
development, with local non-profit business coalitions. They will conduct
workshop and networking events to foster the growth of small businesses, which
are the fastest-growing segment of the economy and work with the Greenville
Chamber of Commerce and the State Department of Commerce to woo larger
industries to South Carolina. According to the U.S. Census Bureau projections,
the population of the 55- to 75-year-olds in this country is expected to grow by
75% to 74.6 million people within the next 20 years. This population will use
some kind of implant in hips, knees, teeth, maxillofacial reconstruction, and
other applications. These implants require substantial uses of biomaterials.
Industries involving biomaterials and related devices are growing in the region
and only continued innovation can sustain growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the development of a biotech economic
cluster based on university research and partnerships with industry and
government. The effort will include forming and fostering small businesses to
commercialize the innovations, attracting large business to the region, and
educating/training workers for the new biotech/biomedical
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity concentrate
providing biomedical materials for the growing need for prosthetic implants for
the aging population in the US. In addition a diverse workforce will be educated
and trained for this growing industry.&lt;br/&gt;