* 0438708
* Life Sciences Workforce Development:    Partnerships for Innovative Laboratory Training
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2004,09/30/2008
* JoAnn Smith, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/2008
* USD 600,000.00

0438708&lt;br/&gt;Smith&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to University of
Kansas to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal was
submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-04556).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include
University of Kansas (Lead Institution), Kansas City Area Life Sciences
Institute, Kansas Technology Enterprise Corporation, Kansas City Area
Development Council, Quintiles, Inc., Bayer health Care, Lawrence Chamber of
Commerce, Xeno Tech LLC, Penn Valley Community College, Boehringer Ingelheim
Vetmedica, JRH Biosciences, Midwest Research Institute,
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective is to provide intensive hands-on
bench science training to prepare support scientists to serve in biomedical
research clusters with continuous improvement of skills. The plan calls for
training two different groups: 1) those that are currently employed in the life
sciences industry within the bi-state area centered around the greater Kansas
City area; and 2) those from underrepresented groups interested in entry-level
positions that will be served by the Penn Valley Community College. The first
group will be served by the University of Kansas through their Continuing
Education department, which that maintains five offices in four different cities
and employs 120 people. This group will receive full-tuition stipends for
immersion course work during the first year after which, industry will be tapped
to provide tuition in years two and three and beyond to help sustain the
program. The other higher education partners who will be responsible for course
content and delivery include the Higuchi Biosciences Center, University of
Kansas Medical Center Continuing Education, and the University of Kansas
Division of Biological Sciences. The program provides interactive
distance/asynchronous technologies prior to, during, and after
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will provide a technologically literate
biomedical workforce needed to sustain the competitive edge in the biomedical
industry in the Kansas-Missouri region. Presently, there is an immediate need
for training at least 400 employees over a 36-month period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project lies in the
promotion of innovation in the bioscience industry by increasing the scientific
and technical capabilities of the local workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the activity concentrate on the education infrastructure
needed to sustain the biomedical industry, as well as providing an ethnically
and socioeconomic diverse workforce. &lt;br/&gt;