* 0439107
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Study for a Cabled Observatory on the Beaufort Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Bernard Coakley, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Intrier
* 08/31/2006
* USD 99,080.00

This SGER is one of three collaborative efforts to define the instrumentation,
sites and budget for a cabled observatory adjacent to the continental shelf of
the Beaufort Sea. FY04 federal legislation calls for building a Barrow Global
Climate Change Facility near Barrow, Alaska. As with cabled observatories
envisioned elsewhere, this is an unprecedented opportunity for continuous, real-
time access to the water column, the underside of sea ice and ocean bottom
sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planning for this facility has been proceeding
for the past year, but the emphasis has been nearly solely on the physical
facility (i.e., the building). Without dedicated planning to the science
infrastructure being done soon, it is possible that the best opportunity to
undertake the best science in this venue may be
unrealized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology will be to first hold a
workshop in Barrow, bringing together oceanographers,&lt;br/&gt;seismologists,
biologists, sea ice specialists, oil industry representatives and educators. The
focus will be a discussion of what instrumentation would be necessary to study
the Beaufort Shelf and adjacent waters. The resulting report will form the basis
for engineering studies that would include preliminary plans for implementation.
These plans would concentrate on adaptation of technology being developed for
other seafloor observatories and how to exploit devices routinely deployed on
moorings. A second meeting would result in an engineering report, translating
the original science plan into a series of technical requirements for an Arctic
seafloor installation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It should be noted in the area of
"Broader Impacts" that this effort has been extensively coordinated with key
constituencies of the Barrow community, and is endorsed by leaders of that
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three separate SGER proposals
are:&lt;br/&gt;0438100 Chayes, Dale Columbia University&lt;br/&gt;0438102
Proshutinsky, Andrey Wood Hole Oceanographic Institution&lt;br/&gt; Chave,
Alan&lt;br/&gt; Detrick, Robert&lt;br/&gt;0439107 Coakley, Bernard University of
Alaska Fairbanks &lt;br/&gt; Weingartner, Thomas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
combination of talents is both necessary and sufficient to complete the tasks as
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;