* 0439079
* Empirical Analysis of Auctions
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Philip Haile, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2005
* USD 56,534.00

&lt;br/&gt;Because auctions are among the market institutions most convincingly
captured by the kind of game theoretic analysis that dominates modern economic
theory, auction data provide important opportunities to evaluate modeling
approaches and assess the importance in practice of strategic behavior predicted
by theory. Auctions also play an increasingly important role in the allocation
of public resources, so goals of efficient allocation and revenue generation
provide strong policy motivations for understanding auctions. This project
consists of four components that contribute to this understanding through
empirical studies of auction markets and development of new statistical tools
for analysis of auctions.&lt;br/&gt; The first component addresses estimation of
demand at auctions in which sellers use reserve prices. By exploiting variation
in the reserve prices that results from heterogeneity in seller valuations, one
can consistently estimate the full distribution characterizing demand at
standard auctions---the model primitive needed for a wide range of policy
simulations. This is done without parametric distributional assumptions.The
second component addresses inference from bids at English auctions in which
bidders may be asymmetric or have correlated valuations. This allows also
environments in which bidders, but not the econometrician, observe a common
factor shifting their private values---a common situation in applications. The
third component develops nonparametric tests for common values at first-price
auctions. Exploiting recent advancements in the econometrics of auctions, we
show how one can use variation in the number of bidders to test for the presence
of the winner's curse and, therefore, common values. The fourth and final
project studies an online auction market with many buyers and sellers trading a
homogeneous object. It addresses the effects of auction rules, seller reputation
and other auction characteristics on bidder participation and bids. Arbitrage
behavior is documented, and the prevalence and predictors of fraudulent seller
behavior are studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;