* 0439125
* Planning Visit to Australia for Parallel Long-Term Studies of Eucalyptus and Populus
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 08/31/2006
* USD 10,019.00

OISE 0439125&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning visit will enable Dr. Thomas
Whitham of Northern Arizona University and several of his students and
postdoctoral fellows to discuss research plans with Dr. Brad Potts and his
research group of the University of Tasmania and examine his Eucalyptus
experimental forests. They intend to replicate these experimental forests in the
U.S. using Populus trees and coordinate identical field experiments in Arizona
with Dr. Potts longstanding research on Eucalyptus trees in Tasmania. Dr.
Whitham's recent research has examined the ecosystem consequences of genetic
variations in natural stands of Populus in Arizona (i.e., the feedback from leaf
chemistry to leaf litter decomposition, nutrient cycling and productivity.) He
intends to set up similar studies on Eucalyptus in Tasmania. This visit will
make it possible for Drs. Whitham and Potts to finalize the specific experiments
and methods to be used in both the U.S. and Australia over the next five years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the most
fundamental issues in ecology today are the genetic basis of community structure
and the heritability and evolution of communities. The work of these U.S. and
Australian investigators focuses on links between genetic variation in trees,
leaf chemical traits, biodiversity and ecosystem processes. They are interested
in characterizing the generality of host plant genetics as a driver of community
structure and ecosystem processes. The parallel studies they plan on two
dominant but phylogenetically and geographically distinct plant species will
provide the basis to link plant genetics to community and ecosystem processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative long-term
experimental research on forests across continents is crucial for testing the
generality of key hypotheses about community genetics and evolution. These
genetic-based hypotheses have major implications for the fields of conservation
biology, land management and the new field of transgenics where the release of
modified organisms is likely to have community and ecosystem consequences. The
planned common experiments in the U.S. and Australia will involve
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, and contribute to
their training and international experience. This research will also enhance the
global development of the newly emerging discipline of community
genetics.&lt;br/&gt;