* 0439947
* Collaborative Research:    Understanding Fault Zone Compliance by Seismic Probing of InSAR Anomalies
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* John Vidale, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 260,000.00

This project aims to measure how much weaker are the rocks in fault zones than
the surrounding, unbroken rocks. The consortium of institutions will deploy
seismometers to record explosions and earthquakes. The experiment will first
decipher the structure of the crust in terms of P, S, and surface wave speeds,
then interpret the wavespeed maps in terms of rock strength and crack density.
The group will also measure the ground deformation over several years with GPS.
These structures will be compared with the features noted with satellite
deformation monitoring. The insights gathered&lt;br/&gt;will help understand why
fault systems form as they do. More specifically, the spacing of faults and the
frequency of earthquakes across the fault system in California is ripe for a
deeper understanding, and this project will strive for progress in this
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to
integrate the expertise at UCLA, UCSD, and USC to systematically map the
structural cross-section of the Calico and Pinto Mountain fault zones across
profiles that exhibited anomalous strain in response to the Landers and Hector
Mine earthquakes. They will deploy portable seismographs in both an active-
source experiment to map the shallow fault structure and a passive-source
experiment to image deeper structure. Their observations will test and extend
previous InSAR modeling to better resolve the amplitude, width and depth of
fault zone anomalies. This project will explore the structure and evolution of
seismogenic faults in the Mojave using a variety of methods. The results will
constrain the size of fault zone weakness and variations in strength across the
earthquake cycle and lead to improved understanding of fault
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports educational
programs at three universities, including graduate student research and field
programs for undergraduates. Collaboration between institutions will be promoted
by regular meetings of the PIs, students and postdocs to discuss relevant
science and the state of the project. Results of this research will be widely
disseminated through publications, conference presentations and media contacts,
including a project website. This research will provide a better understanding
of fault behavior, leading eventually to improved earthquake forecasting and
reduced casualties and damage.&lt;br/&gt;