* 0439980
* SGER: AN INNOVATIVE FRAMEWORK ON THE STABILITY OF DYNAMICS WITH MULTIPLE TIME DELAYS
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Nejat Olgac, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* mario rotea
* 12/31/2005
* USD 40,998.00

&lt;br/&gt;AN INNOVATIVE FRAMEWORK ON THE STABILITY OF DYNAMICS WITH MULTIPLE
TIME DELAYS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SGER proposal presents an
innovative and unique perspective on a ubiquitous yet unsolved problem: the
stability assessment of linear time invariant multiple time delay systems (LTI-
MTDS). It entails a systematic procedure resulting in a complete map of the
system stability in the domain of the time delays. This paradigm called "the
cluster treatment of characteristics roots-CTCR" is built upon two very
interesting properties of LTI-MTDS which were unrecognized until the recent work
of the PI. The funding is requested for a one-year study on two key directions:
(a) To explore the viability of the new procedure for higher order dynamics and
higher number of time delays, (b) To introduce a new concept of controlling LTI-
MTDS: time-delay scheduling (management). If understood well such a strategy can
introduce a powerful tool to the controls designer.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
appears in several categories: Scientific impact: The study covers a very
important and basic research topic. The TDS are known to be mathematically very
challenging. We suggest a phenomenological perspective, CTCR, to help understand
their stability properties. Secondly, the potential utilization of the findings
is strong. Some important dynamics are governed by MTDS, such as machine tool
chatter in simultaneous machining, the data-network communications and
congestion dynamics. Educational impact: The PI will further profit from this
research by incorporating some of the findings into his advanced level graduate
course 'ME 379 Advances in Control System Design". He has taught this course in
Fall 2003 semester already and a part of the syllabus was on TDS
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;