* 0439722
* SGER:    Transient Biomolecular Transport in Nanochannels with Application to Biosensing
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2006
* Albert Conlisk, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 09/30/2006
* USD 42,810.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0439722 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: A. T. CONLISK INSTITUTION:
OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY

Transient Biomolecular Transport in Nanochannels with applications to Biosensing

The goal of this research program is to model the unsteady transport of a
charged biomolecule in a charged-wall nanochannel. Objectives include: modeling
the entry of a biomolecule into a circular pore and its subsequent transport
through the pore, and also developing a model for surface binding of a specific
analyte. The flow will be driven electroosmotically and the current density due
to this unsteady process will be calculated and compared with existing
experimental data. The work is novel because there is a dearth of biomolecular
transport models that account for the size of the biomolecule when it is of the
order of the channel dimension. Hindered diffusion analysis and excluded volume
effects will be used for this purpose. The proposed work is high-risk because
this modeling effort requires significant experimental data to identify the
binding constants, and the natural ion channels (which have dimensions on the
order of one to three nanometers) may require a combination of continuum and
molecular models to properly describe these events. Given the importance of
nanoscale flows, a basic understanding of fluid and biomolecular transport at
this scale is therefore critical in developing new devices capable of detecting,
identifying and manipulating complex biomolecules at the single molecule level.
The intellectual merit of this work is to: (1) create new and fundamental
knowledge of the transport of ionic species and biomolecules in electrokinetic
flow at the nanoscale, ultimately to guide design of biodevices for transport
and sensing. (2) Create new analytical and computational models of the transport
of biomolecules confined in nanoscale geometries to support rapid analytical
techniques and improve the effectiveness of biomolecular sensing. The broader
impacts of this work will include advancing discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching and learning, broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups, and broad dissemination of results for the enhancement
of scientific and technical understanding. The PI is actively involved in
developing new courses on nanofluidics at Ohio State as well as professional
society meetings. This work will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups and undergraduates in research.

