* 0439978
* Testing Mineralogical Models of  the Mantle Transition Zone Using Seismic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2008
* Donald Weidner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2008
* USD 172,315.00

Mantle composition plays an essential role in understanding&lt;br/&gt;evolution,
mantle dynamics and phase transitions of the Earth's&lt;br/&gt;mantle. With
increasing amounts of experimental data, chemical&lt;br/&gt;interactions of
various phases can be explored between different&lt;br/&gt;subsystems, and
seismic velocity and density profiles can be&lt;br/&gt;calculated based on
compositional models. The ability to&lt;br/&gt;quantitatively calculate seismic
profiles based on compositional&lt;br/&gt;models makes it possible for
compositional models to be directly&lt;br/&gt;tested and constrained using
seismic data. The investigators will&lt;br/&gt;perform a joint modeling of
seismic and mineral physics data to&lt;br/&gt;constrain compositional and
thermal models in the Earth's&lt;br/&gt;transition zone. The collaborative
research also investigates&lt;br/&gt;regional variation of seismic structures,
as well as its cause,&lt;br/&gt;using seismic data sampling various tectonic
regions. The intellectual&lt;br/&gt;merits of the collaborative research include
quantitative and&lt;br/&gt;integrative studies of seismic structures, wave
propagation,&lt;br/&gt;mantle composition and mantle mineralogy in the Earth's
transition&lt;br/&gt;zone. This research has broad impacts on training
of&lt;br/&gt;a graduate student in both seismology and mineral physics,
and&lt;br/&gt;providing seismically-constrained compositional and thermal
models&lt;br/&gt;which would serve as a basis for a quantitative understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;the effects of mantle mineralogy on the dynamics of the
descending&lt;br/&gt;slabs and ascending mantle plumes, and for a quantitative
link&lt;br/&gt;between seismic velocity perturbations, mantle
temperature,&lt;br/&gt;and density buoyancy in large-scale geodynamical
modeling.