* 0439734
* Institute for Mathematics and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2005,06/30/2012
* Fadil Santosa, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2012
* USD 20,526,861.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0439734&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Douglas N. Arnold, Fadil Santosa, Arnd
Scheel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Institute for Mathematics and its
Applications&lt;br/&gt;(IMA) is to increase the impact of the mathematical
sciences by&lt;br/&gt;fostering interdisciplinary research linking mathematics
of the&lt;br/&gt;highest caliber to important scientific and
technological&lt;br/&gt;problems from other disciplines, technology, industry,
and&lt;br/&gt;society. Allied with this mission, the IMA also works to
expand&lt;br/&gt;and strengthen the talent base engaged in mathematical
research&lt;br/&gt;relevant to such problems. To this end, the Institute serves
as&lt;br/&gt;an information hub in the mathematical sciences,
hosts&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral researchers at the start of their careers,
conducts&lt;br/&gt;and sponsors graduate student workshops, offers opportunities
for&lt;br/&gt;mid-career mathematical scientists to change research
directions,&lt;br/&gt;organizes programs aimed at students and researchers from
groups&lt;br/&gt;traditionally underrepresented in the mathematical sciences,
and&lt;br/&gt;sponsors public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMA
is a national research institute that hosts scientific&lt;br/&gt;programs on
short (one week or less) and long (academic year) time&lt;br/&gt;scales, without
permanent faculty or research staff. Most of the&lt;br/&gt;Institute's programs
are conducted in its Minneapolis facilities, but&lt;br/&gt;the IMA also sponsors
conferences and graduate summer workshops at its&lt;br/&gt;academic
participating institutions. Those academic institutions and&lt;br/&gt;IMA's
participating corporations contribute to the Institute's&lt;br/&gt;programming
and planning through dedicated governance committees. The&lt;br/&gt;IMA web site
at http://www.ima.umn.edu/ describes upcoming and past&lt;br/&gt;programs,
solicits ideas for future programs, and offers application&lt;br/&gt;forms for
Institute activities.&lt;br/&gt;