* 0439021
* Collaborative Research:  Crustal Deformation and Earthquake Behavior in the Lebanese Restraining Bend of the Dead Sea Fault System (Lebanon and SW Syria)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2005,02/28/2009
* Francisco Gomez, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 02/28/2009
* USD 225,922.00

Scientists from the University of Missouri and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in collaboration with scientists from Lebanon and Syria are
investigating the active tectonics and earthquake behavior of a 200-km-long
restraining bend along the Dead Sea fault system in Lebanon and southwestern
Syria. The Dead Sea fault system ranks among the large, continental transform
systems of the world and comprises a key element in the plate tectonic framework
of the eastern Mediterranean region. Thus, in addition to elucidating the
regional tectonic and geodynamic processes, this research is addressing
scientific questions relevant to other continental transforms worldwide. The
team is investigating the: (1) earthquake cycle along a large strike-slip fault,
including earthquake interactions between adjacent structures (e.g., stress
loading), and how this relates to crustal rheology; (2) strain partitioning and
uplift within a large restraining bend, and its relationship to internal
deformation of the Arabian plate; and (3) oblique plate motions and predicted
along-strike variations in slip rate of the central and northern Dead Sea fault
system. To address these problems, the team is conducting: (1) neotectonic field
studies to assess detailed kinematics and fault slip rates within the
restraining bend; (2) paleoseismic investigations to assess possible fault
segmentation and to construct robust earthquake histories, (3) tectonic geodesy,
using GPS and InSAR, in the far-field and near-field to determine short term
rates of fault slip and kinematics in three-dimensions, and (4) geophysical
modeling of fault mechanics from geodetic and geological data, the earthquake
cycle using geological/geodetic data and paleoseismology, and large plate
motions of the Sinai and Arabia plates. These studies are taking advantage of a
lengthy, well documented, and relatively complete historical record of large
earthquakes (approximately magnitude 6.5) that spans more than two millennia.
Such historical records are unavailable for nearly all other plate boundaries in
the world and are helping to bridge the critical gap between geologic and
geodetic assessments of strain in the region.