* 0439605
* SGER Grant: A Conference to Strengthen Mathematics and Science Education Through Indigenous Knowledge and Ways of Knowing
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2006
* Sharon Nelson-Barber, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2006
* USD 190,758.00

&lt;br/&gt;We propose a three-phase plan to gather and document novel thinking
about the role of &lt;br/&gt;community in determining and supporting effective
mathematics and science education in &lt;br/&gt;indigenous communities. We will
convene an eclectic international group of innovators who &lt;br/&gt;have
developed deep sensibilities about the social ideals, values, and behavioral
standards that &lt;br/&gt;have shaped local approaches to successful schooling
in mathematics and science. Each member &lt;br/&gt;will have a depth of
experience thinking .outside the box. and creating successful innovations
&lt;br/&gt;that make a meaningful difference in real communities. This shared
experience of striving to &lt;br/&gt;develop solutions (against the odds) forms
a common thread that we believe will help &lt;br/&gt;participants interweave
their perspectives and intentions as a group.with a focus on articulating
&lt;br/&gt;a set of truly transformative ideas about how community involvement
in indigenous education &lt;br/&gt;can help all children learn mathematics and
science. &lt;br/&gt;In Phase I, a small but representative international Working
Group of primarily &lt;br/&gt;indigenous mathematics and science educators and
researchers will convene in a five-day long &lt;br/&gt;institute. Deliberations
will center on the role of community in determining and supporting
&lt;br/&gt;education by navigating tensions among traditional/western
mathematics and &lt;br/&gt;science/knowledge/approaches, culturally responsive
curriculum, teacher preparation/cultural &lt;br/&gt;orientation, language
revitalization and language maintenance, the indigenous research agenda,
&lt;br/&gt;alternative assessment models, and technical assistance/support
structures. Participants will &lt;br/&gt;report on their own work and come
together for in-depth discussions in smaller work groups &lt;br/&gt;around
specified sub-themes. By the end of the meeting, the Working Group will develop
an &lt;br/&gt;agenda and plan of action that will guide future activities.
&lt;br/&gt;In Phase II, a nominated council of up to four individuals from the
Working Group, will &lt;br/&gt;attend selected national meetings in mathematics,
science, and indigenous education, and via a &lt;br/&gt;series of interactive
workshops, panels, and/or individual presentations, introduce the Working
&lt;br/&gt;Group.s vision and agenda, and elicit contributions from educators
and community members &lt;br/&gt;similarly engaged in community-driven
education. &lt;br/&gt;In Phase III, two members of the Working Group will attend
the triennial World &lt;br/&gt;Indigenous People.s conference, which hosts
peoples from around the world who are committed &lt;br/&gt;to achieving reform
and transformation of education. Working Group participants will offer
&lt;br/&gt;workshops at this conference and seek counsel and input from this
further extended group &lt;br/&gt;involved in like-minded efforts. A web-based
interactive community will remain in place during &lt;br/&gt;all phases of the
work to facilitate ready connection and communication. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A growing group of knowledgeable mathematics and
science educators and &lt;br/&gt;others who will continue to work toward
defining indigenous ways of knowing and educational &lt;br/&gt;philosophies,
inspire growing dialogues in uses of indigenous knowledge in schooling, and
&lt;br/&gt;stimulate increased integration of indigenous knowledge in
educational curriculum. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: Learnings will
contribute to the emerging international body of scholarly work &lt;br/&gt;that
delineates ways in which local cultural context fosters academic success in
mathematics and &lt;br/&gt;science for all students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;