* 0439220
* Dye Probe Studies of Spin Coating of Sol-Gel Solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 05/21/2004,05/31/2005
* Dunbar Birnie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,285.00

9802334 Birnie Sol-gel chemistry is a popular technique for making new materials
and high technology coatings of a wide variety of types. Because of the ever-
expanding importance of sol-gel synthesis, and because of the need to make high
quality coatings with a high- throughput industrial procedure, it is important
to understand the fundamentals of spin coating when performed using sol-gel
solutions. This project will monitor and understand, in real time, the coating
formation and drying of sol-gel solutions during spin coating. Dye molecules
will be incorporated into the sol-gel solutions to help sense the chemical and
physical changes taking place during spin coating. Two fundamental processes are
critical in controlling coating formation during spin coating in general: 1)
viscous flow and 2) evaporation. Early stages are dominated by the viscous
behavior, i.e. relatively smooth fluid flow radially outward on the substrate.
As the fluid layer gets thinner the outward flow rate reduces until the second
process (evaporation) takes over as the dominant process. This transition
corresponds to a "setting" point for coating formation. When spin coating is
performed on sol-gel solutions then extra complexities arise including
accelerated chemical reaction caused by solvent evaporation and viscosity
changes being driven by the hydrolysis and condensation reactions in solution.
Thus, sol-gel solutions may be particularly sensitive to the conditions that are
imposed by the spin coating process. Carefully designed optical measurements
will be carried out which would allow in-depth study of the dynamical and
chemical effects that are occurring in sol-gel solutions during spin coating.
Small concentrations of dye molecules would be incorporated into the sol-gel
solutions for use as structure/chemistry probes during the spinning process. The
primary focus will be on molecules that change their absorption spectra
depending on the characteristics of the local envir onment. Therefore, equipment
would be set up to allow absorption characteristics to be measured during spin
coating processing. In addition, laser interferometry would be used to
dynamically monitor the rapid fluid thinning process occurring during spinning.
%%% It is anticipated that increased understanding of this important
technological process would lead to new methods for improving the quality of
spin coated sol-gel layers, thus allowing the production of materials with
higher reliability and increased manufacturing yield. For example, since the
evaporation of the most volatile solution component will dominate during coating
formation, then sol-gel scientists would learn to focus particularly close
attention to the chemical effects caused by early and rapid removal of this
component, especially with respect to premature gelation. And conversely, since
the chemical condensation reactions can cause profound viscosity changes, then
coating developers would seek to understand more about the rheological
characteristics of their sol-gel solutions, even before coating quality issues
arise. ***