* 0439897
* Quantification of Extensional Fault Processes and Landscape Response using Surface Exposure Dating
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2007
* Mark Anders, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 188,128.00

Understanding displacement accumulation rates and timing of fault events is
crucial to constrain models of fault growth and seismic risk in active settings.
Previous studies have attempted to unravel fault growth histories in a
qualitative sense, but the lack of a suitable dating technique for natural fault
systems has limited the models' ability to predict rates and variations in rate,
of displacement accumulation during development of a fault array. This work
unites the traditional disciplines of structural geology, geomorphology and
geochemistry in a quantitative analysis of extensional fault array evolution and
drainage response to deformation. In particular, the study involves detailed
mapping of fault systems and associated drainages, in tandem with Surface
Exposure Dating using in-situ cosmogenic nuclides, to determine chronology and
rates of fault growth during the complete cycle of fault growth from initial
propagation to physical linkage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study area is located
in the Canyonlands Graben of southeastern Utah, where extensional faulting has
occurred in the last 0.5 m.y. and is ongoing. It is one of the finest areas for
this type of investigation, as the faults are exceptionally well exposed in a
variety of fault interaction orientations, drainage responses are readily
observed, and the exposed lithology and time scale is very appropriate for
Surface Exposure Dating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves careful
physical mapping on aerial photographs and a 5-meter Digital Elevation Model,
followed by more detailed field mapping of fault linkage zones and associated
deformed drainage systems. Combined with an extensive Surface Exposure Dating
study using in-situ Berylium-10, Aluminum-26 and Carbon-14 extracted from
quartz-rich bedrock samples along stream beds and fault scarps, this approach
yields unique quantitative information about the timing and rates of faulting.
In addition, fluvial deformation will be correlated to specific events of
displacement accumulation and will be used to evaluate the mechanisms and rates
of fault-related knickpoint retreat through the landscape. The results of this
research will provide, for the first time, a complete, quantitative
reconstruction of fault growth rates through the entire cycle of lateral fault
propagation, through interaction and linkage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This, in
turn, will significantly improve the understanding of the fundamental processes
underlying fault array evolution and thus increase the reliability of seismic
risk assessments and sedimentary basin analysis. The research will also have
important implications for understanding erosion and mass sediment removal
through bedrock channel erosion, which is considered a governing force in the
tectonic evolution of mountainous terrains.