* 0439603
* SBIR Phase I:     Power System Restoration - The Graceful Degradation Phase
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Mahmood Adibi, Industrial Research and Development Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates
controlled islanding of power system during major disturbances. Most power
system faults occur on high- and extra high-voltage transmission lines due to
their vulnerability arising from their exposed lengths. The majority of these
faults, such as those caused by lightning, are temporary and of short duration.
These faults are rapidly cleared leaving the power system in an unfaulted
condition. However, during the short fault duration, the electrical output of
generators' decrease, while the mechanical input to the generators remain
practically constant. The effect of the torque imbalance is for the groups of
generators to accelerate at different rates and to "swing" with respect to one
another. If not quickly corrected they may lose synchronism, forming imbalance
load-generation islands, and consequently resulting in blackouts.

The proposed online real-time methodology has the potential of avoiding the
formation of imbalance load-generation islands thus reducing the possibility,
extent and duration of blackouts. The impact of prolonged blackouts on the
public, on the economy, and on the power system itself makes rapid effective
controlled islanding very important. An effective system separation reduces the
impact of an outage on customers and on the economy of affected area while
reducing the possibility of damage to equipment.