* 0439058
* The 2004 CISE Workshop for Principal Investigators of Minority Institutions Infrastructure and Research Infrastructure Awards - July 9-11
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* Andrew Bernat, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/2006
* USD 78,237.00

&lt;br/&gt;CRA will organize and facilitate the annual CISE Workshop for
Principal Investigators of Minority Institutions Infrastructure and Research
Infrastructure Awards in July 2004 for the CISE Research Infrastructure and the
CISE Minority Institution Infrastructure Programs. These programs provide
support for the establishment, enhancement, and operation of major experimental
facilities for all CISE research areas. The Principle Investigators' meeting is
a chance to bring researchers together to learn about the work of other research
projects and to provide a forum to discuss new ideas and future directions.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CRA will hold the workshop immediately prior to the CRA
biennial conference for academic and research laboratory administrators - the
Snowbird Conference. This collocation has been used a number of times in the
past and has proved highly successful because of the large overlap in attendance
at the RI/MII meeting and the CRA Snowbird conference. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As
the workshop organizer, CRA will be responsible for a number of tasks both prior
to and during the workshop such as registering participants, organizing the
program, distributing handouts, and arranging and staffing the meeting site. The
2004 CISE Workshop for Principal Investigators of Minority Institutions
Infrastructure and Research Infrastructure Awards will be held July 9-11 in
Snowbird Utah. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CRA will work with the CISE RI/MII program
staff to assemble the program elements. In past years, the program has opened
with introductory remarks by NSF officials and updates on NSF CISE activities
followed by presentations by the Principle Investigators of RI/MII projects. PI
presentations include discussions of research and/or educational outcomes, both
expected and unexpected; infrastructure related barriers to research; success
and failure of efforts; and research outcomes that would not have been possible
without RI/MII support, among other topics. The meeting will also include a
poster session and opportunities for informal discussion were also included in
the program. &lt;br/&gt;