* 0439999
* Variations in Deformation and Kinematics Along and Across the Himalayan Arc through Time: Insights from the Darjeeling-Sikkim-Tibet Transect
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2010
* Gautam Mitra, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 03/31/2010
* USD 200,968.00

The Himalayan mountain belt is the result of continent - continent collision
between the Indian and Eurasian tectonic plates that started 50-55 million years
ago and is continuing to the present day. A significant portion of the total
~650 km plate convergence went to forming shortening structures in the Himalayan
ranges. Because of the arcuate form of the Himalayas shortening varies along its
length. The amounts of shortening have previously only been documented in the
western Himalayas (Kashmir, Kumaon, Nepal). This project is undertaking a pair
of detailed transects along the Tista drainage (~89 degrees East longitude), to
fill a gaping hole in our knowledge of terra incognita (viz. the eastern
Himalaya). Traditional structural mapping techniques are being combined with
geodetic (satellite global positioning system [GPS]) data and age dating of
river terraces formed during mountain building and
erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is determining: (1) the amount of
shortening across the eastern Himalaya, (2) the variation of convergence along
the Himalayan arc, and (3) whether the rates of convergence are the same for
geologic time scales as compared to current [GPS] rates. This study, together
with earlier work in southern Tibet under Project INDEPTH, is providing the
first complete structural transect across the Himalayas from India to Tibet, and
will form the basis for developing comprehensive models of mountain belt
evolution in active belts. The study is also revealing whether or not zones in
the mountain belt are building anomalous strain that could lead to great
earthquakes in this region that has one of the highest seismic hazard risks
along the Himalayan arc. The study is promoting collaboration of researchers
from two countries, melding different field techniques, and helping in the
training of future geologists.&lt;br/&gt;