* 0439812
* Characterizing an Active Magma Chamber at South Sister Volcano, Oregon: Constraints From Gravity and GPS Measurements
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Albert Eggers, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 09/30/2007
* USD 78,186.00

Characterizing an Active Magma Chamber at South Sister Volcano, Oregon:
Constraints From Gravity and GPS
Measurements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0208490&lt;br/&gt;PI: Johnson
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Modeling of InSAR data by the USGS has determined that an
uplift of ~0.022 km 3 has developed since approximately 1998 due to an inflation
source at 5-7 km depth. This uplift has not been accompanied by seismic
activity. A goal of this project is to determine if this uplift is attributable
to new magma injection, expansion of an existing magma body, or hydrothermal
processes. If magma injection is producing the uplift, then an important second
goal will be to characterize the magma chamber. Important questions to be
addressed are: 1) does the magma chamber at 5-7 km depth contain only material
added within the past few years? 2) what is the volume of the magma? 3) is the
magma basic or silicic? 4) what is the gas content of the magma? These questions
will be addressed by modeling the proposed gravity measurements.&lt;br/&gt;
Three years of gravity observations on three radial profiles of the uplift will
be completed. Vertical control with leveling and GPS surveys is planned by the
USGS and will be available to this project. The siting of stations and survey
schedule will be optimized for the characterization and removal of the annual
groundwater and soil moisture signal from this data set. Central to modeling of
the gravity changes is observing the ratio of gravity change to vertical uplift
at monitored sites, which may be interpreted in terms of mass and density change
at depth.&lt;br/&gt;