* 0439943
* Workshop on the Development of the Language Production System
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Cecile McKee, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2008
* USD 29,141.00

The National Science Foundation will support a workshop on the development of
the language production system, to be held in October 2005 at the University of
Arizona. Existing research on this system emphasizes children's phonological and
lexical errors. There is still no detailed developmental model of the production
system. Developmental psycholinguistics has not explored how a changing
performance system interacts with the knowledge that the system operates on.
Adult psycholinguistics has yielded richly diverse models of language production
that can inform developmental study. These include computationally explicit
variants. The models have healthy empirical underpinnings and have been usefully
applied to populations other than normal adults (e.g., aphasics). Yet, they do
not articulate developmental predictions. The 'developmentalization' of language
production models will benefit both the adult models and acquisition research.
Application of theoretical models to a previously unstudied population tests the
models. New theoretical and empirical questions will be worked out. For example,
how are the production system's various processes and information types built
up? How does the system reflect language-particular details? Before a speaker
has mastered a grammar and lexicon, does the production system reflect default
choices? Other benefits will come from integrating hypotheses about an unfolding
capacity to deploy linguistic representations with hypotheses from competence-
based theories. Language acquisitionists need to understand the nature and
extent of the multiple influences on children's utterances, including effects of
the production system itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following the Dahlem
Workshop Model, this workshop will emphasize discussion of the unknown over
presentations on the state of the art. A workshop report and an associated
tutorial CD are planned. The workshop's impact will be enhanced by these
elements, as well as by activities aimed at sabbaticals, theses/dissertations,
and conferences. The workshop will encourage students and feature women.
Academic fields associated with child development tend to include more women
than many other sciences. As the cognitive sciences have largely neglected the
developing language production system, another impact of the proposed workshop
will be to direct new interdisciplinary research to an unexplored area. A
plausible projection of this research is into the more applied areas of second
language acquisition and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;