* 0439089
* BE/MUSES:     Renewable Energy from Forest Resources: Investigating the Complex Interrelated Issues Associated with Generating Automotive Fuels from Lignocellulosic Biomass
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* John Sutherland, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2005
* USD 114,498.00

&lt;br/&gt;This BE/MUSES planning grant supports planning activities to
investigate the feasibility of the use of biomass from lignocellulose sources
(switchgrass, poplar, alder) for processing into a motor vehicle fuel (ethanol).
It brings together an interdisciplinary team with expertise in forest ecology,
conservation biology, natural resource economics, sociology, chemical and
mechanical engineering, GIS and spatial analysis, and educational outreach. It
includes several parts: investigating and confirming optimal research
methodologies including GIS techniques for identifying suitable biomass in the
Great Lakes system, avian surveys as a measure of biodiversity, policy elements
through involvement of interest groups (CVM), studies on the enzymatic
hydrolysis of cellulose and yield of ethanol, comparative life cycle analyses,
analysis of the supply chain for processing centers to deliver fuels.
Educational activities include new and modified courses at MTU, and inclusion of
Native Americans from a local community college in research activities. The
impacts of this planning project focus on the groundwork that could alter the
way the U.S. is powered. The potential for development of a domestic renewable
source of automotive fuel that could significantly replace petroleum and other
fossil-based fuels had broad social, industrial, economic, ecological and
political implications. This award will be co-manages by Paul Werbos, ECS / ENG
and Delcie Durham, DMII./ENG.