* 0439747
* Continued Investigation of Rheological Behavior of Clinopyroxene and Clinopyroxene-Olivine Aggregates Under Hydrous Conditions: Implications for Crustal and Mantle Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2005,01/31/2009
* David Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2009
* USD 237,734.00

++&lt;br/&gt;This proposal involves an experimental investigation of the high-
temperature, high-pressure strength of aggregates of clinopyroxene, an important
mineral in both the lower crust and the upper mantle, and of aggregates of
clinopyroxene plus olivine. Recent analyses of earthquake depth distributions
and gravity anomalies on continents conclude that the lower crust is, in
general, stronger than the uppermost mantle. This point of view is contrary to
the jelly-sandwich model of the continental lithosphere in which a weak lower
crust lies between a strong upper crust and a strong upper mantle such that the
strength of the continental lithosphere lies in the mantle rather than in the
crust. This research projects explores the proposition that the relative
strengths of lower crust and upper mantle depend on the presence or absence of
water. Little is known about the strength of clinopyroxene relative to that of
olivine, even when the two phases are present in the same rock. Recent
experiments suggest that clinopyroxene is stronger than olivine under anhydrous
conditions but weaker than olivine in hydrous environments. A careful
investigation of the water concentration dependence of the viscosity of
clinopyroxene and clinopyroxene + olivine rocks is critical in order to address
these issues and to model the geodynamical and geochemical behavior and
evolution of the lower crust and upper mantle. The effect of water on the
viscosity of rocks composed of clinopyroxene and clinopyroxene + olivine is
emphasized, because even a small amount of water dramatically weakens nominally
anhydrous minerals. In most studies, the water-weakening effect has been treated
as an 'on-off' process - if water is present, rocks are weak; if water is
absent, rocks are strong. Recent experiments demonstrate that the viscosity of
olivine-rich rocks is a factor of more than 10 smaller in water-rich
environments (e.g., the mantle wedge above a subducting slab) than in water-
under saturated settings (e.g., mantle beneath a mid-ocean ridge). The proposed
research builds on this observation, on published investigations of the
deformation behavior of dry clinopyroxene-rich rocks, and on our initial results
that reveal a significantly larger water-weakening effect in clinopyroxene than
in olivine. To apply laboratory results to processes occurring at depth in the
Earth, detailed flow laws are essential in order to describe strain rate (i.e.,
viscosity) as a function of water concentration as well as differential stress,
grain size, temperature, and pressure in both the diffusion and the dislocation
creep regimes. Water concentrations are determined by micro-infrared analyses,
microstructures produced by deformation are analyzed using optical and electron
microscopy, and fabrics are measured using electron backscattered
diffraction.&lt;br/&gt;