* 0439161
* RUI: Collaborative Research:  Improvements in the Application of the Mossbauer Effect to Studies of Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2009
* Melinda Dyar, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 01/31/2009
* USD 76,939.00

A set of Moessbauer spectroscopy experiments are proposed, designed to enable
true quantification of Fe3+ and Fe2+ contents in minerals. Valence state- and
site-specific recoil-free fraction "correction" factors for relating peak areas
to species abundance will be determined, four commercially-available software
packages for processing of Moessbauer data will be tested on a set of
petrologically-important minerals, and the capabilities of modern
instrumentation and modeling will be highlighted through a set of three, two-
year student projects designed to demonstrate the abilities of the new
technique. The intellectual merit of this project of this project has four
aspects: (1) improvement of Moessbauer analyses of wide range of minerals, (2)
understanding iron distribution in pyroxene, which is a common rock-forming
mineral on all terrestrial planets, (3) enabling for the first time analyses of
the redox state of iron in feldspars, and (4) study of an important metamorphic
mineral, chlorite, within the necessary, well-constrained petrologic framework.
The broader impact of this research will be worldwide improvements in
interpreting Moessbauer spectroscopic results from mineralogical studies. The
error bars on future studies of iron in minerals using Moessbauer spectroscopy
will be effectively reduced, and it will be demonstrated that this technique has
new capabilities that can be used to study geologic materials even in tiny
samples or those with a low percentage of iron. This project will have great
educational impact on the six women undergraduates (two each year) who will make
these projects the topics of senior theses.