* 0439768
* Theoretical Solid State Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Marvin Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John W. Mintmire
* 10/31/2008
* USD 948,000.00

This grant supports a long-range, broad-based theoretical research program in
condensed matter physics and computational materials science. The research
projects cover the fields of semiconductors, metals, surfaces and interfaces,
defects, superconductivity, materials under pressure, clusters, fullerene-based
materials, nanotubes and other nanostructures, conjugated polymers, and many-
electron effects in solids. The major objective is to use quantum theory to
explain and predict the properties of materials. Emphasis is placed on using
realistic models, close collaboration with experimentalists, investigations and
suggestions for producing novel and useful materials, development of new
theoretical approaches, and predictions related to electronic and structural
properties of solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many new techniques based on quantum
theory were developed in this research program to enable accurate calculations
of real materials. In particular, the ab initio pseudopotential method and total
energy techniques are applied within the density functional formalism to compute
ground-state properties. Excited-state (spectroscopic) phenomena are
investigated using a first-principle self-energy approach based on the GW
approximation for quasiparticle excitations and an ab initio two-particle
Green's function method based on the Bethe-Saltpeter equation for optical
excitations. Other studies rely on variational and diffusion Monte Carlo
approaches, molecular dynamics simulations, dielectric function methods, BCS
theory, density functional perturbation theory, and extensions of standard many-
body theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past successes include accurate predictions of
properties and the existence of new materials, electronic structure calculations
which allow band-gap engineering approaches to technology, and new theoretical
approaches. The research program builds on this work and goes in several new
directions. Specific projects include those related to understanding and
predicting the properties of nanotubes, fullerenes, molecular junctions, and
other nanostructures; electronic, vibrational and structural properties of
materials at ambient and high pressure; mechanical properties, elastic stability
and limit of strength of solids; electron-hole interaction and optical
properties of solids, defects and polymers; quasiparticle excitations and
electron correlations; and superconductivity and new formalisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is extensive involvement of graduate students and
postdoctoral associates in this research.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant
supports a long-range, broad-based theoretical research program in condensed
matter physics and computational materials science. The research projects cover
the fields of semiconductors, metals, surfaces and interfaces, defects,
superconductivity, materials under pressure, clusters, fullerene-based
materials, nanotubes and other nanostructures, conjugated polymers, and many-
electron effects in solids. The major objective is to use quantum theory to
explain and predict the properties of materials. Emphasis is placed on using
realistic models, close collaboration with experimentalists, investigations and
suggestions for producing novel and useful materials, development of new
theoretical approaches, and predictions related to electronic and structural
properties of solids. There is extensive involvement of graduate students and
postdoctoral associates in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;