* 0439042
* SGER: Manipulations of Upper Crown Water Supply to Assess The Role of Low Water Potential in Limiting The Height Growth of Trees
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2006
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2006
* USD 67,695.00

Size is a fundamental attribute of organisms, and studying the factors that
limit size can improve understanding of the genetic and environmental
constraints on organism function. The fossil record demonstrates that since
plants began to colonize land some 400 million years ago they have steadily
increased in size. Today the largest trees that can achieve heights in excess of
112 meters, or nearly 370 ft., (coast redwood, Sequoia sempervirens) and total
volumetric mass that exceeds 1485 m3 (an estimated 365,000 kg for giant Sequoia;
Sequoiadendron giganteum). The limits to tree height are not well understood,
but may be determined by the problem of raising water from the soil to the
uppermost leaves against the influence of gravity. Recent studies have
demonstrated that a major index of plant water stress, the "water potential" of
leaves, becomes progressively limiting to photosynthesis as trees grow taller.
Although the tallest trees grow where soils remain moist throughout the year,
the influence of gravity appears to increase water stress with increasing
height, and this may ultimately limit how tall trees can grow. This reasoning
predicts that if the uppermost branches of a very tall tree are provided with a
"local" source of water - i.e., water that has not been raised under tension
against gravity - then leaf water stress will be reduced and photosynthesis and
height growth will be increased. To test this prediction, the proposed study
will use several novel approaches to supplement water availability to the
uppermost branches of redwoods over 110 m in height. A suite of physiological
and growth measurements will reveal the extent to which the experimental
manipulations improve water potential and release photosynthesis and height
growth from the constraints due to gravity. The proposed research will develop
new methodologies that may have broad implications for studying water stress in
plants, including agriculturally important species. The research will increase
understanding of water stress in tall trees, including an important timber
species. Finally, it is expected that the results of this study will inform
understanding of how climate change may affect the growth and productivity of
forest trees. Funds will be used to engage undergraduate students in the
research process.