* 0439707
* Collaborative Research: Using the Products of Volcano-Ice Interaction to Constrain Paleo-Ice Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2006,12/31/2008
* Benjamin Edwards, Dickinson College
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 155,745.00

This is an integrated volcanological, sedimentological, geochemical and
geochronological study of mafic and intermediate-silicic glaciovolcanic and
glacial deposits from the Edziza Volcanic Complex (EVC), in northern British
Columbia, Canada to both constrain variations in Pleistocene ice conditions in
this region and to develop the methodology of using such a multi-disciplinary
study as a proxy for paleo-ice conditions/paleoclimate elsewhere in the world.
This project will develop a methodology based on integrating datasets from
glaciovolcanic and glaciogenic facies analysis, volatile and H-isotope analysis
of volcanic glass, and precise 40Ar/39Ar geochronology that could be used to
constrain Pleistocene ice conditions in British Columbia, and in many other
glaciated volcanic areas, such as the Cascades, the Andes, Iceland, west
Antarctica and Siberia. North-central British Columbia is a key area for
understanding the dynamics of the Cordilleran Ice Sheet (CIS), as models suggest
that this area lay close to the central and thickest part of the CIS during the
Last Glacial Maximum and was also located along a major ice divide. The
processes and products of mafic glaciovolcanism are well documented, but those
of intermediate-silicic glaciovolcanism are much less well known.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly increase our understanding
of this style of volcano-ice interaction. Studies of volcano-ice interaction on
Earth also help our understanding of deposits and edifices generated by magma-
ice interaction on Mars, which are recognized as significant astrobiological
targets.&lt;br/&gt;