* 0439665
* Collaborative Research: A Record of the Timing, Nature and Geometry of the Rheic Ocean in the Appalachian Carolina and Avalon Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2009
* Brent Miller, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* W James  Dunlap
* 12/31/2009
* USD 134,104.00

The Rheic Ocean opened in the wake of crustal blocks rifted from the northern
margin of Gondwana to form one of the most prominent Paleozoic global features;
its closure is responsible for one of the major collisions that produced the
supercontinent of Pangea. Despite its importance in the global evolution of the
Paleozoic, there is little knowledge of it paleogeogaphy. Most of what is known
is based on limited exposures found in Europe. Critical questions exist
regarding such fundamental aspects of the Rheic Ocean, including its timing and
mode of opening and its geometry with respect to Paleozoic continental elements.
In North America, a 3000 km long belt of peri-Gondwanan crustal blocks along the
eastern flank of the Appalachian orogen defined the leading edge of the Rheic
during its opening, yet the history of the Rheic recorded in these rocks has
been neglected. This study focuses on the two largest Rheic-related elements of
the Appalachian peri-Gondwanan realm, the Carolina and Avalon zones. The primary
objectives of this study are to 1) determine the time of opening of the Rheic
Ocean, 2) identify the mode of Rheic opening, and 3) constrain the geometry of
the Rheic during its evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives are being
addressed through the integration of several lines of study, including focused
geologic field mapping, geochemistry, high precision U-Pb and detrital zircon
provenance analysis. The character and timing of opening of the Rheic Ocean are
being addressed by combined geochemical- high precision U-Pb geochronological
studies on late stage mafic plutonic rocks in the Carolina zone. By comparison
with the established time of rifting of Avalon from Gondwana, these data will
better constrain the mode of opening of the Rheic. The detrital zircon study is
elucidating the original paleogeographic relationship between Carolina and
Avalon. These data are being used to test the hypothesis that Carolina and
Avalon once constituted a single 'ribbon continent' rifted from Gondwana.
Detrital zircon age spectra from time equivalent lithic assemblages throughout
each zone are elucidating long term trends and changes in source areas that
might arise from rifting, collision, or drift past other eroding crustal blocks.
Trends and changes in detrital zircon age spectra, considered in conjunction
with other available data, represent new constraints on the relative
paleogeography of the two zones. Detrital zircon data are also being utilized
with other extant data sets in an attempt to identify the source region(s) of
Carolina and Avalon; the original location of these crustal blocks is a
prerequisite to delineating the geometry of the Rheic at its birth. High
precision U-Pb zircon dating is providing tight age constraints on rocks of
particular significance. Finally, the most important aspect of any
geochronological/geochemical study is confidence in the field relations of the
sampled rocks. Focused field geologic mapping is being conducted in conjunction
with all sampling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;