* 0439186
* SGER:  Development of Methods for Analysis of Small Non-coding Transcrips by MPSS
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Pamela Green, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Vicki B. Vance
* 01/31/2006
* USD 199,746.00

The goal of this project is to develop and test methods to isolate, clone and
sequence small RNA molecules (21 to 24 nucleotides) on a larger scale than
previously possible. RNAs of this size have specific biological activities in
many eukaryotes. Preliminary data suggest that most of these tiny RNA molecules
are small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) or microRNAs (miRNAs). These small RNAs can
turn off genes by inhibiting the synthesis or function of longer RNAs, like
mRNAs, that they can base pair with. They do this by guiding protein complexes
to the RNA or the DNA that encodes it. In this manner, siRNAs can inhibit the
synthesis or cause degradation of mRNAs, whereas miRNAs can inhibit the ability
of mRNAs to be translated into protein. miRNAs can also cause accelerated
degradation of the mRNAs, similar to siRNAs. The identification and/or
prediction of siRNA and miRNA molecules have been hampered by limited
experimental data that characterize these molecules in depth. The application of
high-throughput approaches in this project will facilitate the identification of
these molecules and provide quantitative estimates of abundance for specific
small RNA molecules in a given tissue. Comparisons of the small RNA sequences to
genomic DNA may identify the source and/or target of these RNA fragments. The
methodology will be broadly applicable in many eukaryotes and can be used to
identify and measure small RNAs that are regulated in response to developmental,
biotic or abiotic cues. In this project, methods for the isolation, cloning and
sequencing by MPSS of these small RNA molecules will be developed and
implemented, and bioinformatics methods for the characterization and analysis of
the data will be initiated. These methods will be tested in two plant species
under multiple treatment conditions. For the genomic analysis of the data, an
existing customized database and web interface for the visualization of MPSS
data will be used (http://mpss.udel.edu/at). The data will be made public via
this web interface.