* 0439048
* Lattice Properties of Crystalline Solids with Glasslike Properties: Ultrasound Studies of Inclusion Compounds and Quasicrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 05/13/2004,05/31/2005
* Veerle Keppens, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2005
* USD 175,581.00

This proposal is designed to investigate the elastic response and ultrasonic
attenuation of a wide variety of "glasslike crystals" (materials that
simultaneously reflect both crystalline and glasslike properties). The
scientific issues that will be addressed include: (a) the relationship between
inclusion compounds, quasicrystals, and structural glasses, (b) are tunneling
states (which are typically found in glasses at low temperatures) intrinsic to
inclusion compounds and/or quasicrystals, and (c) structure-property
relationships - to what extent can various structural features be used to
predict the elastic properties of a given material? This research project will
use Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS) to probe the elastic properties of
the materials under investigation. RUS is a novel technique for determining the
elastic moduli of solids, based on the measurement of the resonances of a freely
vibrating body. The ultrasonic attenuation of the materials will be measured
using a standard pulse-echo technique. This proposal will contribute toward the
development of a strong solid-state program at The University of Mississippi.
Both advanced undergraduate and graduate students will gain in-depth experience
in ultrasound experiments and the techniques of low temperature physics.

"Ordinary" materials are either crystals (with long-range order, i.e., the atoms
are arranged in a periodic array) or glasses (with no long-range order). This
proposal will investigate the properties of some "extraordinary" materials such
as inclusion compounds and quasicrystals. These are materials that
simultaneously display both crystalline and glasslike properties. The project
will focus on the elastic properties of these remarkable solids, using a
relatively new technique, Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy (RUS). A study of
materials that display the unusual combination of glasslike and crystalline
features is expected to have an impact on two fronts. First, the investigation
of the glasslike properties found in these materials is expected to lead to a
better understaanding of the origin of glassy behavior. Since these materials
are of interest for technological (thermoelectric) applications, a better
understanding of their properties is essential for the design of materials with
superior properties. Secondly, this research will contribute to the training of
young scientists at the undergraduate and graduate level in Mississippi, who
will gain in-depth experience in the field of condensed-matter physics.