* 0439992
* High Resolution Upper Mantle Structure beneath the Tibetan Plateau and Its Surroundings from Studies of Seismic Waveforms
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2005,04/30/2008
* Lupei Zhu, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2008
* USD 113,530.00

Mountain building by continent-continent collision is the most important
orogenic process on Earth whose mechanism is not well understood. The collision
between India and Asia is the largest region of such collision and has produced
the world's most spectacular topography. Within this region, the Tibetan Plateau
stands out as a natural laboratory in which we can test hypotheses regarding a
fundamental process that has impacted continental dynamics. Collision models,
obtained in various studies, predict significantly different upper-mantle
structure beneath the plateau. The upper mantle, therefore, holds a key to
differentiating between possible collisional models and to unraveling how this
archetype of plateaus came into being. The objective of this research is to
determine high resolution 3-D upper-mantle P and S velocity structure beneath
the Tibetan Plateau and neighboring regions. The PIs will collect and process
available seismic waveform data of more than 300 broadband stations in the study
area from earthquakes in the upper-mantle distance range. These studies should
provide much improved lateral and depth resolution in the upper mantle than it
has been possible in all previous studies. The results of the proposed study can
be used to verify or dismiss existing collision models and to develop new ones.
The research topic is also closely related to several undergraduate and graduate
courses (plate tectonics and geodynamics) that the PI is currently developing
and teaching at SLU. The proposed research involves collaboration between Saint
Louis University and the Institute of Geophysics, Chinese Earthquake
Administration. It will use seismic data collected by several multi-national
(China, France, Germany, USA, etc) projects in Tibet.