* 0439810
* Studies of Spin-Currents, Anomalous Hall Effect and Ballistic Electron Propagation in Quench Condensed Alkali Films
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Gerd Bergmann, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/28/2009
* USD 325,000.00

This individual investigator award is to study the properties of alkali metal
films that get modified when they are in contact with other materials. Alkali
metals have the unique property that even in quench-condensed films the
conduction electrons have long mean free paths. With quenched condensation,
complex sandwiches can be prepared and the ballistic propagation of conduction
electrons can be investigated in situ. Alkali films in weak contact with Fe
films show strong spin currents. One focus of the proposed research is the study
of spin currents and the anomalous Hall effect. Both phenomena have attracted
strong interest in recent years because of their importance in the field of
spintronics. Furthermore, alkali metal films have found important applications
in the storage of hyperpolarized noble gases (which are used in MRI of the
lungs). Only containers covered with alkali films can store the hyperpolarized
noble gases over a sufficiently long time and the cause of it is not understood
at present. &lt;br/&gt;The project introduces graduate and undergraduate
students to the techniques of high vacuum, low temperature, and thin film
physics. Undergraduate students who participated in previous research projects
in the principal investigator's group have won first and second prizes in
university-wide undergraduate research competition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Films
of alkali metals became recently important in the medical application of MRI to
the lungs and other air filled organs. For the MRI of the lungs, one needs
hyperpolarized noble gases (for example He3). Only containers covered with
alkali films can store these gases for sufficiently long times. The property of
alkali metals that makes this possible is not clear at present. Within the
proposed project, the modified properties of alkali films when in contact with
other material will be investigated. Alkali films have the unique property that
they form a rather perfect lattice even when they are condensed onto a liquid-
helium-cooled substrate. Therefore, the ballistic propagation of conduction
electrons can be investigated in complex multi-films of alkali and other metals.
The project focuses on the investigation of spin currents in iron-alkali multi-
films and the properties of thin alkali films in contact with other
materials.&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces graduate and undergraduate students
to the techniques of high vacuum, low temperature, and thin film physics and
trains them as competent workers for frontier scientific research. Undergraduate
students who participated in previous research projects in the principal
investigator's group have won first and second prizes in university-wide
undergraduate research competition.&lt;br/&gt;