* 0439630
* Setting an Academic Research Agenda for the FIATECH Capital Projects Technology Roadmap Inititaive:  An Interdisciplinary Charrette
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Jorge Vanegas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/2005
* USD 66,593.00

SETTING AN ACADEMIC RESEARCH AGENDA FOR THE&lt;br/&gt;FIATECH CAPITAL PROJECTS
TECHNOLOGY ROADMAP INITIATIVE:&lt;br/&gt;AN INTERDISCIPLINARY
CHARRETTE&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The capital projects industry delivers
and maintains facilities (e.g., commercial, institutional, industrial, and
residential buildings), and also critical civil infrastructure systems (e.g.,
transportation, energy, water and sewage, and communication systems). FIATECH,
formed as a collaborative and non-profit R&amp;D consortium composed of owners
in the private and public sectors, engineering, procurement, and construction
contractors, research organizations, and a small number of academic
institutions, provides an integrating entity to address current challenges,
pressures, issues, and opportunities facing this industry. One of FIATECH's
primary focuses to date has been the development of the Capital Projects
Technology Roadmap, which provides an overarching vision of a highly automated
capital project and facility management environment, in which the operations and
systems of all project partners and project functions are instantly and securely
interconnected and integrated across all phases of the facility life cycle, and
within which data, information, knowledge, and experience are available on
demand, wherever and whenever they are needed to all interested stakeholders. In
this project, the principal investigator, with the assistance from a Steering
Committee, targets members of the Academic Community who have not participated
in developing the technology roadmap, and engages them to contribute to research
and education programs, projects, and activities related to nine functional
elements of the vision model of the technology roadmap, and to seven program
plans for its tactical implementation. More specifically, the project
identifies, invites, and brings together, in a three-day charrette, a select
multidisciplinary group of academic experts to (1) present and discuss the
functional elements and program plans; and (2) collect, discuss, and record
their reactions and in-depth critiques. The principal outcomes of this project
include: first, the alignment between the Academic Community and the FIATECH
Consortium around the technology roadmap; second, the development of a research
agenda for the Academic Community's future involvement in supporting and
furthering FIATECH's vision, mission, and goals; and third, a proposal for
collaboration in research and education programs, projects, and activities
between the Academic Community and the FIATECH Consortium. &lt;br/&gt;This
project engages academic experts from multiple disciplines, who normally do not
have many opportunities to interact with each other (e.g., Construction
Engineering and Management, Civil and Environmental Engineering, other
Engineering disciplines such as Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, Industrial and Systems Engineering, and other affinity disciplines
such as Public Policy, Management, Architecture, and Computer Science), in a
meaningful and focused dialogue toward strengthening and enhancing the new and
bold paradigm of technology for the capital projects industry posed by FIATECH.
This paradigm envisions (1) automated systems, processes, and equipment, to
drastically reduce the time and cost of planning, design, and construction of
facilities and critical civil infrastructure systems in both the public and the
private sectors; (2) scenario-based planning systems and modeling tools, to
enable rapid and accurate evaluation of multiple project alternatives, to find
the best balance of quality, value, performance, productivity, and cost and time
effectiveness; and (3) new materials and methods, to reduce the time and cost of
construction and greatly extend facility performance, functionality, aesthetics,
affordability, sustainability, security, and responsiveness to changing business
demands. This active engagement of the academic community in implementing this
paradigm not only enhances and strengthens the infrastructure for research and
education in the specific knowledge domains addressed within the Capital
Projects Technology Roadmap, but more importantly, ensures the delivery,
operation, and maintenance of the facilities and the critical civil
infrastructure systems that form the U.S. industrial base, supporting both the
Nation's economy and the way of life of modern society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;