* 0439095
* Why Doesn't Childhood Association Always Inhibit Sexual Attraction?
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2005,02/29/2008
* Arthur Wolf, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2008
* USD 88,666.00

One of the few questions that have engaged the attention of philosophers and the
theologians as well as social and biological scientists is the origins of the
nearly universal prohibition on sexual relations between close relatives. Until
only a few years ago the central question was: Is the prohibition constructed to
protect human beings from a natural inclination to mate and marry their close
relatives or is the prohibition rooted in a sexual aversion aroused by early
childhood association? In other words, does the incest taboo repress or express
a natural human tendency? Evidence from studies in Israel and Taiwan has shown
that children reared together from an early age develop an aversion to sexual
relations. Most scientists agree that the ultimate cause is the dangers of
inbreeding. But the proximate cause is the subject of this project. The primary
purpose of this project is to examine Taiwanese minor marriages (where the bride
is reared from a young age as a sibling of the groom). Household registers
compiled by the Japanese colonial government make it possible to reconstruct the
families in which couples married in the minor fashion were reared and determine
whether or not their parents married in the minor fashion and with what result.
This creates the possibility of determining what it is about early association
that is heritable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. The broader implication
of the research concerns our understanding of human sexuality in general. It is
very unlikely that incest is an isolated aspect of human sexuality. Evidence
concerning the conditions that do or do not inhibit sexual attractions among
close relatives will be of general interest because it is certain to have
implications for our understanding of sexual attraction in general. &lt;br/&gt;