* 0439096
* Collaborative Research:     SGER:    Computer-Assisted Interpretation of Citizen Input in Rebuilding Lower Manhattan
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* David Stark, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 34,619.00

This is a collaborative grant with two PIs; Javed Mostafa of Indiana, and David
Stark of Columbia.

Intellectual Merit With a grant from the NSF Digital Government Program, David
Stark has been studying the role of information technologies in the public
debate surrounding the rebuilding of Lower Manhattan in the wake of the
September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center. In the process of conducting
that research Stark's team has assembled an extensive digital archive containing
5,000 participant oral statements from one town hall meeting and an additional
19,000 oral statements collected at 240 different venues around New York City in
the 'Imagine New York Envisioning Workshops'. These gathered statements provide
a rich opportunity for testing various strategies of computer-assisted
interpretation because they provide an opportunity to compare the conceptual
patterns discerned by human intelligence with findings reached through the
analytical methods of artificial intelligence. Supporting the initial
explotation of that archive is the purpose of this grant.

The technical component of this grant arises from work Javed Mostafa has done
under an NSF ITR grant. Data mining research concentrating on spontaneous human
conversations is at an early stage of development. Mostafa's approach to data
mining can offer different ways to analyze the same data. The project has three
specific goals: 1) to detect emergent concepts by applying techniques that do
not impose any a priori conditions; 2) to use techniques for analyzing known
concepts by applying constraints on the mining process, and 3) to develop
visualization of the results to facilitate interpretation by social scientists
and support direct validation by citizen participants.

Broad Impact Computer mediated communication offers new channels for citizens to
express their views to elected officials and government agencies. Often, the
resulting deluge of comments poses a technical and political challenge. How can
officials/agencies make sense of large-scale citizen input? How can meaningful
patterns be efficiently and effectively identified? This project will contribute
to advancing understanding of the opportunities and the limitations of computer-
assisted interpretation. Its findings will be of considerable interest to
scholars as well as to government managers responsible for the rebuilding of
lower Manhattan.

Summary Many challenges involved in creating new data mining tools demands an
interdisciplinary collaboration for access to new data; this project offers such
an opportunity. This time-critical testing of artificial intelligence methods
will be important in understanding the public input to rebuilding lower
Manhattan.

