* 0439074
* SGER: Liquid Logic-The 3rd Wave in Electronics
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/2004,10/31/2006
* Andrew Steckl, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 10/31/2006
* USD 46,976.00

Research Objectives

The objective of this research is to determine the feasibility of liquid state
electronics. At the heart of the proposed "liquid logic" transistors is the
electrowetting (EW) process. EW provides control of the contact angle between an
electrolyte and a solid surface through the application of an electric field
across the liquid. Combining the EW effect in a conducting (polar) liquid with a
hydrophobic insulator we can design an insulated gate field effect transistor
(IGFET) structure that is functionally very similar to the semiconductor MOSFET.
The main activities of the project will be: investigation of materials choices;
design, fabrication and characterization of liquid state transistors.

Intellectual Merit & Broader Impact

Liquid logic is a revolutionary new approach to electronics that proposes to use
liquids as the active medium. The development of liquid electronics will enable
large area ("human-scale") circuits for various applications: large flat or
flexible panel displays, large array antennas, scanners/printers/copiers, large
area sensors, full-size medical imaging systems, photovoltaic arrays,
electrotextiles (wearable electronics), electronic newspapers.

This project will provide interactions with faculty and graduate students at the
University of Cincinnati (UC) in Electrical Engineering, Chemistry, Physics, and
Materials Engineering. Biomedical applications of liquid logic transistors will
be explored in collaboration with the UC Medical School.