* 0439649
* Joint Stochastic Non-Linear Inversion of Hydrogeophysical Data for Improved Vadose Zone Characterization and Monitoring
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2005,12/31/2007
* Yoram Rubin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

0439649 Rubin The vadose zone is an extremely important region to consider for
environmental, agricultural and atmospheric science applications. As analyses
related to vadose zone become more sophisticated, there is a mounting pressure
to provide more detailed, high-resolution imaging capabilities. One of the
breakthroughs in that direction has been the introduction of geophysical surveys
as a key tool for hydrologic characterization. Yet, a characterization approach
that can handle the nonlinearities and complexities inherent in vadose zone
flow, including hysteresis and preferential flow, and geophysical processes, is
still a challenge. Several promising techniques have been proposed recently, and
additional investigation is needed to better understand their strength and
limitations. The objective of the proposed research is to develop a stochastic
inversion procedure that will allow addressing these challenges. We shall focus
on the combined use of crosshole radar (GPR) and hydrogeologic data such as soil
moisture and pressure head, obtained from boreholes, to provide high-resolution
imaging of soil moisture dynamics, and subsequently for inverse modeling. Our
hypothesis is that an inversion framework that is based on simultaneous
inversion of geophysical and hydrological measurements and on non-linear
modeling of the flow processes and of the geophysical surveys, improves our
ability to characterize the vadose zone. The inversion of the geophysical and
hydrogeological data will be carried out simultaneously using non-linear
mathematical models of the flow and geophysical processes to relate between
target parameters (lithology, permeability, other soil's parameters needed for
modeling of the relative conductivity and water retentivity), and input data.
This is motivated by the following observations. First, current methods for
integrating hydrogeological and geophysical data are either sequential or
iterative. The problem with sequential methods is that the error associated with
the geophysical inversion is ignored, and the problem with the iterative methods
is that convergence is not guaranteed, unless special conditions are met, which
are difficult to evaluate. Second, several promising inversion procedures have
been explored recently based on linearization (low-order approximations in terms
of variability) of the flow equation. Our fully non-linear approach will explore
their strength and limitations. The procedure will be stochastic in nature, with
the goal of characterizing the target parameters through their multivariate
spatial probability distributions. A stochastic approach is chosen because it
allows to treat rationally the uncertainty due to spatial variability, data
scarcity and measurement error. A Bayesian formulation will be pursued, because
it allows combining prior information with site-specific measurements. Entropy-
based methods (MRE: minimum Relative entropy) will be employed for determining
prior probability distributions of parameters from constraints based on
prior/extraneous information, with minimum subjectivity. Fuzzy neural networks
will be used to develop petrophysical models. The proposed approach will be
tested using a digital analogue-based synthetic model, and data from a field
experiment carried out at the DOE site at Hanford. The synthetic study will test
our ability to identify the soil's hydraulic parameters away from wells, and the
Hanford study will assess our capability to improve predictive capabilities. The
intellectual merits are primarily in the consistent treatment of uncertainty in
both the geophysical and hydrological data through joint inversion (non-
sequential, non-iterative), and in the use of non-linear mathematical models for
the flow and geophysical processes. While ad-hoc methods for joint inversion,
based on linearization of the flow equation, were found satisfactory, a
scientific basis is needed for establishing their strength and limitations, and
for exploring problems which are outside of current capabilities (i.e., larger
variability, irregular and transient boundary conditions, and sharp fronts).
There are two points we propose to consider in terms of the broader impact of
the project. The first concerns geophysical inversion. It is common in the
geophysical community to ignore hydrogeological constraints. While geophysical
surveys are making inroads into hydrogeology, this is not true the other way
around. The interpretation approach we propose can create a positive impact in
that direction. The second point we view as important is the holistic approach
to stochastic analysis, including all sources of error, and a rational treatment
of prior information. From a narrow perspective, this approach intends to remove
inconsistency in the treatment of geophysical data and to avoid subjectivity in
the prior, but from a broader perspective, these ideas are meritorious for a
broad class of inverse problems in and outside hydrogeology, where combined use
of many sources of data, including priors, is still a challenge.