* 0439766
* ABR: Experimental Studies of Thermo-Chemical Convection in the Mantles of Terrestrial Planets
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* Mark Richards, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 233,940.00

Heat and mass transfer across thermal and chemical boundary layers within the
mantle play a dominant role in the evolution of the terrestrial planets.
Although the interior of planets is not accessible for direct observation, there
are still seismological, mineral physics, geodetic, and geochemical data that
provide constraints on mantle dynamics. Relating these observations to
geodynamic processes is critical for advancing our understanding of the Earth's
evolution.

This project will use laboratory experiments to characterize the spatial and
temporal evolution of compositional heterogeneity in the mantle. The focus will
be on fine-scale structures produced by entrainment and stirring. An
experimental approach will be used because it is well suited for thermo-chemical
convection. The overall goals of the experiments are to 1) elucidate the
coupling of heat transfer and flow in a compositionally heterogeneous mantle, 2)
characterize entrainment processes and quantify entrainment rates, 3)
characterize the spatial and temporal evolution of compositional heterogeneity,
4) understand the initiation and extinction of thermo-chemical plumes. A second
project will focus the interaction between thermo-chemical convection and flow
associated with plate motions.The results of these studies will provide a basis
for interpreting and drawing conclusions from indirect observations, in
particular seismology and geochemistry.

This project will provide a training opportunity for a graduate student, and an
introduction to research for undergraduates. Outreach beyond the group involved
directly in the research will be through classes at UC Berkeley, scientific
conferences and refereed publications. This project should lead to new
interdisciplinary collaborations between the engineering and geodynamics
communities.