* 0439676
* Evolution of Intraplate Volcanism in a Diffuse Igneous Province: A Case Study of the Pribilof Islands, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2005,05/31/2008
* Todd Feeley, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2008
* USD 159,947.00

This proposal is for an integrated field, 40Ar/39Ar dating, geochemical,
isotopic, and petrologic study of volcanism in the Pribilof Islands, Alaska. The
two principal Pribilof Islands, St. Paul and St. George, are key volcanic fields
in the little studied Bering Sea basalt province (BSBP). The BSBP is an example
of a 'diffuse igneous province,' a newly recognized and poorly understood type
of intraplate volcanism. The Pribilof Islands have been selected for this study
because they allow investigation of two major BSBP volcanic fields in a setting
where factors such as lithospheric thickness and composition, distance from the
Aleutian arc front, and other tectonic factors are essentially constant. This in
turn allows assessment of whether differences exist in the evolution of the
centers due to factors such as structural evolution, mantle and crustal mass
balance involved in magmatism, and magma reservoirs and plumbing systems. The
specific objectives of the project are to 1) document the volcanic and geologic
evolution of the Pribilof Islands through detailed geologic mapping, sampling,
and 40Ar/39Ar dating; 2) identify any temporal trends in composition through
geochemical analyses of samples whose ages are well constrained; 3) determine
the geometry and timing of faulting on the islands and its influence on eruptive
activity and localization of distinct vent types; and 4) obtain suitably
complete chemical (XRF and ICP-MS), isotopic (Sr, Nd, Pb, and O), and petrologic
data for the volcanic rocks and included xenoliths so that the nature of the
mantle and crustal source rocks and parent magmas can be constrained, the
degrees of partial melting estimated, and the petrogenesis of the magmas
determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant aspect of this work is that
there are several broad impacts that extend well beyond understanding the
petrology of the volcanic rocks. These impacts draw from the important human and
wildlife communities on the Pribilof islands. Notable aspects are that the
islands host the largest Aleut communities on earth, are the seasonal breeding
grounds for over half of the world's northern fur seals, and are the nesting
sites for nearly three million seabirds. It is likely that differences in the
distributions of these populations among the islands reflect the timing and
migration of Pleistocene to Holocene volcanism and faulting in the region.
Better understanding of the geologic evolution of the Pribilof Islands will
therefore permit greater insight into the dominant controls on the contrasting
geomorphology of each island and their contrasting wildlife and human
populations. &lt;br/&gt;