* 0439183
* 3rd International Workshop on Nanoscale Spectroscopy; College Park, MD
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2004,03/31/2005
* Raymond Phaneuf, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Rapid developments in nanotechnology require the creation of tools for
spectroscopic measurements at the nanometer scale. Much of nanotechnology is
driven by quantum confinement effects that modify bulk properties when the
length scale of a nanostructure becomes comparable to wave function spatial
extents in the material. To understand the modification of optical and
electronic properties requires spectroscopic tools that can make measurements at
the resolution of a single nano-structure, typically 1-10 nm. This is far below
the wavelength limit of probes using visual light, so many conventional probes
must be modified to use near-field approaches or re-invented altogether. The
purpose of this workshop is to exchange ideas amongst researchers in the field,
with the intention of developing tools that will match the fabrication
capabilities now emerging in nano-technology.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Materials
fabrication at very small size structures results in interesting new properties.
Often, properties of a material are modified in useful ways when the particle
sizes become so small that only a few hundred or a few thousand atoms are
present in a single particle. In that limit, materials properties are an amalgam
of those of the bulk material and those of single atom. This gives an
opportunity to modify materials properties without fabrication of "new"
materials; instead the modification takes place simply by changing the particle
size of existing materials. One important challenge is to create measurement
techniques that can study material properties that originate from only a single
grain of these "nano-structured" materials. This requires changing conventional
measurement tools so that the spot size for the measurement is at least one
hundred times smaller than in current practice. The purpose of this workshop is
to exchange ideas within the research community that is developing such
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;