* 0439418
* SGER: Stress State Dependence of Peierls Barriers and Dislocation Kinetics at the Nanoscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Vaclav Vitek, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

The plastic behavior of crystalline materials is governed by dislocation glide
and the yield and flow stress is determined by the ability of dislocations to
circumvent obstacles. Localized obstacles that can be overcome with the aid of
thermal activations control temperature and strain rate dependencies. Among
those, the Peierls barrier is particularly significant. It is an intrinsic
property of a specific material, related to the atomic structure of the
dislocation cores. It cannot be altered by treatments, such as purification,
annealing etc., unless the nature of the material is altered. While the
dislocation core structure affects deformation properties at all scales, it is
most important at nanocale when the size of the samples and/or components
becomes comparable with the extent of the critical thermally activated event of
overcoming the Peierls barrier. Furthermore, at this scale other obstacles may
be separated so as to diminish in importance, while the Peierls barrier relates
to the inherent lattice resistance. When the dislocation core effects are
important, unexpected deformation modes together with strong and often unusual
dependence of the yield and flow stress on temperature and crystal orientation
are common. A prominent feature is that the plastic flow is influenced by the
entire stress tensor rather than only by the Schmid stress, i. e. the shear
stress in the slip direction in the slip plane. An outstanding challenge is to
identify and quantify how the atomic level core properties project onto the
nanoscale via thermally activated motion of dislocations and then percolate
through the mesoscale dynamics of dislocations up to the macroscopic flow
properties. The link and interplay between the two lowest levels of this
hierarchy is the focus of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research.

The state-of-the-art atomistic calculations, carried out by the investigators,
expose the exact tensorial stress-state dependence of the Peierls stress, which
is the stress needed to overcome the Peierls barrier at 0K. However, they do not
reveal the Peierls barrier alone and its stress-state dependence. Hence, the
principal challenge of the proposed research is to utilize the atomic level
understanding of the stress-state dependence of the Peierls stress in the
theoretical analysis of the thermally activated dislocation motion. The
researchers will employ for this purpose the multidimensional Kramers approach
in which the thermal activation over the energy barrier is treated using the
stochastic Langevin equation with associated 'friction coefficients' for the
reaction and nonreaction modes. In the present context, the 'friction'
represents the cumulative effect of core transformations induced by the applied
stress tensor, which slows down and/or accelerates the kinetics of escape over
the barrier. The exploratory aspect of this project is primarily related to how
the friction coefficients can be connected to the stress-state dependence of the
Peierls stress determined by atomistic simulations of the dislocation cores and
related glide at 0K.

The outcome of this research will be constitutive relations for the dislocation
mobility that encapsulate the effects of temperature and stress induced atomic
level core transformations. These relations may then be employed in modeling
that ranges from nanoscale dislocation dynamics to continuum analyses of plastic
yielding in single and polycrystals. The results of such analysis will
accurately reflect the effect of atomic level core properties of dislocations on
plastic flow at the nanoscale and via further coarse graining, also on micro and
macro scale.

This research that links dislocation kinetics at the nanoscale with the atomic
level properties of dislocations has wide ramifications. It may provide entirely
new insights into how the atomic structure of dislocations affects the
dislocation kinetics at finite temperatures. This is of paramount importance, as
both functional and structural materials are becoming more complex chemically
and crystallographically. It is expect that the proposed research will have
major impact not only as a scientific advancement but also in industrial
developments when newly formulated constitutive relations become parts of
modeling tools, which can be used by materials researchers, as well as device
designers.