* 0439574
* SGER:  Dynamic Evolution of DNA Supercoils and Loops
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Noel Perkins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* mario rotea
* 12/31/2005
* USD 44,474.00

&lt;br/&gt;DYNAMIC EVOLUTION OF DNA SUPERCOILS AND
LOOPS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noel Perkins and Edgar
Meyhofer&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical Engineering&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2125&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
proposed research employs methods of nonlinear dynamical systems to explore the
fundamental biological functions of DNA. Critical biological functions such as
replication and transcription are influenced by the shape or "structure" of DNA.
This very long molecule (length is thousand times longer than diameter) is
extraordinarily flexible, and it can undergo nonlinear motions that can regulate
(i.e. control) gene expression. For example, proteins can force segments of DNA
into loops that prevent transcription. In addition, thermal energy excites
vibrations of DNA and resulting changes in supercoiled states can promote
transcription. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motions described above occur over very
long length scales (hundreds to tens of thousands of nanometers) and on very
long time scales (microsecond to millisecond) relative to atomic dimensions
(angstrom) and molecular dynamic rates (picosecond and smaller). It is the long-
term objective of our research program to understand these dynamical processes
through novel theories and experiments on DNA structural dynamics. A promising
dynamical theory for long length/time scales follows from treating the long
chain molecule as a dynamic continuum rod. The first step in our research plan
is to develop a nonlinear computational rod model for DNA supercoils and loops.
Major challenges to be considered include 1) the nonlinear deformation, 2)
spatial non-uniformity and anisotropy (e.g., "sequence-dependent" stiffness and
"intrinsic" curvature and twist), 3) self-contact/electrostatics and
interwinding, 4) dissipation, and 5) efficient numerical algorithms. We will
then employ our computational model in two strategic case studies. The first
case study focuses on the dynamic evolution of supercoils for strands subjected
to controlled end rotation as observed in recent single molecule experiments.
The second case study explores the looping of DNA when subjected to a bound
protein known as the lac repressor. Our interdisciplinary research team, which
possesses the requisite background in dynamical systems and molecular biology,
is well-positioned to make these fundamental investigations of DNA dynamics by
advancing methods from the engineering sciences.&lt;br/&gt;