* 0439122
* Studies of the Evolution of the Terrestrial Mantle Using Neon Isotopes in Ocean Island and Island Arc Basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,12/31/2008
* David Hilton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 281,913.00

This study is to pursue geochemical studies in two related areas of terrestrial
mantle research using neon isotopes as the primary geochemical tracer. The first
area concerns the origin of mantle plumes. Neon isotopic heterogeneity among
various classes of ocean island basalt (OIB) will be pursued as a means of
sampling different reservoirs in the terrestrial mantle. The ultimate goal of
the project is to further evaluate the relationship between He and Ne by
targeting Icelandic hyaloclastites and sub-aerial lavas, which have amongst the
highest 3He/4He values worldwide. The plan is to characterize the neon isotope
characteristics of the most primitive mantle, and also, to analyze samples
having HIMU-type geochemical characteristics from La Palma (Spain) and Mangaia
(Cook Islands) to consider the Ne isotope characteristics of this important
mantle end-member. The focus of this part of the study will be to ascertain the
extent of involvement of recycled components in the genesis of
OIB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A secondary goal of the project is to consider the
extent of volatile recycling via subduction zones. Two subduction zones
previously identified by the NSF-sponsored MARGINS initiative (Central America
and the Izu-Bonin-Mariana system) will be targeted in order to search for
evidence of shallow versus deep contributions to the volatile output via arc
volcanism. Relationships between neon isotopes and other indices of mantle- or
air-derived contributions (specific isotopes of He and Ar) will be investigated
with the aim of quantifying their contributions to the total mass balance.
Subduction of noble gases (and other volatiles) has the potential to exert a
strong control on the geochemical evolution of the
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this proposal will be on two areas of
research activity at SIO/UCSD. First, it will re-establish a dedicated neon
isotope facility whose primary role is training of graduate students and post-
doctoral visitors. Second, the neon mass spectrometer (VG5400) is sited in the
Fluids and Volatiles Laboratory at SIO. The VG5400 is an important addition to
the facility such that students and visitors alike will be exposed to many
different facets of noble gas research enhancing their training experience.
&lt;br/&gt;