* 0439732
* Collaborative Research:  Multi-tracer Investigation of Interbasin Groundwater Transfer in the Lowland Rainforest of Costa Rica
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2005,10/31/2008
* David Genereux, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 10/31/2008
* USD 234,702.00

0439732 Genereux

Existing data suggest interbasin groundwater flow (IGF) beneath surface
topographic divides is responsible for large inputs of water and solutes to some
lowland rainforest watersheds in Costa Rica. In this work age-dating tracers and
trace gases will be used together with stable isotopes and major ions to test
this conceptual hydrologic model for mixing of old regional groundwater (IGF)
and much younger local groundwater in the watersheds. The tracers to be used are
CFCs, 3H/3He, SF6, 4He, 14C, 36Cl, 18O, dissolved trace gases (Ne, Ar, Kr, N2,
and O2), and major ions. Tracers will be measured in groundwater, spring water,
and (for the non-volatile tracers only) streamwater, during both the wet season
and dry season. The project will: 1. Improve understanding of an important but
understudied hydrologic process, IGF: Wherever IGF exists, quantitative
knowledge of it is central to understanding the hydrology and water quality of
lowland watersheds, and the status and function of those watersheds as
ecosystems. 2. Test the consistency of several tracer methods through their
simultaneous application to a well-posed problem on an important hydrologic
process in a new setting (rain forest with volcanic geology): Testing our
conceptual hydrologic model will also test the general utility of state-of-the-
art tracer data in identifying and quantifying mixing between groundwaters of
very different age in a complex discharge area. 3. Help illustrate the practical
significance of IGF for land/water management: The conceptual hydrologic model
to be tested here suggests that full protection of lowland rainforest watersheds
and ecosystems requires understanding a regional groundwater system whose
volume, boundaries, and recharge areas are currently not known (but will be
constrained by the results). Support for the model would underscore the
importance of a regional approach to land and water management in the presence
of IGF, and motivate further study of IGF at other sites. 4. Advance education
and research: The project will have strong educational/training benefits for a
graduate student who will master several state-of-the-art tracer techniques. The
research partners (NCSU, USGS, Univ. of Utah, and the Organization for Tropical
Studies) will build collaborations that enhance their current research and
training activities, make this work possible, and have the potential to carry
over to future activities.