* 0439443
* Foundation Science:  A Comprehensive High School Science Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2004,11/30/2011
* Jacqueline Miller, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 11/30/2011
* USD 5,851,672.00

Building on the one-semester module on chemistry completed in Phase I of
"Foundation Science," a comprehensive science curriculum for grades 9-11 is
developed in Phase II. The completed "Foundation Science" provides high schools
with a scientifically-based, modular science curriculum with supporting
professional development and outreach materials that accommodate the variety of
approaches that school districts take in their secondary science programs. The
curriculum responds to challenges faced by high schools in meeting state and
national standards, preparing students for high stakes testing, accommodating
new understandings about how students learn, updating teacher content and
pedagogical knowledge and serving an increasingly diverse student population.
The curriculum consists of eight one-semester modules -- two each in biology,
chemistry, Earth science, and physics. Each module comprises four units each
developing a particular set of concepts through two to four story-driven
learning experiences. The first module in each discipline develops introductory
conceptual understandings appropriate for grades 9 and 10 and skills in critical
thinking, problem solving, communications and laboratory techniques. The second
module in each discipline builds on the first to provide deeper, more complex
and more extended learning in grade 11. Students complete all four of the first
modules and two of the second. Thus, students obtain a challenging, rigorous
science education that provides a foundation in scientific understanding and
literacy skills and prepares them to pursue higher-level learning in science.
The professional development materials support the adoption, implementation and
integration of the instructional materials into the classroom and support
teachers in the use of multiple assessments to conclusions about the
effectiveness of the materials with different populations of students.
Professional development includes a self-evaluation of the content knowledge
component with resources available for teachers to increase their understanding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;