* 0439093
* Consequences of Changing Topography on Pyroclastic Flow Dispersal During the Current Active Cycle of Tungurahua, Ecuador
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2005,06/30/2008
* Michael Sheridan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2008
* USD 245,297.00

Tungurahua, a 5,023 m high volcano in Ecuador produces a catastrophic eruption
approximately every 100 years. Since 1999, potential volcanic flows from the
current eruption threaten the town of Banos (~20,000 inhabitants) that is
located only 6 km from the summit. This study will show how rapid deposition and
erosion related to this eruption change the local ground surface within valleys
near populated areas. Computer simulations of volcanic flows will incorporate
topographic changes to more accurately forecast the areas that could be affected
by subsequent flows. This investigation will determine the consequences of these
simulations on associated hazards by determining the pattern of historical
activity, establishing the effects of continuous volcanic activity on evolution
of valley geomorphology, and ascertaining the new hazards associated with
changes in the valley configuration. This essentially is real-time hazard
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional broader impacts of this study will be
to support field and laboratory work of one Ph.D. researcher and 3 undergraduate
students from the University at Buffalo. The participation of students from
underrepresented groups, especially of Hispanic background, will be encouraged.
Students and professionals from Instituto Geofisico, Escuela Politecnica
Nacional in Quito (IG-EPN) in Ecuador will also participate in work in an
exchange between the two universities. Data from this project will be of
particular interest to groups studying the broader-scale problem of hazards
related to eruptions of similar volcanoes elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;