* 0439930
* Model of Earth and Planetary Chemistry:  Prediction of Solid/Liquid/Gas Equilibria in Aluminosilicate, Evaporite and Carbonate Systems to High Concentration and Temperature 0- 250C
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2005,03/31/2006
* Nancy Moller, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 03/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

Aluminosilicate minerals are found throughout the earth's surface and crust,
commonly as feldspars in metamorphic and igneous rock, as clays in well-
weathered soils and as authigenic constituents of evaporites. This one year
research project develops modeling technology, based on the Pitzer
representation of the aqueous solution free energy, to accurately predict the
chemical behavior of natural fluids in contact with aluminosilicate minerals to
high solution concentration and temperature. The Pitzer models developed by this
group (TEQUIL, geotherm.ucsd.edu), can predict properties such as the activity
of solute species, the solubility of minerals and the vapor pressure above
solutions for formation fluids below 300C in evaporite, carbonate and silica
systems with accuracies near that of data. The TEQUIL models include many of the
solution species necessary to determine the saturation status of natural fluids
in contact with aluminosilicate minerals but do not include Al solution species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aqueous chemistry of aluminum is complex, and, because
of the low solubility of Al containing minerals, precise data are difficult to
obtain. In this project it is planned to generate a model of aluminum aqueous
chemistry to ~250C in sodium chloride solutions using recently determined
effective equilibrium constants for mononuclear Al speciation reactions via
solubility studies and potentiometric titrations (Wesolowski, Palmer, Benezeth,
Bourcier, Castet). This solution model will be the first high accuracy equation
of state that summarizes these data and is tailored to provide mixing properties
in the high concentration region. It is also planned to, then, initiate
development of a thermodynamic data base for aluminosilicate minerals (including
alkali feldspars) that is consistent with the solution models obtained. This
work will develop the methods necessary to include many solids in this extremely
important class of rock forming minerals in a high concentration, temperature-
dependent model. &lt;br/&gt;