* 0439641
* Conference on New Development of Statistical Analysis in Wildlife, Fisheries, and Ecological Research
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2005
* Lori Thombs, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

As technology has advanced dramatically in recent years,
both&lt;br/&gt;statistical research and wildlife, fisheries, and ecological
research&lt;br/&gt;have moved into a new era. However, the use of advanced
statistical&lt;br/&gt;methods in wildlife, fisheries, and ecological research is
in its&lt;br/&gt;infancy. There remain many fundamental statistical and
computational&lt;br/&gt;issues. There is a substantial interest among
biological&lt;br/&gt;scientists and statisticians in the development of modern
statistical&lt;br/&gt;methods with which to answer the relevant scientific
questions.&lt;br/&gt;In the recent years, many new statistical methods (such
as&lt;br/&gt;spatial-temporal models, multiple testing, stochastic search
variable&lt;br/&gt;selection, Bayesian model averaging, Bayesian hierarchical
models,&lt;br/&gt;latent variable methods, and Markov chain Monte Carlo methods,
to name&lt;br/&gt;a few) are developed to deal with such
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators request funding to host a
Conference on&lt;br/&gt;New Development of Statistical Analysis in Wildlife,
Fisheries,&lt;br/&gt;and Ecological Research at the University of
Missouri.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the conference is to advance the understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;statistical problems in wildlife, fisheries, and ecology.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular, the goal is to identify future research needs and
to&lt;br/&gt;encourage and facilitate collaboration among biological
and&lt;br/&gt;statistical scientists and to pursue the interdisciplinary
research&lt;br/&gt;programs. The broader impact of this conference will be
manifested&lt;br/&gt;through fostering interaction between junior and senior
researchers&lt;br/&gt;and promoting communication between researchers from
government&lt;br/&gt;and acedamia on research problems, methodology, and
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;